NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLVING IMPACT OF THE OGALLALA AQUIFER:
AGRICULTURAL ADAPTATION TO GROUNDWATER AND CLIMATE
Richard Hornbeck
Pinar Keskin
Working Paper 17625
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17625
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

For many helpful comments and suggestions, we thank seminar participants at Bocconi, Brown, Columbia,
EHA, Harvard, IIES, Kansas, Miami-OH, Michigan, Michigan State, NBER, NEUDC, PERC, Queen's,
RES, Santa Barbara, Toronto, Tufts, UPF, Vanderbilt, Wellesley, World Bank, and Yale. For financial
support, we thank the Harvard University Center for the Environment and the Harvard Sustainability
Science Program. Melissa Eccleston, James Feigenbaum, Jan Kozak, and Jamie Lee provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Richard Hornbeck and Pinar Keskin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Evolving Impact of the Ogallala Aquifer: Agricultural Adaptation to Groundwater and
Climate
Richard Hornbeck and Pinar Keskin
NBER Working Paper No. 17625
November 2011
JEL No. N52,Q54
ABSTRACT
Agriculture on the American Great Plains has been constrained by historical water scarcity. After
World War II, technological improvements made groundwater from the Ogallala aquifer available
for irrigation. Comparing counties over the Ogallala with nearby similar counties, groundwater access
increased irrigation intensity and initially reduced the impact of droughts. Over time, land-use adjusted
toward water-intensive crops and drought-sensitivity increased; conversely, farmers in water-scarce
counties maintained drought-resistant practices that fully mitigated higher drought-sensitivity. Land
values capitalized the Ogallala's value at $26 billion in 1974; as extraction remained high and water
levels declined, the Ogallala's value fell to $9 billion in 2002.
Richard Hornbeck
Department of Economics
Harvard University
232 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
hornbeck@fas.harvard.edu
Pinar Keskin
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
pkeskin@wellesley.edu

Water resources are critical to agricultural development in many arid regions, such as the
Western United States (Coman 1911; Hansen, Libecap, and Lowe 2011) and India (Rao
1979; Shah 1993; Moench 1996; FAO 1999; Schoengold and Zilberman 2007; Keskin 2009).
Water scarcity is often exacerbated by ineﬃcient water allocation, and much research has
focused on common pool externalities and the institutional structure for water allocation
(Gisser 1983; Ostrom 1990; Provencher and Oscar 1993; Blomquist 1994; Aggarwal and
Narayan 2004; Foster and Rosenzweig 2008; Sekhri 2008; Rosegrant et al. 2009; Ostrom
2011; Libecap 2011).
Groundwater resources are being depleted as agricultural economies grow and become
increasingly dependent on groundwater irrigation. Future climate change may aﬀect precipitation, temperature, and the incidence of extreme drought. Yet, it is diﬃcult to identify how
agricultural land-use and drought sensitivity adapt to water availability in the short-run and,
of more interest, evolve over many decades. In general, the economic impacts of environmental change depend on how economic agents adjust in the long-run to mitigate short-run
impacts (Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher 2006;
Deschenes and Greenstone 2007; Guiteras 2009; Schlenker and Roberts 2009; Dell, Jones,
and Olken 2011; Olmstead and Rhode 2011; Hornbeck forthcoming). Historical changes
in groundwater availability provide a unique opportunity to identify long-run agricultural
adjustments and how land-use evolves to accommodate water resources and climates.
This paper analyzes the impacts of groundwater on agricultural land-use and drought
sensitivity, exploiting local variation in Plains counties’ access to the Ogallala aquifer. The
Ogallala was formed by ancient runoﬀ from the Rocky Mountains, trapped below the modern
Great Plains, and it maintains distinct irregular boundaries that cut across modern soil
groups and natural vegetation regions. The Ogallala was ﬁrst discovered in the 1890s,
but it remained mainly inaccessible. Following World War II, improved pumps and center
pivot irrigation technology made Ogallala groundwater available for large-scale irrigated
agriculture.
The baseline empirical speciﬁcations compare counties over the Ogallala with nearby
counties in the same state and soil group, controlling for longitude, latitude, average precipitation, and average temperature. Historical county-level data are drawn from the Census of
Agriculture and merged with a United States Geological Survey map of the Ogallala’s original
boundary. Extended empirical speciﬁcations estimate the interaction between groundwater
and climate, using annual data on crop yields and drought severity. Ogallala counties and
non-Ogallala counties had similar characteristics prior to improved groundwater availability,
lending support to the identiﬁcation assumption that Ogallala counties would otherwise have
been similar to non-Ogallala counties.
1

Groundwater has theoretically distinct short-run and long-run impacts when farmers adjust production methods faster than crop choice. In the short-run, farmers increase irrigation
intensity, causing crop yields to become less sensitive to drought. In the long-run, farmers
shift land toward water-intensive crops, causing yields to become more sensitive to drought.
The net impact of groundwater is theoretically ambiguous, depending on relative adjustment
along the intensive (short-run) and extensive (long-run) margins.1 In each period, the net
present value of access to groundwater is capitalized in agricultural land values.
Following the introduction of improved pumps and center pivot irrigation technology,
irrigated farmland increased substantially in counties over the Ogallala, both in absolute
terms and relative to nearby similar counties. Farmers increased irrigation ﬁrst along the
intensive margin, shifting non-irrigated farmland to irrigation, before somewhat expanding
total farmland.
In the production of crops, farmers’ initial response was to increase the irrigation intensity
of corn and wheat. Irrigated corn acreages and irrigated wheat acreages increased, while
total corn and wheat acreages were mostly unchanged. In later periods, farmers shifted land
toward the more water-intensive corn.
Consistent with the model, farmers’ short-run adjustments reduced the impact of drought
on water-intensive corn yields. In the long-run, changes in land allocations increased the
impact of drought on corn yields. Conversely, farmers in nearby water-scarce counties have
maintained drought-resistant agricultural practices that fully mitigate their naturally higher
sensitivity to drought.
Groundwater access remains a valuable agricultural asset, however, improving crops’
drought-resistance in the short-run and enabling the production of higher value crops in
the long-run. Estimated land value premiums capitalized the Ogallala’s peak value at $26
billion in the 1970’s and, as extraction rates remained high and water levels declined, the
Ogallala’s estimated value fell to $9 billion in 2002. The impact on agricultural revenues has
been increasing over time, particularly as farmers adjusted toward high-value water-intensive
corn. In the modern period, declining land values and rising revenues are consistent with
expectations that many areas will lose access to Ogallala groundwater. As the region loses
access to groundwater, the estimates predict short-run increases in drought sensitivity before
long-run adaptations increase resistance to drought.
The economic impacts of groundwater and its interaction with climate are diﬃcult to observe in modern settings, as short-run data do not capture the extent of long-run agricultural
1

In the opposite case, when farmers lose access to groundwater, the short-run response is to decrease
irrigation intensity and yields become more sensitive to drought. In the long-run, farmers shift land from
water-intensive crops and yields become less sensitive to drought.

2

adaptation. Agricultural adaptation can reverse estimated short-run impacts, as adoption
of drought-resistant practices reduces drought impacts in areas lacking groundwater access.
Losing access to groundwater is costly, but it need not increase vulnerability to drought
in the long-run. For settings in which long-run historical perspective is unavailable, the
Ogallala provides a stark example of agricultural adaptation to groundwater and climate.
I

Background on the Ogallala Aquifer

The Ogallala aquifer is one of the world’s largest underground freshwater sources. It was
formed by ancient runoﬀ from the Rocky Mountains, trapped amidst accumulated sand,
gravel, clay, and silt. The Ogallala is a closed aquifer, essentially a nonrenewable resource,
that receives less than an inch of annual recharge due to minimal rainfall, high evaporation,
and low inﬁltration of surface water (Zwingle 1993; Opie 1993; McGuire et al. 2003).2
The Ogallala underlies 174,000 square miles of the Great Plains from the Texas panhandle
to South Dakota. The Ogallala’s boundaries are sharply deﬁned by the location of ancient
valleys and hills, which have long since been covered and obscured on the surface.3
The Ogallala was ﬁrst discovered by the United States Geological Survey in the 1890s,
but was considered of limited agricultural importance (Webb 1931; US Department of Commerce 1937). Windmill pumps could only provide small quantities of water, approximately
enough to irrigate 5 acres or provide for 30 cattle (Cunfer 2005). In a 1928 bulletin, the Nebraska Agricultural Extension Service highlighted the need for improved irrigation methods
to supplement scarce rainfall and streams; while “the underground water supply is abundant,” there are insuﬃcient means of “lifting it to the surface and applying it to the land”
(Weakley and Zook 1928). Groundwater irrigation was thought to be of great potential
value, particularly in raising corn yields, but pumps were small and/or expensive (Weakly
1932; Weakly 1936). “Most of the pumps are operated by the general-purpose tractor, which
is used principally for other farm work;” “irrigation pumps are considered as equipment for
emergency use by a large proportion of Nebraska owners” (Brackett and Lewis 1933).
After World War II, automobile engines were adapted to power improved pumps, lifting
groundwater cheaply and in larger volumes. In the 1950’s, Nebraska Agricultural Exten2
Artiﬁcial recharge has been considered but is infeasible. The 1968 Texas Water Plan considered diverting
water from the Mississippi River, but the Army Corps of Engineers estimated an annual requirement of 50
billion kilowatts of electricity ($5 billion in 2010) and Texas abandoned the plan (Opie 1993).
3
Local irrigation potential from the Ogallala is determined by three main characteristics: (1) depth
of water (distance between the ground surface and the surface of the aquifer); (2) saturated thickness
(distance from surface of the aquifer to the Triassic clay bottom of the aquifer); (3) speciﬁc yield (amount of
water that can be extracted from a unit volume of saturated ground). As water levels continue to decline,
these characteristics will have increasingly important economic implications for water-use. Pumping costs
increase with the depth of water. The total available water for irrigation increases in the saturated thickness
and speciﬁc yield. The speciﬁc yield and soil porosity aﬀect the speed of underground water ﬂow, which
determines the degree of externality in water withdrawal.

3

sion Service bulletins discuss the growing importance of groundwater irrigation pumps (Epp
1954). Thorﬁnnson and Epp (1953) report that pump irrigation increases corn yields and
“serves as partial insurance against the hazards of drought.” Rhoades et al. (1954) discuss
how, as lands become irrigated, farmers can adjust corn “production practices to take full
advantage of irrigation water.” To guide adaptation in sub-humid Plains areas, Gertel et
al. (1956) draw lessons from a local Nebraska river basin: through production adjustments,
irrigation allows a higher-value crop rotation, with an emphasis on corn, and provides partial
insurance against drought.
In these early years, groundwater was mainly pumped into open irrigation furrows. Sprinkler systems were not widely adopted due to technical limitations and high capital and labor
costs (Bonnen et al. 1952).4 In Texas, agricultural bulletins in 1952 focused on wheat production, for which irrigation “is generally a practice of supplementing the natural rainfall
and is not an intensive irrigation of the crop” (Porter et al. 1952). “Only a limited amount
of corn is grown” and “practically all of the corn acreage is under irrigation because of the
low natural rainfall” (Rogers and Collier 1952).
Groundwater irrigation increased substantially with the subsequent introduction and
adoption of center pivot technology. Originally invented in 1949 by a Colorado farmer,
Frank Zybach, the “self-propelled sprinkling apparatus” combined recent advances in turbine pumps, steel and aluminum pipes, and lawn sprinklers.5 Center pivot technology was
particularly suited to the Great Plains: able to direct water to plants with minimal evaporation in dry windy weather and able to accommodate large ﬁelds with hilly or sandy
land.
Zybach’s patent was granted in 1952 and he moved home to Nebraska and partnered with
a local businessman to begin manufacturing prototypes. Yet early center pivot machines
were unreliable; in 1954, they sold the patent to the Nebraska-based Valley Manufacturing
Company, who improved the design and began large-scale production and distribution. Competition increased after Zybach’s original patent expired in 1969, though Nebraska remains
the hub of the center pivot irrigation industry.
As pumping and center pivot irrigation technologies were improved and adopted, Ogal4

From Bonnen et al. (1952), “Use of Irrigation Water on the High Plains,” Texas Bulletin 756: “A few
operators have attempted to overcome the disadvantage of steep slopes and extremely sandy soils through
the use of sprinkler systems. These have the advantage of providing an even distribution of water on land
diﬃcult to water by other means. The practice has not been widely adopted partly because of a greatly
increased investment, higher pumping costs, the additional labor involved in moving the system over the
land, the diﬃculty of applying water rapidly enough especially during periods of high temperatures, and the
uneven wetting of the soil during periods of windy weather.”
5
For
ﬁrst-hand
accounts
of
the
technology’s
introduction
and
improvement,
see
http://www.livinghistoryfarm.org/

4

lala groundwater became increasingly used for irrigation and farmers’ withdrawals quickly
surpassed the aquifer’s natural recharge rate. The USGS estimates that groundwater withdrawals quintupled from 1949 to 1974 and water tables have declined substantially from
pre-development levels (McGuire et al. 2003; Little 2009).6 Agriculture accounts for the vast
majority of groundwater extraction.7 Most areas retain suﬃcient groundwater to supply
irrigation pumps, though scattered shallow sections of the Ogallala are beginning to run dry.
Ogallala groundwater has visibly transformed the Plains landscape (Groundwater Foundation 2005). Center pivot irrigation creates distinctive circular crop patterns nested within
traditionally square land plots (Appendix Figure 1).8 Farmers in nearby counties do not
access Ogallala groundwater using pipelines or any system of exchange.9
Farmers’ water extraction draws from the broader Ogallala region such that, over time,
there is little marginal eﬀect on farmers’ own water levels.10 Thus, the Ogallala represents
a classic “common pool” problem, in which individual water users do not pay the social
cost of water extraction. There has been little strict regulation of water-use, though some
states and local water management districts have increasingly limited new wells, restricted
“wastage,” and explored well-metering.11 Depletion of the aquifer may encourage reform of
water institutions (e.g., Demsetz 1967), though the Ogallala represents a large cross-state
coordination problem with strongly diverging interests. Federal tax code allows irrigating
farmers to depreciate the value of Ogallala water level declines, essentially magnifying private
extraction externalities.12
Much economics research has focused on water extraction externalities in India and other
developing countries. Relative to smaller aquifers around the world, the magnitude of the
Ogallala and speed of underground water ﬂow imply that most local water extraction is
6
O’Brien et al. (2001), Peterson and Ding (2005), and Pfeiﬀer and Lin (2010) analyze Ogallala farmers’
adoption of irrigation technology and changes in groundwater extraction.
7
Ogallala groundwater is also used for drinking water, though much of the Plains population has access
to alternative drinking water sources. Ogallala water does not meet EPA drinking water standards in a few
counties (Guru and Horne 2000).
8
In the corners of plots, farmers either accept lower yields or plant less water-intensive crops. Less often,
farmers install more-costly irrigation equipment that also reach the corners. Torrell et al. (1990) compare
the market value of irrigated and non-irrigated farms in the Ogallala region, though irrigation decisions may
be correlated with unobserved land and farm characteristics.
9
There is mixed evidence on whether irrigation broadly aﬀects downwind precipitation (see DeAngelis et
al. 2010 for a recent study).
10
Underground water ﬂows vary in speed throughout the Ogallala, but in no area do individual farmers
internalize a meaningful portion of their private water extraction.
11
See McGuire et al. 2003 for a review of state management policies.
12
Since a legal decision in 1965, Ogallala groundwater has been declared a nonrenewable resource and treated similarly to timber and minerals (US Court of Appeals,
http://bulk.resource.org/courts.gov/c/F2/347/347.F2d.103.20972.html).
The depreciation allowance
is given to farmers extracting water, based on estimated declines in the general water table
(http://taxmap.ntis.gov/taxmap/pubs/p225-034.htm).

5

soon drawn from distant sources. Standard plot sizes begin at 160 acres on the US Plains,
much larger than in India, so wells have less temporary eﬀect on neighboring wells.13 Large
plot sizes also imply that ﬁxed costs of digging a well are relatively less important than the
marginal costs of water extraction.
Because farmers’ water extraction is almost entirely an externality, there is little local
variation in the degree of externality, and this paper focuses on other questions concerning
land-use adaptation and drought sensitivity. For this set of questions, a relative advantage to studying Ogallala groundwater is that the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
has detailed maps on the Ogallala’s location; thus, it is not necessary to infer groundwater availability from constructed wells or other agricultural decisions. In addition, the
annual availability of groundwater is not directly aﬀected by drought and agricultural landuse, because the Ogallala is a large closed aquifer. Over time, water levels are aﬀected by
agricultural activity, so the empirical analysis assigns groundwater availability using USGS
pre-development Ogallala boundaries.
II

Agricultural Adaptation to Groundwater and Climate

Technological innovations substantially increased water availability for agriculture over the
Ogallala. In this simple model, farmers can adjust the water-intensity of production on the
intensive margin (within crops) and the extensive margin (between crops). Depending on the
relative speed and magnitude of adjustment on the intensive and extensive margins, groundwater access has diﬀerent short-run and long-run impacts on the sensitivity of agricultural
production to drought. The overall productive value of groundwater is capitalized in land
values.
II.A

Baseline Model of Agricultural Adaptation to Groundwater

Assume that a farmer uses water and land to produce rents from two crops, according to two
concave production functions, y1 (w1 , L1 ) and y2 (w2 , L2 ). Water and land increase production
of both crops, but the ﬁrst crop is more water-intensive.14
The farmer maximizes total rents, subject to a water constraint (w1 + w2 = w) and a
land constraint (L1 + L2 = 1). The farmer’s optimal production decisions are functions of
the water endowment: w1∗ (w), L∗1 (w), w2∗ (w), L∗2 (w).
An increase in the water endowment aﬀects agricultural production along the intensive
13

Plot sizes of 160 acres create a natural minimum 0.4 kilometer buﬀer between wells, which is often the
policy goal in developing countries to reduce the immediate impact of farmers’ extraction on neighbors’ water
levels. Over time, aquifer water ﬂows underground to equalize levels.
14
In particular, we introduce three assumptions. First, the marginal product of water is higher for the
ﬁrst crop: ∂y1 /∂w1 > ∂y2 /∂w2 > 0. Second, the marginal product of water declines slower for the ﬁrst crop:
∂ 2 y2 /(∂w2 )2 < ∂ 2 y1 /(∂w1 )2 < 0. Third, water and land are complementary for both crops, but weakly more
so for the ﬁrst crop: ∂ 2 y1 /∂L1 ∂w1 ≥ ∂ 2 y2 /∂L2 ∂w2 > 0.

6

and extensive margins:
(1)

∂w1∗ (w)
>0
∂w

and

∂L∗1 (w)
> 0.
∂w

On the intensive margin, the farmer uses more water for the water-intensive crop. On the
extensive margin, land is shifted toward the water-intensive crop.15 Refer to the Theory
Appendix for a proof of the comparative statics in equation (1).
In a dynamic setting, agricultural adjustment may be delayed on the intensive margin
and/or extensive margin, as after the Dust Bowl in this region (Hornbeck forthcoming).
The increase in groundwater availability may also be gradual, as pumping and center pivot
irrigation technologies improve. Agricultural rents increase as production adjusts along both
margins. Agricultural land values increase immediately in anticipation of later rent increases,
to the extent that increases in water endowments are unexpected.
II.B

Adaptation to Drought Risk and Groundwater

Of further interest is how a farmer adapts to drought risk, particularly when there is a change
in groundwater availability. Assume that a risk-neutral farmer’s agricultural production
function depends on an additional drought term: y1 (w1 , L1 , d) + y2 (w2 , L2 , d). Drought d
is unexpected, reﬂecting deviations from average weather conditions, and farmers cannot
respond by changing water or land inputs.16 Groundwater partially mitigates the negative
impact of drought, particularly for the water-intensive crop.17
The farmer continues to maximize total rents, subject to constraints on water and
land. Given optimal allocations of water and land, the impact of drought is given by:
∂y1 (L∗1 , w1∗ , d)/∂d + ∂y2 (L∗2 , w2∗ , d)/∂d. Of particular interest, an increase in the water endowment has an ambiguous eﬀect on the impact of drought:
(2)

[
] ( 2
) ( 2
)
∂ y1 ∂w1∗
∂ 2 y2 ∂w2∗
∂ y1
∂ 2 y2
∂L∗1
d ∂y1 ∂y2
+
.
+
=
+
−
dw̄ ∂d
∂d
∂d∂w1 ∂ w̄
∂d∂w2 ∂ w̄
∂L1 ∂d ∂L2 ∂d ∂ w̄
|
{z
} |
{z
}
>0

<0

On the intensive margin, an increase in water mitigates the impact of drought on each crop
(the ﬁrst term). On the extensive margin, however, land shifts toward the more droughtChanges in water usage for the less water-intensive crop (∂w2∗ (w)/∂w) can be positive or negative,
depending on the production function parameters.
16
In practice, a farmer may partially adjust inputs when a drought occurs; for the model, it is only
necessary that a farmer is less able to adjust inputs after a drought is known than before the season began.
17
In particular, we introduce two additional assumptions. First, drought decreases the productivity of
land for both crops, but drought has a larger negative eﬀect on the water-intensive crop: ∂ 2 y1 /∂L1 ∂d <
∂ 2 y2 /∂L2 ∂d < 0. Second, drought increases the productivity of water for both crops, but more so for the
water-intensive crop: ∂ 2 y1 /∂w1 ∂d > ∂ 2 y2 /∂w2 ∂d > 0.
15

7

sensitive crop (the second term). The water-intensive crop may also become more sensitive
to drought as the land allocation shifts (e.g., growing corn in the Texas panhandle).
If land allocations are constrained in the short-run, an increase in the water endowment
only increases water usage on the intensive margin and mitigates the impact of drought. In
the long-run, however, as land allocations adjust, drought has more impact and may even
aﬀect agricultural production more than before. Refer to the Theory Appendix for a proof
of this general case.
For a stark example, consider a plausible special case in which a farmer maximizes
L1 y1 (w1 , d) + L2 y2 (w2 , d) subject to w1 L1 + w2 L2 = w̄ and L1 + L2 = 1. After an increase in the water endowment, in the short-run, per-acre crop water usage increases and
the impact of drought is mitigated. In the long-run, however, the farmer shifts land to
the water-intensive crop (∂L∗1 (w)/∂w > 0) and per-acre crop water usage is unchanged
(∂w1∗ (w)/∂w = ∂w2∗ (w)/∂w = 0). Thus, in the long-run, an increase in the water endowment magniﬁes the impact of drought. Refer to the Theory Appendix for a proof of this
special case.
The comparative statics are intuitive for a symmetric loss in groundwater. In the shortrun, crop choice remains ﬁxed and there is less available water, so drought has a larger
impact on production. In the long-run, crop choice shifts toward the drought-resistant crop
and the impact of drought is mitigated. If there is suﬃcient change in crop choice, then
the impact of drought may become even less than before the loss in groundwater. In the
cross-section, areas without groundwater may suﬃciently adapt toward non-water-intensive
crops to fully mitigate their naturally higher impact of drought.
III

Data Construction and County Diﬀerences by Ogallala Share

III.A

Census Data and Spatial Patterns

Historical county-level data are available every ﬁve years from the US Census of Agriculture
(Gutmann 2005; Haines 2005).18 The main variables of interest include: irrigated acres
and total acres of agricultural land, harvested acres and bushels of corn and wheat, value
of agricultural revenue, and value of agricultural land. The empirical analysis focuses on a
balanced panel of 368 Plains counties, from 1920 to 2002, for which data are available in
every period of analysis. To account for occasional changes in county borders, census data
are adjusted in later periods to maintain 1920 county deﬁnitions (Hornbeck 2010).
Figure 1 maps the Ogallala aquifer, overlaid with county borders in 1920. The shaded
area represents the USGS’s estimated original boundary of the aquifer, prior to intensive
use for agriculture. The sample is restricted to counties within 100 kilometers of the aquifer
18

We thank Haines and collaborators for providing additional data.

8

boundary.
Figure 2 maps the 368 sample counties, shaded to reﬂect the irrigated percent of county
land in 1935 (panel A) and 1974 (panel B). In 1935, there was little irrigation in all sample
counties, aside from a few counties on major rivers. By 1974, irrigation increased substantially in counties over the Ogallala, while counties within 100km were relatively unchanged.
Spatial patterns in agricultural land values are consistent with large economic impacts of
groundwater access. Figure 3 shows counties in 1920 (panel A) and 1964 (panel B), shaded in
each year to reﬂect their quintile in the distribution of counties’ average value of agricultural
land per county acre. There are strong regional determinants of land values; within local
areas, however, Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties had similar land values in 1920.
By 1964, land values are generally higher over the Ogallala than in nearby counties not over
the Ogallala.
The empirical research design exploits spatial variation in access to Ogallala groundwater,
comparing counties over the Ogallala with nearby similar counties. To focus on comparisons
among “nearby similar counties,” the empirical speciﬁcations control for average diﬀerences
by state, soil group, longitude, latitude, average precipitation, and average temperature.
States, mapped in Figure 1, capture diﬀerences in region, state agricultural extension services, and other state-level policies.
Figure 4 displays major soil groups in the Plains, as deﬁned by the Soil Conservation
Service in 1951. The 1951 SCS map was scanned, traced in GIS software, and merged to
1920 county borders to assign each county the fraction of its area in each soil group. These
soil groups proxy for detailed regional determinants of agricultural production. For example,
“Alluvial Soils” occur along major rivers and predict higher irrigation in 1935. Conversely,
“Sand and Silt” in North-Central Nebraska is unproductive for agriculture. The Ogallala
boundary cuts across major soil groups; importantly, as the analysis eﬀectively compares
Ogallala and non-Ogallala counties within the same soil group.
Climate and geographic location may also inﬂuence agricultural production, even withinstate and within-soil group. County-level data on average precipitation and temperature
are taken from PRISM data (PRISM 2004). County longitude and latitude are measured
using the coordinates of 1920 county centroids (NHGIS).19 Because non-Ogallala counties
surround the Ogallala region, there is variation in Ogallala access within similar climate,
longitude, and latitude.
19

In practice, “longitude” and “latitude” are represented by the X and Y coordinates of the county centroid
from an equal area map projection of the United States. These coordinates reﬂect exact distances East-West
and North-South, rather than exact longitude and latitude degrees whose physical distance varies slightly
over the sample area.

9

III.B

Pre-Diﬀerences in County Characteristics by Ogallala Share

Prior to modern improvements in pumping and irrigation technology, the Ogallala may have
little impact on agriculture. The Ogallala water table is generally too deep to be accessed by
natural vegetation. Appendix Figure 2 shows the Ogallala boundary, overlaid with a 1924
map of natural vegetation regions (USDA 1924). The Ogallala boundary cuts across the two
largest vegetation regions (“Short Grass” and “Tall Grass”) and more-wooded river areas
(“Oak-Hickory”).
Table 1 reports estimated diﬀerences between Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties, prior to the increased availability of Ogallala groundwater for intensive agricultural use.
Column 1 reports average sample county characteristics in 1920, or in the earliest year available. From a regression of each outcome on the fraction of county land over the Ogallala
and a constant, column 2 reports the estimated average diﬀerence between counties entirely
over the Ogallala (“Ogallala counties”) and counties entirely not over the Ogallala (“nonOgallala counties”).20 Columns 3 to 5 include controls to compare Ogallala counties with
nearby similar non-Ogallala counties: column 3 includes state ﬁxed eﬀects; column 4 adds
controls for the fraction of county land in each soil group; and column 5 adds linear controls
for average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude.
After controlling for state and soil group, there are no substantial or statistically significant diﬀerences between Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties in 1920. These estimates lend support to the identiﬁcation assumption that Ogallala and non-Ogallala counties
would have been similar in later years, if not for access to Ogallala groundwater.
The empirical speciﬁcations do not control for pre-diﬀerences in county agricultural outcomes, as early diﬀerences may be partly attributed to the Ogallala. Ogallala groundwater
was available to farmers on a limited scale through the use of early pumps, windmills, and
irrigation techniques. Expected improvements in Ogallala access may also inﬂuence farmers
and land speculators.
III.C

Changes in County Characteristics by Ogallala Group

For a preliminary view of the data, Figure 5 plots average outcomes over time for two groups
of sample counties: counties less than 10% over the Ogallala, and counties more than 90%
over the Ogallala.21 By contrast, the main empirical speciﬁcations use continuous variation
in counties’ Ogallala share and control for other diﬀerences among sample counties.
20

In later years, residual scatterplots indicate that the Ogallala’s impact is roughly linear in the fraction
of county land over the Ogallala. The county means and regressions are weighted by county acres, as the
empirical analysis is focused on changes for an average acre of land over the Ogallala.
21
Average outcomes for the in-between counties are between the averages for the two groups shown, but
this third category is omitted from the ﬁgure for increased clarity.

10

Counties in both groups had similar low levels of irrigated farmland in 1935 (Panel
A). As pumping and irrigation technology improved, counties over the Ogallala increased
irrigation through the 1970’s. Irrigated corn acreage increased somewhat in Ogallala counties
from 1954 to 1964, and was substantially higher by 1978 (Panel B). In contrast, total corn
acreage changed similarly from 1920 through 1964, and only became substantially higher
in Ogallala counties by 1978 (Panel C).22 The value of farmland was relatively lower or
similar in Ogallala counties from 1920 through the 1940’s; after 1950, land values became
consistently higher in Ogallala counties than in non-Ogallala counties (Panel D).
IV

Empirical Framework

In the main empirical speciﬁcations, outcome Y in county c is regressed on the fraction of
county area over the Ogallala, state ﬁxed eﬀects αs , the fraction of county area in each soil
group γg , and linear functions of four county characteristics Xc (average rainfall, average
temperature, longitude, and latitude). These cross-sectional speciﬁcations are pooled across
all time periods, with each coeﬃcient allowed to vary in each time period:
(3)

Yct = βt OgallalaSharec + αst + γgt + θt Xc + ϵct

In each time period, the estimated β reports the average diﬀerence between counties entirely
over the Ogallala and counties never over the Ogallala.23
The estimated β’s can be interpreted as the impact of the Ogallala in each year, under
the identiﬁcation assumption that sample counties would have had the same average outcomes in each year if not for the Ogallala. In practice, this identiﬁcation assumption must
hold after controlling for other diﬀerences correlated with state, soil group, precipitation,
temperature, longitude, and latitude. In this way, the research design exploits the sharp
spatial discontinuity created by the Ogallala’s irregular boundary. Robustness checks limit
the sample to counties that intersect the Ogallala boundary.
The Ogallala’s impact may vary over the analyzed region. For example, the Ogallala may
have less impact in areas with unproductive soil and more impact in areas with productive
soil and water deﬁciencies. For simplicity, the analysis reports the impact of the Ogallala on
the average acre of land over the Ogallala. For this purpose, the regressions are weighted by
county size.
Diﬀerences in the estimated β’s, from one year to another year, report the average change
22

Harvested corn acreages fell substantially during the 1930’s drought and widespread crop failure.
Some counties are partly over the Ogallala, and this speciﬁcation assumes that the eﬀect of the Ogallala
is linear in the fraction of county area over the Ogallala. From graphing county residual changes in irrigated
farmland against county residual Ogallala shares, the eﬀect of the Ogallala appears roughly linear in the
share of county area over the Ogallala.
23

11

for an Ogallala county relative to a non-Ogallala county over that time period. Diﬀerencing
the estimated coeﬃcients is numerically equivalent to estimating equation (3) with county
ﬁxed eﬀects.24 The standard error of the diﬀerence is generally 20-40% lower than the
standard error of the two cross-sectional coeﬃcients due to positive serial correlation in
county-level outcomes. The change in β’s can be interpreted as the changing impact of the
Ogallala, under the weaker identiﬁcation assumption that sample counties would have had
the same average changes if not for the Ogallala.
For the statistical inference, standard errors are clustered at the county level to adjust
for heteroskedasticity and within-county correlation over time. When allowing for spatial
correlation among sample counties, the estimated standard errors increase by approximately
10-30%.25
V

Results

V.A

Irrigation and Farmland: Intensive vs. Extensive Margins

Table 2, column 1, reports the estimated impact of the Ogallala in each year on acres of
irrigated farmland per county acre. In 1935, irrigation was a statistically insigniﬁcant 0.4
percentage points lower in Ogallala counties than in non-Ogallala counties.26 By 1950, irrigation was a statistically insigniﬁcant 1.3 percentage points higher in Ogallala counties than
in non-Ogallala counties. As groundwater irrigation technology improved and agricultural
production adjusted, this diﬀerence increased to 11.3 percentage points by 1978. Ogallala
counties maintained substantially higher irrigation levels through 1997.
Column 2 reports the estimated impact of the Ogallala on acres of total farmland per
county acre. The fraction of county land in farms was similar in Ogallala and non-Ogallala
counties through 1959, though higher in some periods. Since the 1960’s, the fraction of
county land in farms has been consistently higher by 5 to 7 percentage points in Ogallala
counties. This small relative increase mainly reﬂects a slower absolute decline in farmland
than in non-Ogallala counties.
Comparing the estimates in column 1 and column 2, initial adjustments in agricultural
24

Diﬀerencing and ﬁxed eﬀects are equivalent for two time periods; for this multi-period regression, the
speciﬁcation is essentially separable for any two time periods. The explanatory variables are fully interacted
with time, such that the impact of each variable is allowed to vary in each year. The sample is also balanced
in each regression, such that every county has data in every analyzed period. Thus, the estimated coeﬃcients
in any one year are not inﬂuenced by county outcomes in any other year.
25
Spatial correlation among counties is assumed to be declining linearly up to a distance cutoﬀ and zero
after that cutoﬀ (Conley 1999). For a distance cutoﬀ of 100 miles or 200 miles, the estimated Conley
standard errors are approximately 10-30% higher than the standard errors when clustering at the county
level, depending on the outcome variable.
26
Note that the ﬁrst row of coeﬃcients for each outcome are the same coeﬃcients reported in column 5 of
Table 1.

12

production were mainly on the intensive margin. Farmers increased irrigation of existing
farmland, shifting land from dryland farming. Subsequently, farmers both increased irrigation and relatively expanded production along the extensive margin of total farmland.
V.B

Corn and Wheat: Irrigated and Total Acreages

Table 3 examines the Ogallala’s impact on corn and wheat acreages, which are the two major
crops in this region with data availability over many years. Irrigated corn and irrigated
wheat acreages became higher in Ogallala counties from 1950 through 1964 (columns 1 and
3). Total corn and wheat acreages did not increase over this period (columns 2 and 4); thus,
as in Table 2, initial increases in irrigated corn and wheat represented a shift on the intensive
margin away from dryland farming of corn and wheat.
By 1978, however, there was a substantial increase in irrigated corn acreages and total
corn acreages. Irrigated wheat acreages continued to increase, while total wheat acreages
declined.
In the context of the model, as groundwater became increasingly available, both corn
and wheat initially became more water-intensive. After some delay, crop production shifted
toward corn, which is typically more water-intensive and drought-sensitive than wheat.
V.C

Agricultural Land Values and Revenues

The model predicts that higher land values over the Ogallala capitalize the net present value
of agricultural rents from groundwater. In each period, land values reﬂect: (1) current
agricultural rents, (2) expected increases in rents from future improvements in pumping and
irrigation technology, (3) expected increases in rents from adjusting agricultural production,
and (4) expected decreases in rents from exhaustion of groundwater.
In the 1950’s, after the introduction of improved pumping and irrigation technologies,
the value of agricultural land and buildings became consistently higher in counties over the
Ogallala (Table 4, column 1).27 The land value premium peaks at 51% in 1964 (0.415 log
points), and has since declined to 19% in 2002 (0.178 log points).
Column 2 reports the implied market valuation of Ogallala groundwater in each period,
based on the coeﬃcients in column 1 and the total value of land over the Ogallala.28 Column 3
converts the estimated valuations into constant 2002 dollars using the Consumer Price Index:
27
Over this long time period, data are only available for the combined value of agricultural land and
buildings. From 1900 to 1940, when data are available separately for land and buildings, the value of land
is the much larger component.
β
28
The coeﬃcient β implies that land values would decline by (e e−1)
percent, on average, in the absence
β
of Ogallala groundwater. This percent decline is multiplied by the total value of land over the Ogallala,
estimated as the sum of each county’s total land value multiplied by its share of land over the Ogallala. The
estimates’ t-statistics are approximately the same as in column 1; they would be identical, but the estimated
log point diﬀerences are converted to percent diﬀerences.

13

the value of Ogallala groundwater rises from $8.9 billion in 1950 to a peak of $26 billion in
1974, and declines to $9.0 billion by 2002. Column 5 converts the estimated valuations into
constant 2002 dollars using a regional land value price index: the rise and fall in Ogallala
value is similar to column 3, though the Ogallala’s value peaks roughly 10 years earlier.29
Recent declines in land values over the Ogallala are consistent with expectations that
groundwater is being exhausted in many areas. An alternative interpretation is that the
marginal value of water has declined in recent periods (e.g., declining relative prices of
water-intensive crops). While agricultural rents are not directly observable, agricultural
revenues provide a useful proxy.30 Table 4, column 5, reports that agricultural revenues
have been higher over the Ogallala since the late 1940’s, but increased substantially in the
1970’s as agriculture shifted toward greater corn acreages over the Ogallala. The impact on
revenues has increased in recent periods, as land values have declined, suggesting that the
marginal return to water remains high and decreased land values reﬂect market expectations
of exhaustion.31
The estimated Ogallala premiums in land values and revenues may reﬂect the combination
of a variety of factors, including: (1) increased allocation of land to high value crops, (2)
increased crop yields, (3) decreased irrigation costs, (4) general increases in yields of waterintensive crops, and (5) general increases in prices of water-intensive crops. In particular,
the introduction of hybrid corn or increased corn prices may increase the Ogallala’s value
if the Ogallala enables counties to grow corn. It is appropriate that the marginal return
to water reﬂect relative changes in the prices and productivity of water-intensive activities.
For example, as policymakers consider the risk of an oil pipeline contaminating Ogallala
groundwater, these ﬁve factors jointly contribute to the policy-relevant valuation of Ogallala
groundwater for agricultural production.
Higher land values over the Ogallala do not appear to reﬂect increased demand for land
in the urban sector. In contrast to other areas of the United States, the sample region is
predominately rural and there is less impact of urban expansion on agricultural land values.
The Ogallala is not estimated to increase log county population or the fraction of population
living in urban areas (i.e., places with population greater than 2500). Further, the estimated
29
The land value price index is deﬁned as the 2002 value of land in sample counties with zero Ogallala
share, divided by that year’s value of land in sample counties with zero Ogallala share.
30
If the agricultural production function were Cobb-Douglas, then percent diﬀerences in revenue equal the
percent diﬀerences in unobserved agricultural rents. However, Ogallala counties’ higher irrigation expenses
suggest that factor shares may not be constant and higher revenues are likely to overstate the impact on
rents.
31
The estimated market valuation of the Ogallala may understate its potential value, to the extent that
groundwater extraction externalities induce ineﬃcient water-use. The estimates may overstate the value of
groundwater, to the extent that groundwater access encourages greater ﬁxed investments that are capitalized
in the value of agricultural land and buildings.

14

land value premiums are similar or higher when restricting the sample to 253 counties with
zero urban population in 1920 or 287 counties with less than 25% urban population in 1920.
V.D

Robustness and General Equilibrium Spillovers

The empirical results appear robust to changes in the particular empirical speciﬁcation, as
suggested by the unadjusted data reported in the maps (Figures 2 and 3) and aggregate
changes by Ogallala share (Figure 5). The results are generally insensitive to changing the
included control variables and/or their functional form. The results are also similar when
narrowing the main 368 county sample to 186 counties on the Ogallala boundary, i.e., with
Ogallala shares strictly between zero and one.
The estimated relative diﬀerences in Ogallala counties may not reﬂect the aggregate
impact of the Ogallala if there are spillover eﬀects on non-Ogallala counties. There are
minimal direct spillovers in access to water, as Ogallala water is not directly transferred
to non-Ogallala counties for agricultural use. The Ogallala may also have limited indirect
eﬀects on agricultural prices because the Ogallala region represents a small share of national
and world agricultural production. However, to the extent that some markets are more
local, nearby non-Ogallala counties may be aﬀected by changes in factor availability and
terms-of-trade.
To explore local spillover eﬀects, a placebo test compares counties near the Ogallala to
counties further from the Ogallala. Restricting the sample to counties with zero Ogallala
share, equation (3) is modiﬁed to estimate the impact in each year of distance to the Ogallala
boundary. For ease of interpretation, distance is measured in units of 100km and made negative. The estimated coeﬃcients are interpreted as the impact of the Ogallala on the nearest
sample counties, relative to the impact of the Ogallala on the furthest sample counties.
Table 5 reports estimates from this placebo test. For each of the main outcome variables, there is no substantial or statistically detectable relative impact of the Ogallala on
nearby non-Ogallala counties. When expanding the sample to counties 200km from the
Ogallala boundary for increased statistical power, there remains little detectable impact of
the Ogallala on nearby counties relative to further counties.
VI

Groundwater and Drought: Short-run and Long-run Interaction Eﬀects

The impact of groundwater on drought sensitivity depends on the relative speed and magnitude of land-use adjustment on the intensive and extensive margins. In response to increased
availability of Ogallala groundwater, farmers are estimated to have initially increased wateruse mainly on the intensive margin. Irrigated farmland, irrigated corn acreage, and irrigated
wheat acreage became higher in Ogallala counties; in contrast, there was little initial change
in total farmland, total corn acreage, and total wheat acreage. In later periods, farmers in15

creased total corn acreage, with some small increases in total farmland and small decreases
in wheat acreage.
Given these ﬁndings, the model predicts an initial decline in the sensitivity of corn yields
to drought. This eﬀect is predicted to dissipate once total corn acreage increases, expanding
into arid drought-sensitive lands. An alternative interpretation is that non-Ogallala counties
have adapted to water scarcity by maintaining acreage in drought-resistant crops.
To explore the short-run and long-run impact of groundwater on drought sensitivity of
corn and wheat yields, annual county-level data are drawn from the National Agricultural
Statistics Service (NASS). In contrast to Census data on harvested acreages, the NASS
provides data on planted acreages of corn and wheat. Drought-damaged cropland is often
not harvested, so it is important to deﬁne crop yields as the log number of bushels produced
per planted acre. In the sample region, corn and wheat yields are only available in each year
for a limited number of counties between 1940 and 1993.32
Drought is deﬁned according to the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI), and annual
county-level PDSI data are drawn from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC).33 The
PDSI uses cumulative rainfall and temperature to determine dryness or wetness, relative to
the local average climate. To focus on drought, the PDSI is set equal to zero in wet years
and the index ranges between zero and 7.22 with a 1.16 standard deviation. For ease of
interpreting the empirical estimates, we normalize this drought measure to have mean zero
and a standard deviation of one.
Focusing initially on non-Ogallala counties, from 1940 to 1993, background speciﬁcations
regress log crop yields on drought, with year ﬁxed eﬀects or state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects.
Drought is estimated to have a large negative impact on corn yield and a moderate negative
impact on wheat yield. Irrigated crop yields are less-aﬀected by drought than non-irrigated
crop yields, particularly for corn. These estimates are consistent with expectations that
corn is more water-intensive and drought-sensitive than wheat (Brower and Heibloem 1986;
Pimentel et al. 1997).
The main empirical speciﬁcations use variation in access to Ogallala groundwater, over
space and time, to estimate interaction terms between drought and the Ogallala. Based on
previous results, the 54 years of data are split into three 18-year eras: before widespread use
of Ogallala irrigation for corn and wheat (1940-1957), after increases in the water-intensity
of corn and wheat (1958-1975), and after a shift toward the more water-intensive corn (19761993). Of particular interest is how the Ogallala aﬀects the impact of drought in the second
32
Before 1940, NASS data is available for few states and the 1930’s were otherwise atypical due to extreme
drought, the Dust Bowl, and the Great Depression. After 1993, NASS data is available for fewer counties
within these states.
33
We thank Hansen, Libecap, and Lowe (2011) for providing PDSI data.

16

and third eras, relative to the ﬁrst era, conditional on a number of control variables.34
Formally, log crop yield Y in county c and year t is regressed on the triple interaction
between a county’s Ogallala share, normalized drought index, and a dummy for the second
era or third era (Ogallalac × Droughtct × 1(e = 2) and Ogallalac × Droughtct × 1(e = 3)).
The change in impact of Ogallala access on yield during average weather is captured by the
double interaction between a county’s Ogallala share and a dummy for the second era or
third era (Ogallalac ×1(e = 2) and Ogallalac ×1(e = 3)). As controls, the regression includes
1
2
county ﬁxed eﬀects (αc ) and era-speciﬁc controls for state (γse
), soil group (γge
), and linear
functions of average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude (γe3 Xc ). The
eﬀect of drought is allowed to vary in each county by controlling for interactions between
drought and county ﬁxed eﬀects (Droughtct × αc ). The eﬀect of drought is allowed to vary in
each era (Droughtct × 1(e = 2) and Droughtct × 1(e = 3)). In some speciﬁcations, the eﬀect
1
of drought is also allowed to vary in each era and state (Droughtct × γse
), each era and soil
2
group (Droughtct × γge
), or each era and linear functions of average precipitation, average
temperature, longitude, and latitude (Droughtct × γe3 Xc ). The full empirical speciﬁcation is:
(4) Yct = β 1 Ogallalac × Droughtct × 1(e = 2) + β 2 Ogallalac × Droughtct × 1(e = 3)
+ β 3 Ogallalac × 1(e = 2) + β 4 Ogallalac × 1(e = 3)
1
2
+ αc + γse
+ γge
+ γe3 Xc

+ δ 1 Droughtct × αc + δ 2 Droughtct × 1(e = 2) + δ 3 Droughtct × 1(e = 3)
1
2
+ δ 4 Droughtct × γse
+ δ 5 Droughtct × γge
+ δ 6 Droughtct × γe3 Xc + ϵct

The main coeﬃcients of interest are β 1 and β 2 , which indicate how the Ogallala aﬀects the
impact of drought in the second and third eras, relative to the ﬁrst era. In addition, the
coeﬃcients β 3 and β 4 indicate how the Ogallala aﬀects yields during average weather in the
second and third eras, relative to the ﬁrst era. The sample is balanced in each regression,
such that every county included has data in each period. There are fewer counties in each
sample, and the states with available data are reported along with the number of county
observations. The regressions continue to be weighted by county size, and standard errors
are clustered at the county level.
Table 6, panel A, reports estimates from equation (5) for corn yields. In the second era,
from 1958 to 1976, the Ogallala substantially mitigated the impact of drought on corn yields.
In years when drought was one standard deviation higher, Ogallala counties experienced a
34% to 45% productivity advantage over non-Ogallala counties (0.29 log points to 0.38 log
34

Drought mainly varies across years in the sample region, so it is not feasible to exploit only within-year
variation in drought intensity and access to Ogallala groundwater.

17

points), relative to average county-level diﬀerences in drought sensitivity. Because the sample
is restricted to 134 counties over 54 years in Nebraska, South Dakota, and Iowa, Column 1
imposes a restriction on the control variables that δ 4 = δ 5 = δ 6 = 0, column 2 restricts only
δ 6 = 0, and column 3 presents the full speciﬁcation from equation (5). During this second
era, there was little change in corn yields during average weather conditions (-0.02 log points
to -0.05 log points).
In the third era, from 1977 to 1993, the Ogallala lost most of its eﬀect on corn yields
during drought (-0.05 log points to 0.08 log points). Yields increased slightly during average
weather conditions from the second era to the third era (0.10 log points to 0.13 log points).
During this third era, as revenues increased substantially, the Ogallala’s main impact was
enabling expansion of high-value corn cultivation without inducing severe drops in yields
during average weather conditions or droughts. Similarly, by limiting corn cultivation, nonOgallala counties have maintained average yields and drought-resistance despite higher water
scarcity.
By comparison, panel B, reports estimates from equation (5) for wheat yields. The
Ogallala had little detectable impact on wheat yields, which is more drought-resistant than
corn and did not experience the same large changes in acreage.
VII

Conclusion

Following engineering improvements in pumping and center pivot irrigation, counties over
the Ogallala gained access to groundwater amidst the arid Great Plains. Farmers responded
initially on the intensive margin by shifting from dryland farming to increase the irrigation
intensity of farmland, corn, and wheat. For corn production, which is relatively waterintensive and drought-sensitive, greater irrigation initially decreased the sensitivity of yields
to drought.
Over time, Ogallala farmers expanded corn acreage into new areas and yields again became sensitive to drought. Agricultural revenues increased, along with water extraction rates,
and the groundwater table declined. In 2002, the remaining value of Ogallala groundwater
had fallen to $9 billion from a peak of $26 billion in 1974.
Lacking access to Ogallala groundwater, nearby counties have maintained agricultural
practices that are less water-intensive and more drought-resistant. Agricultural production
has adapted to groundwater availability such that, over time, non-Ogallala counties are no
more sensitive to drought than heavily-irrigated Ogallala counties.
As Ogallala counties lose access to groundwater, corn yields may become more sensitive
to drought in the short-run; yet, over time, adoption of neighboring counties’ land-use practices can re-establish drought-resistance. Agricultural production will become less valuable

18

without Ogallala groundwater, but neighboring counties illustrate the scope for long-run
agricultural adaptation.
In the Great Plains and in other arid regions, groundwater resources are becoming exhausted even as climate change threatens to increase drought. The impact on vulnerable
agricultural economies depends on the degree of agricultural adaptation; yet, in modern settings, it is diﬃcult to observe adaptation to groundwater access and climate. The history
of farming over the Ogallala aquifer reveals the inﬂuence of both short-run and long-run
agricultural adaptation to groundwater and climate.

19

REFERENCES
Aggarwal, R.M. and T.A. Narayan. 2004. "Does inequality lead to greater efficiency in the use
of local commons? The role of strategic investments in capacity," Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 47, 163-182.
Blomquist, W. 1994. “Changing Rules, Changing Games: Evidence from Groundwater Systems
in Southern California,” in Rules, Games, and Common-Pool Resources, eds. Elinor Ostrom,
Roy Gardner, and James Walker, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Bonnen, C.A., W.C. McArthur, A.C. Magee, and W.F. Hughes. 1952. “Use of Irrigation Water
on the High Plains.” Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas Agricultural
and Mechanical College System, Bulletin 756 (December).
Brackett, E.E. and E.B. Lewis. 1933. “Pump Irrigation Investigations in Nebraska.” Agricultural
Experiment Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 282 (July).
Brower, C., and Heibloem, M. 1986. "Irrigation water management: Irrigation water needs,"
Training Manual 3, Rome 7, FAO.
Coman, K. 1911. "Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation," American Economic Review, 1(1)119.
Conley, T. 1999. “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence.” J. of Econometrics, 92
(1)1-45.
Cunfer, G., 2005. On the Great Plains: Agriculture and Environment. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
DeAngelis, A., F. Dominguez, Y. Fan, A. Robock, M. D. Kustu, and D. Robinson. 2010.
"Evidence of enhanced precipitation due to irrigation over the Great Plains of the United States,"
Journal of Geophysical Research, 115.
Dell, M., B. Jones, and B. Olken. 2011. “Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence
from the Last Half Century.” August, Mimeo.
Demsetz, H. 1967. “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings, 57, 347-359.
Deschenes, O. and M. Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.” American Economic
Review, 97(1)354-385.
Epp, A.W. 1954. “The Cost of Pumping Water for Irrigation in Nebraska.” Agricultural
Experiment Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 426
(November).
FAO. 1999. Poverty Reduction and Irrigated Agriculture. International Programme for
Technology and Research in Irrigation and Drainage. Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations, Rome.
20

Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig, “Inequality and the Sustainability of Agricultural Productivity
Growth: Groundwater and the Green Revolution in Rural India,” mimeo, 2008.
Gertel, K., J.W. Thomas, T.S. Thorfinnson, and H.W. Ottoson. 1956. “Adjusting to Irrigation in
the Loup River Area in Nebraska.” Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Nebraska
College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 434 (February).
Gisser, M. 1983. "Groundwater: Focusing on the Real Issue," Journal of Political Economy,
91, 1001-1027.
Groundwater Foundation. 2005. Rainmakers: A Photographic Story of Center Pivots. Lincoln,
Nebraska.
Guiteras, R. 2009. “The Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture,” mimeo.
Guru, M.V., and J.E. Horne. 2001. “The Ogallala Aquifer,” Water Resource Management, 48,
321-329.
Gutmann, M.P. 2005. Great Plains Population and Environment Data: Agricultural Data. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan and ICPSR.
Haines, M.R. 2005. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790–2000. Hamilton, NY: Colgate University and ICPSR.
Hansen, Z., G. Libecap, and S. Lowe. 2011. "Climate Variability and Water Infrastructure:
Historical Experience in the Western United States," in The Economics of Climate Change:
Adaptations Past and Present, eds. Gary D. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, May 2001, NBER,
University of Chicago Press.
Hornbeck, R. Forthcoming. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short and
Long-run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe,” American Economic Review.
Hornbeck, R. 2010. “Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125, 767–810.
Keskin, P. 2009. “Thirsty Factories, Hungry Farmers: Intersectoral Impacts of Industrial Water
Demand,” mimeo, Kennedy School of Government.
Libecap, G. 2011. "Institutional Path Dependence in Climate Adaptation: Coman's 'Some
Unsettled Problems of Irrigation,'" American Economic Review Centenary Symposium,
101(1)64-80.
Little, J. 2009. “The Ogallala Aquifer: Saving a Vital U.S. Water Source.” Scientific American,
March.
McGuire, V.L., Johnson, M.R., Schieffer, R.L., Stanton, J.S., Sebree, S.K., and Verstraeten, I.M.,
2003, Water in storage and approaches to ground-water management, High Plains aquifer, 2000:
U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1243.
Mendelsohn, R., W. Nordhaus, and D. Shaw. 1994. "The impact of global warming on
agriculture: A Ricardian analysis," American Economic Review, 84(4)753-771.
21

Moench, M. 1996. Groundwater policy: Issues and alternatives in India. Colombo:
International Irrigation Management Institute.
NHGIS, http://www.nhgis.org/, Minnesota Population Center, University of Minnesota.
O’Brien, D.M., F.R. Lamm, L.R. Stone, and D.H. Rogers. 2001. “Corn-Yield and Profitability
for Low- Capacity Irrigation Systems,” Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 17, 315–21.
Olmstead, A.L. and P. Rhode. 2011. "Adapting North American wheat production to climatic
challenges, 1839 - 2009," PNAS, 108(2)480-485.
Opie, J. 1993. Ogallala: Water for a Dry Land. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action.
London: University of Cambridge Press.
Ostrom, E. 2011. "Reflections on 'Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation,'" American Economic
Review Centenary Symposium, 101(1)49-63.
Peterson, J.M., and Y. Ding. 2005. “Economic adjustments to groundwater depletion in the high
plains: Do water-saving irrigation systems save water?” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 87 (1), 147–159.
Peterson, J.M., T.L. Marsh, and J.R. Williams. 2003. “Conserving the Ogallala Aquifer:
Efficiency, Equity, and Moral Motives,” Choices, 1, 15–18.
Pimentel, D., J. Houser, E. Preiss, O. White, H. Fang, L. Mesnick, T. Barsky, S. Tariche, J.
Schreck, and S. Alpert. 2007. "Water Resources: Agriculture, the Environment, and Society."
BioScience, 47(2)97-106.
Pfeiffer, L. and C.-Y.C. Lin. 2010. "The effect of irrigation technology on groundwater use,"
Choices, 25(3).
Porter, K.B., I.M. Atkins, and C.J. Whitfield. 1952. “Wheat Production in the Panhandle of
Texas.” Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas Agricultural and
Mechanical College System, Bulletin 750 (June).
PRISM Climate Group. 2004. http://prism.oregonstate.edu, Oregon State University.
Rao, K. L. 1979. India’s Water Wealth. Orient Longman, New Delhi.
Rhoades, H.F., O.W. Howe, J.A. Bondurant, and F.B. Hamilton. 1954 “Fertilization and
Irrigation Practices for Corn Production on Newly Irrigated Land in the Republican Valley.”
Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln,
Bulletin 424 (February).
Rogers, J.S. and J.W. Collier. 1952. “Corn Production in Texas.” Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, College Station, Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College System, Bulletin 746
(March).
Rosegrant, M.W., C. Ringler and T. Zhu. 2009. “Water for Agriculture: Maintaining Food
Security under Growing Scarcity,” Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 34, 205-222.
22

Schlenker, W., W. Hanemann, and A. Fisher. 2006. "The Impact of Global Warming on U.S.
Agriculture: An Econometric Analysis of Optimal Growing Conditions." Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88(1)113-125.
Schlenker, W. and M. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages to
U.S. crop yields under climate change," PNAS, 106(37)15594-98.
Schoengold, K. and Zilberman, D. 2007. "The economics of water, irrigation and development,"
in Evenson R.E., Pingali, P., Schultz, T.P. (eds.), Handbook of Agricultural Economics:
Agricultural Development: Farmers, Farm Production and Farm Markets, vol. 3, North-Holland.
Sekhri, S. 2008. "Public Provision and Protection of Natural Resources: Groundwater
Irrigation in Rural India," forthcoming, American Economic Journal, Applied Economics.
Shah, T. 1993. Groundwater Markets and Irrigation Development: Political Economy and
Practical Policy. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
Soil Conservation Service. 1951. Map of Major Soil Groups. National Archives Record Group
114, item 148.
Thorfinnson, T.S. and A.W. Epp. 1953. “Effect of Pump Irrigation on Farms in Central
Nebraska.” Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture,
Lincoln, Bulletin 421 (October).
Torell, L.A., JD Libben, and M.D. Miller. 1990. “The market value of water in the Ogallala
aquifer,” Land Economics, 66, 163-75.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1924. Atlas of Agriculture, Part I, section E, Washington, DC:
GPO.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1937. The Future of the Great Plains: Report of the Great
Plains Committee to the House of Representatives, 75th Cong., 1st session, doc. 144.
Weakly, H. E. and L.L. Zook. 1928. “Pump Irrigation Results.” Agricultural Experiment Station,
University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 227 (June).
Weakly, H.E. 1932. “Pump Irrigation and Water Table Studies.” Agricultural Experiment
Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 271 (May).
Weakly, H.E. 1936. “Pump Irrigation at the North Platte Experimental Substation.” Agricultural
Experiment Station, University of Nebraska College of Agriculture, Lincoln, Bulletin 301 (June).
Webb, W.P. 1931. The Great Plains, New York, NY: Grosset & Dunlap.
Zwingle, E. 1993. “Wellspring of the High Plains,” National Geographic, March, 80-109.

23

Figure 1. Ogallala Region and Counties Within 100km

Notes: The shaded area represents the original boundary of the Ogallala Aquifer, as mapped by the United States
Geological Survey. This map is overlaid with county borders, as defined in 1920, for all counties within 100km of
the Ogallala boundary.

24

Figure 2. Irrigated Percent of County Area in 1935 and 1974
A. Irrigation in 1935

B. Irrigation in 1974

Notes: Figures 3a and 3b show the 368 main sample counties, shaded to reflect the percent of county land irrigated
in 1935 (Figure 3a) and 1974 (Figure 3b). White areas are omitted from the sample.

25

Figure 3. Value of Agricultural Land per County Acre, Shaded by Quintile in Each Year
A. Land Value in 1920

B. Land Value in 1964

Notes: The 368 sample counties are shaded to reflect their quintile in the distribution of counties' average value of
agricultural land per county acre in 1920 (Panel A) and 1964 (Panel B). The lightest gray represents the 20% least
valuable counties, while the darkest gray represents the 20% most valuable counties. White areas are omitted from
the sample.

26

Figure 4. Ogallala Boundary and Soil Group Control Variables

Notes: The Ogallala boundary (USGS) is overlaid with major soil groups, as mapped by the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS 1951).

27

.2
.15
.1
.05
0

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

Figure 5. Average County Characteristics Per County Acre, by Ogallala Group
Panel A. Irrigated Farmland Acres
Panel B. Irrigated Corn Acres Harvested

1925

1935

1945

1954

1964

1974

1982

1992

2002

1925

1935

Percent of County Area over Ogallala:
0% to 10%

1945

1954

1964

1974

1982

1992

2002

1992

2002

Percent of County Area over Ogallala:

90% to 100%

0% to 10%

Panel D. Log Value of Farmland

0

3

.05

4

.1

5

6

.15

7

.2

Panel C. Corn Acres Harvested

90% to 100%

1925

1935

1945

1954

1964

1974

1982

1992

2002

1925

Percent of County Area over Ogallala:
0% to 10%

1935

1945

1954

1964

1974

1982

Percent of County Area over Ogallala:

90% to 100%

0% to 10%

90% to 100%

Notes: Each panel reports average characteristics for counties in two groups: those less than 10% over the Ogallala and those more than 90% over the Ogallala.
Panels A and D include counties from the main 368 county sample. Panel B (Panel C) includes counties from a restricted 333 county sample (365 county
sample) with irrigated corn acreage (total corn acreage) data in every period shown.

28

Table 1. Average County Characteristics in 1920 and Differences by Ogallala Share
Coefficient on Ogallala Share:
County Means

No Controls

State
State and
State, Soil,
Fixed Effects
Soil Group
Climate, X/Y
Per county acre:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Farmland
0.706
0.140**
0.020
-0.001
-0.003
[0.249]
(0.039)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.038)
Irrigated Farmland, 1935
0.007
-0.0013
-0.0013
-0.0026
-0.0039
[0.020]
(0.0024)
(0.0022)
(0.0027)
(0.0034)
Log Value of Farmland
2.87
0.432*
-0.203
-0.057
-0.038
and Farm Buildings
[1.30]
(0.194)
(0.155)
(0.120)
(0.135)
Log Value of Farm
1.75
0.306
-0.224
-0.102
-0.010
Revenue
[1.18]
(0.177)
(0.147)
(0.117)
(0.128)
Corn Acres
0.054
0.0066
-0.0347**
0.0006
-0.0043
[0.088]
(0.0098)
(0.0075)
(0.0067)
(0.0075)
Irrigated Corn Acres
0.0003
0.00007
-0.00006
-0.00024
-0.00029
[0.0011]
(0.00015)
(0.00012)
(0.00018)
(0.00019)
Wheat Acres
0.077
0.017
-0.008
-0.003
0.001
[0.113]
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.012)
Irrigated Wheat Acres
0.001
-0.00016
-0.00007
-0.00059
-0.00083
[0.003]
(0.00027)
(0.00031)
(0.00051)
(0.00067)
Notes: Column 1 reports average county characteristics in 1920, except for irrigated farmland for which
data are first available in 1935. Corn and wheat data refer to acreages harvested. County averages are
weighted by county acres, and standard deviations are reported in brackets. Columns 2 through 5 report
estimates from regressing each outcome on the fraction of county area over the Ogallala. Column 2 reports
the unconditional difference. Column 3 controls for state fixed effects. Column 4 also controls for the
fraction of county area in each soil group (Figure 4). Column 5 also controls for linear functions of county
average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. The regressions are weighted by county
acres, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
level, * at the 5% level.

29

Table 2. Estimated Differences by Ogallala Share and Year: Irrigation and Farmland

Coefficient in year:
1920

Irrigated Farmland Acres

Farmland Acres

per county acre
(1)

per county acre
(2)
-0.003
(0.038)
-0.015
(0.036)
0.044
(0.032)
0.054*
(0.023)
0.013
(0.029)
0.052
(0.029)
0.016
(0.029)
0.039
(0.032)
0.008
(0.030)
0.043
(0.027)
0.055*
(0.024)
0.052**
(0.020)
0.060**
(0.019)
0.071**
(0.020)
0.058**
(0.020)
0.051*
(0.022)
0.064**
(0.023)
368

1925
1930
1935

-0.004
(0.003)

1940
1945
1950
1954
1959
1964
1969
1974
1978
1982
1987
1992
1997
Sample Counties

0.013
(0.007)
0.030**
(0.009)
0.051**
(0.010)
0.062**
(0.010)
0.080**
(0.010)
0.097**
(0.012)
0.113**
(0.014)
0.104**
(0.013)
0.093**
(0.012)
0.105**
(0.013)
0.114**
(0.014)
368

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report estimates from equation (3). The indicated outcome variable is regressed on
the share of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in each soil group,
state by year fixed effects, soil group by year fixed effects, and linear functions of county average
precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. All coefficients are allowed to vary in each year.
The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. **
denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.

30

Table 3. Estimated Differences by Ogallala Share and Year: Corn and Wheat Acreages

Coefficient in year:
1920
1925
1930
1935

Corn Acres Harvested
per county acre
Irrigated Corn
All Corn
(1)
(2)
-0.0003
-0.0036
(0.0002)
(0.0075)
0.0108
(0.0086)
0.0112
(0.0096)
-0.0074*
(0.0035)

Wheat Acres Harvested
per county acre
Irrigated Wheat
All Wheat
(3)
(4)
-0.0009
0.0108
(0.0007)
(0.0122)
0.0262*
(0.0114)
0.0645**
(0.0144)
0.0311**
(0.0115)

1940
1945

0.0117
(0.0081)
0.0035
(0.0080)
0.0033
(0.0069)
0.0046
(0.0075)
-0.0020
(0.0052)

0.0340*
(0.0136)
1950
0.0021*
0.0012*
0.0733**
(0.0010)
(0.0006)
(0.0139)
1954
0.0032**
0.0016*
0.0340**
(0.0012)
(0.0006)
(0.0105)
1959
0.0097**
0.0035**
0.0515**
(0.0026)
(0.0012)
(0.0099)
1964
0.0120**
0.0072**
0.0264**
(0.0027)
(0.0017)
(0.0095)
1969
0.0261**
(0.0091)
1974
0.0332**
(0.0115)
1978
0.0651**
0.0446**
0.0133**
0.0236*
(0.0097)
(0.0097)
(0.0020)
(0.0105)
1982
0.0578**
0.0381**
0.0187**
0.0315*
(0.0094)
(0.0090)
(0.0026)
(0.0125)
1987
0.0544**
0.0374**
0.0163**
0.0276**
(0.0084)
(0.0081)
(0.0025)
(0.0104)
1992
0.0670**
0.0499**
0.0171**
0.0156
(0.0099)
(0.0099)
(0.0027)
(0.0114)
1997
0.0762**
0.0652**
0.0140**
0.0146
(0.0106)
(0.0110)
(0.0022)
(0.0115)
Sample Counties
333
365
313
367
Notes: Columns 1-4 report estimates from equation (3). The indicated outcome variable is regressed on the
share of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in each soil group, and
linear functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. All coefficients
are allowed to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.

31

Table 4. Estimated Differences by Ogallala Share and Year: Land Value and Revenue
Implied Ogallala Value in millions:
Log Value Farmland
Log Farm Revenue
per county acre
$
$CPI
$LV
per county acre
Coefficient in year:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-151
-1360
-1530
1920
-0.038
-0.010
(0.135)
(0.128)
-103
-1056
-1543
1925
-0.035
0.044
(0.112)
(0.131)
633
6817
9432
1930
0.223*
0.207
(0.103)
(0.107)
306
4016
7334
1935
0.160
-0.080
(0.093)
(0.112)
-41
-525
-1041
1940
-0.024
(0.104)
241
2407
4393
1945
0.096
0.355**
(0.093)
(0.105)
1192
8911
13255
1950
0.273**
0.423**
(0.085)
(0.112)
1982
13269
17950
1954
0.360**
0.382**
(0.084)
(0.121)
2499
15421
18033
1959
0.352**
0.480**
(0.090)
(0.116)
3907
22659
22729
1964
0.415**
0.464**
(0.081)
(0.129)
4531
22233
20146
1969
0.394**
0.584**
(0.076)
(0.126)
7248
26439
19097
1974
0.369**
0.888**
(0.072)
(0.133)
8544
23559
12663
1978
0.239**
0.813**
(0.072)
(0.129)
10168
18951
12143
1982
0.219**
0.935**
(0.073)
(0.132)
5257
8321
9028
1987
0.158*
0.880**
(0.069)
(0.130)
7252
9296
11146
1992
0.209**
1.016**
(0.076)
(0.145)
10538
11809
12706
1997
0.245**
1.177**
(0.068)
(0.150)
9002
9002
9002
2002
0.178*
1.291**
(0.080)
(0.155)
Sample Counties
368
368
Notes: Columns 1 and 5 report estimates from equation (3), as described in notes to Table 2. Column 2 reports
the implied Ogallala value in contemporary millions of dollars, based on coefficients in column 1. The implied
percent decline in land values is multiplied by the total value of land over the Ogallala, estimated as the sum of
county land values multiplied by Ogallala shares. Column 3 converts column 2 into 2002 dollars using the CPI.
Column 4 converts column 2 into 2002 dollars using a land value price index: in counties with zero Ogallala
share, the 2002 value of land divided by that year's value of land.

32

Table 5. Estimated Local Spillover Impacts: Nearby Non-Ogallala Counties vs. Counties 100km from the Ogallala
Corn Acres Harvested
Wheat Acres Harvested
Log Farm
Log Farm
Value
Revenue
Farmland
Irrigated Corn
All Corn
Irrigated
All Wheat
Coefficient in:
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1920
0.134**
-0.0002
0.0111
-0.00004
0.0249
0.277
0.210
(0.048)
(0.0004)
(0.0179)
(0.00059)
(0.0176)
(0.172)
(0.184)
1935
0.000
0.092
0.0086
0.0119
0.285
(0.006)
(0.056)
(0.0111)
(0.0133)
(0.213)
1945
0.009
0.0162
0.0176
0.268
0.232
(0.054)
(0.0203)
(0.0176)
(0.189)
(0.187)
1950
-0.002
-0.048
0.0008
0.0182
-0.00020
-0.0029
0.085
0.054
(0.009)
(0.049)
(0.0016)
(0.0202)
(0.00022)
(0.0213)
(0.138)
(0.170)
1954
-0.001
-0.044
0.0017
0.0091
-0.00016
0.0041
0.0754
-0.036
(0.009)
(0.060)
(0.0017)
(0.0189)
(0.00013)
(0.0157)
(0.159)
(0.194)
1959
-0.005
-0.016
0.0036
0.0078
-0.00020
0.0153
0.102
0.007
(0.010)
(0.051)
(0.0037)
(0.0206)
(0.00019)
(0.0144)
(0.115)
(0.192)
1964
-0.004
-0.030
0.0037
-0.0012
-0.00004
0.0004
0.061
0.020
(0.010)
(0.050)
(0.0031)
(0.0148)
(0.00043)
(0.0142)
(0.118)
(0.209)
1969
-0.002
0.021
0.0022
0.073
0.111
(0.010)
(0.043)
(0.0164)
(0.117)
(0.223)
1978
0.003
0.018
0.0102
0.0068
-0.00024
0.0122
-0.022
0.204
(0.013)
(0.049)
(0.0076)
(0.0162)
(0.00085)
(0.0208)
(0.122)
(0.257)
1982
0.003
0.019
0.0083
0.0054
-0.00003
-0.0059
-0.015
0.234
(0.012)
(0.053)
(0.0083)
(0.0154)
(0.00116)
(0.0244)
(0.144)
(0.235)
1987
0.000
0.036
0.0065
0.0044
-0.00004
-0.0042
-0.042
0.181
(0.010)
(0.047)
(0.0062)
(0.0129)
(0.00083)
(0.0199)
(0.106)
(0.262)
1992
0.004
0.042
0.0104
0.0066
0.00002
-0.0011
0.117
0.298
(0.012)
(0.056)
(0.0087)
(0.0160)
(0.00114)
(0.0222)
(0.116)
(0.277)
1997
-0.001
-0.004
0.0081
0.0049
-0.00066
-0.0215
0.078
0.190
(0.012)
(0.052)
(0.0070)
(0.0145)
(0.00176)
(0.0217)
(0.119)
(0.271)
Sample Counties
136
136
114
133
99
135
136
136
Notes: For counties with zero area over the Ogallala, each column reports estimates from a modified equation (3): coefficients report the impact of
"Negative Distance to Ogallala Boundary," measured in 100km units. Coefficients reflect average outcomes in counties next to the Ogallala boundary,
relative to counties 100km away. Otherwise, the specifications are as described in Tables 2-4. For conciseness, some coefficients are omitted from
1925, 1930, 1940, 1974, and 2002. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.
Irrigated
Farmland
(1)

33

Table 6. Estimated Impacts of Ogallala and Drought on Yields, Relative to 1940 - 1956
(1)
Panel A. Log Corn Yield
Ogallala * Drought * (1958 - 1975)
Ogallala * Drought * (1976 - 1993)
Ogallala * (1958 - 1975)
Ogallala * (1976 - 1993)
Sample Counties
Panel B. Log Wheat Yield
Ogallala * Drought * (1958 - 1975)
Ogallala * Drought * (1976 - 1993)
Ogallala * (1958 - 1975)
Ogallala * (1976 - 1993)

(2)

(3)

0.375**
(0.101)
0.077*
(0.038)
-0.034
(0.145)
0.084
(0.139)
134

0.353**
(0.098)
-0.050
(0.065)
-0.023
(0.151)
0.082
(0.137)
134

0.292*
(0.121)
-0.036
(0.080)
-0.053
(0.151)
0.082
(0.139)
134

0.008
(0.052)
0.057
(0.055)
0.052
(0.042)
0.094
(0.072)

0.075
(0.045)
0.045
(0.057)
0.047
(0.042)
0.074
(0.073)

0.067
(0.054)
-0.024
(0.076)
0.046
(0.042)
0.060
(0.075)

Additional Controls:
Drought * County Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Drought * Era
Yes
Yes
Yes
Drought * Era * State & Soil
No
Yes
Yes
Drought * Era * Climate & X/Y
No
No
Yes
Sample Counties
165
165
165
Notes: Columns 1-3 report estimates from versions of equation (4). In panel A, log corn yield is regressed on
the triple interaction between a county's Ogallala share, normalized Palmer Drought Severity Index, and a
dummy for the second era (1958 - 1975) or third era (1976 - 1993). Also reported is the double interaction
between Ogallala share and era. All specifications control for county fixed effects and era-specific controls for
state, soil group, and linear functions of average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. In
addition, all specifications control for interactions between drought and county fixed effects and interactions
between drought and era fixed effects. The sample is limited to 134 counties in Nebraska, South Dakota, and
Iowa with data available in each of the 54 years between 1940 and 1993.
Column 2 also controls for interactions between drought and state fixed effects and interactions between
drought and soil group shares. Column 3 also controls for interactions between drought and linear functions of
average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude.
Panel B reports estimated impacts on wheat yields. The sample is limited to 165 counties in Colorado,
Kansas, Oklahoma, South Dakota, and Wyoming with wheat yield data in each of the 54 years between 1940 and
1993. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. **
denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.

34

Appendix Figure 1. Panel A. Kansas Farmland over Ogallala

Appendix Figure 1. Panel B. Kansas Farmland outside Ogallala

Notes: Panels A and B display recent Google Earth images from nearby counties in south central Kansas.

35

Appendix Figure 2. Ogallala Boundary and Natural Vegetation Regions

Notes: The Ogallala boundary (USGS) is overlaid with natural vegetation regions, as mapped by the 1924 Atlas of
Agriculture (USDA 1924).

36

VIII

Theory Appendix

This appendix contains proofs of the theoretical results discussed in section II.
VIII.A

Model Setup

The maximization problem of our representative farmer is
max

L1 ,L2 ,w1 ,w2

y1 (L1 , w1 , d) + y2 (L2 , w2 , d)

subject to the constraints
w1 + w2 = w̄
L1 + L2 = L̄
The production functions are globally concave, with ﬁve additional assumptions:
1. The marginal product of water is higher for the ﬁrst crop:
∂y1 /∂w1 > ∂y2 /∂w2 > 0.
2. The marginal product of water declines slower for the ﬁrst crop:
∂ 2 y2 /(∂w2 )2 < ∂ 2 y1 /(∂w1 )2 < 0.
3. Water and land are complementary for both crops, but weakly more so for the ﬁrst
crop:
∂ 2 y1 /∂L1 ∂w1 ≥ ∂ 2 y2 /∂L2 ∂w2 > 0.
4. Drought decreases the productivity of land for both crops, but drought has a larger
negative eﬀect on the water-intensive crop:
∂ 2 y1 /∂L1 ∂d < ∂ 2 y2 /∂L2 ∂d < 0.
5. Drought increases the productivity of water for both crops, but more so for the waterintensive crop:
∂ 2 y1 /∂w1 ∂d > ∂ 2 y2 /∂w2 ∂d > 0.

37

VIII.B

Comparative Statics Without Drought

Initially, suppress the impact of drought (d) on production. The ﬁrst order conditions for
the farmer’s maximization problem are given by:
)
(
∂y1 (L∗1 , w1∗ ) ∂y2 L̄ − L∗1 , w̄ − w1∗
−
= 0
∂w1
∂w2
)
(
∂y1 (L∗1 , w1∗ ) ∂y2 L̄ − L∗1 , w̄ − w1∗
−
= 0.
∂L1
∂L2
Of interest is how optimal factor allocation responds to a change in the available water (w̄).
Proposition 1. Water and land allocated to the water intensive crop are increasing in total
water availability.
Proof Totally diﬀerentiating the ﬁrst order conditions with respect to w̄, we obtain
)
(
∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂L∗1 ∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂w1∗ ∂ 2 y2 (·)
∂y2 (·) ∂L∗1
∂w1∗
+
−
+
= 0, and
1
−
∂w1 ∂L1 ∂ w̄
∂ w̄
∂w2 ∂L2 ∂ w̄
(∂w1 )2 ∂ w̄
(∂w2 )2
(
)
∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂w1∗ ∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂L∗1 ∂ 2 y2 (·) ∂L∗1
∂y2 (·)
∂w1∗
+
+
−
1−
= 0.
∂w1 ∂L1 ∂ w̄
∂w2 ∂L2
∂ w̄
(∂L1 )2 ∂ w̄
(∂L2 )2 ∂ w̄
Rewriting, we obtain
∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂y2 (·) ∂L∗1
∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂ 2 y2 (·) ∂w1∗
∂ 2 y2 (·)
+
]
+[
+
]
=
, and
∂w1 ∂L1 ∂w2 ∂L2 ∂ w̄
(∂w1 )2
(∂w2 )2 ∂ w̄
(∂w2 )2
∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂y2 (·) ∂w1∗
∂ 2 y1 (·) ∂ 2 y2 (·) ∂L∗1
∂ 2 y2 (·)
[
+
]
+[
+
]
=
.
∂w1 ∂L1 ∂w2 ∂L2 ∂ w̄
(∂L1 )2
(∂L2 )2 ∂ w̄
∂w2 ∂L2
[

The solution to this system is
(
∂L∗1
∂ w̄

= (

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂w1 )2

(

∂w1∗
∂ w̄

= (

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂w1 )2

+

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂L1 )2

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂w1 )2

+

+

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂w2 )2

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂w2 )2

+

)(

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂L2 )2

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂w2 )2

)

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂L1 )2

)

)(

−

∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2

+

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂w2 )2

∂ 2 y1 (·)
(∂L1 )2

∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂w1 ∂L1

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂L2 )2

−

+

(

(

)

−

∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂w1 ∂L1

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂L2 )2

)

−

+
(

∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2

∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂w1 ∂L1

+
(

∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2
∂ 2 y1 (·)
∂w1 ∂L1

)

+
)
+

∂ 2 y2 (·)
(∂w2 )2
∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2

∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2
∂y2 (·)
∂w2 ∂L2

)2

)2

Global concavity of the revenue function (y1 + y2 ) ensures that the denominators in ∂L∗1 /∂ w̄
and ∂w1∗ /∂ w̄ are positive. Under assumptions 1 - 3, above, the numerators are also positive.
Thus, ∂L∗1 /∂ w̄ > 0 and ∂w1∗ /∂ w̄ > 0.

38

VIII.C

General Case: Comparative Statics With Drought

Proposition 2. When the land allocation is held constant, an increase in water availability
reduces the (negative) impact of drought:
[
]
d ∂y1 (L∗1 , w1∗ (w̄) , d) ∂y2 (L∗2 , w2∗ (w̄) , d)
+
> 0.
dw̄
∂d
∂d
Conversely, when the land allocation can respond to changes in w̄, an increase in water
availability has an ambiguous eﬀect on the impact of drought.
Proof Consider the eﬀect of w̄ on the derivative of the revenue function with respect to d.
[
]
d ∂y1 ∂y2
∂ 2 y1 ∂L∗1
∂ 2 y1 ∂w1∗
∂ 2 y2 ∂L∗1
∂ 2 y2 ∂w2∗
+
+
−
+
=
dw̄ ∂d
∂d
∂d∂L1 ∂ w̄
∂d∂w1 ∂ w̄
∂d∂L2 ∂ w̄
∂d∂w2 ∂ w̄
( 2
) ( 2
)
∗
∗
2
∂ y1 ∂w1
∂ y1
∂L∗1
∂ y2 ∂w2
∂ 2 y2
=
+
+
−
∂d∂w1 ∂ w̄
∂d∂w2 ∂ w̄
∂d∂L1 ∂d∂L2 ∂ w̄
|
{z
} |
{z
}
>0

<0

Assumption 5 and Proposition 1 imply that the ﬁrst term is positive. Assumption 4 and
Proposition 1 imply that the second term is negative. Thus, an increase in water availability
has an ambiguous eﬀect on the impact of drought. If the land allocation is held ﬁxed
(∂L∗1 /∂ w̄ = 0), then the impact is unambiguously positive. In addition, the eﬀect of water
availability on the impact of drought is more positive than when the land allocation is free
to adjust.
VIII.D

Special Case: Comparative Statics With Drought

Consider the special case of constant returns to land, in which the farmer maximizes
L1 y1 (w1 , d) + L2 y2 (w2 , d).
Proposition 3. When the production technology displays constant returns to land:
1. If the land allocation can adjust to w̄, then an increase in water availability increases
the (negative) impact of drought:
[
]
d
∂y1 (w1∗ (w̄) , d)
∂y2 (w2∗ (w̄) , d)
∗
∗
L (w̄)
+ L2 (w̄)
< 0.
dw̄ 1
∂d
∂d
2. If the land allocation is ﬁxed, then an increase in water availability reduces the (negative) impact of drought.
39

Proof The ﬁrst order conditions simply to:
∂y2 (w2 , d)
∂y1 (w1 , d)
=
∂w1
∂w2
∂y2 (w2 , d)
y1 (w1 , d) − y2 (w2 , d) =
(w1 − w2 ) .
∂w2
Assumption 1 and global concavity imply that
w1∗ > w2∗ .
In deriving the impact of w̄, total diﬀerentiation of the ﬁrst order conditions yields:
∂ 2 y1 (w1 , d) ∂w1
∂ 2 y2 (w2 , d) ∂w2
=
(∂w1 )2 ∂ w̄
(∂w2 )2 ∂ w̄
(
)
∂y1 (w1 , d) ∂w1 ∂y2 (w2 , d) ∂w2
∂ 2 y2 (w2 , d) ∂w2
∂y2 (w2 , d) ∂w1 ∂w2
−
=
(w1 − w2 ) +
−
.
∂w1
∂ w̄
∂w2
∂ w̄
∂w2
∂ w̄
∂ w̄
(∂w2 )2 ∂ w̄
Using the ﬁrst order conditions to simply the second expression:
∂ 2 y2 (w2 , d) ∂w2
(w1 − w2 ) = 0.
(∂w2 )2 ∂ w̄
Because w1∗ ̸= w2∗ , the only solution is ∂w1 /∂ w̄ = ∂w2 /∂ w̄ = 0. That is, increased water
availability does not cause the farmer to use more water per acre; instead, the farmer shifts
land toward the more water-intensive crop. Because w1 and w2 are constants,
L∗1 (w̄) =

w̄ − w2
,
w1 − w2

and L∗1 is increasing in w̄. Substituting this special case into the general solution:
d ∗
∂y2
∂L∗1 ∂y1
∂ 2 y1 ∂w1∗ ∂L∗2 ∂y2
∂ 2 y2 ∂w2∗
∂y1
[L1 (w̄)
+ L∗2 (w̄)
] =
+ L∗1
+
+ L∗2
dw̄
∂d
∂d
∂ w̄ ∂d
∂d∂w1 ∂ w̄
∂ w̄ ∂d
∂d∂w2 ∂ w̄
) (
)
(
2
∗
2
∗
∂y1 ∂y2 ∂L∗1
∗ ∂ y1 ∂w1
∗ ∂ y2 ∂w2
=
L1
+ L2
+
−
.
∂d∂w1 ∂ w̄
∂d∂w2 ∂ w̄
∂d
∂d ∂ w̄
|
{z
} |
{z
}
=0

<0

Thus, when land allocations can adjust and the production technology displays constant
returns to land, an increase in water availability increases the (negative) impact of drought.
If the land allocation is ﬁxed, however, increased water availability can only be allocated on
the intensive margin and the (negative) impact of drought declines.

40

