NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMPIRICS OF FIRM HETEROGENEITY AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Andrew B. Bernard
J. Bradford Jensen
Stephen J. Redding
Peter K. Schott
Working Paper 17627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

Bernard, Jensen and Schott thank the National Science Foundation (SES-0241474, SES-0552029 and
SES-0550190) and Redding thanks Princeton University and the Centre for Economic Performance
(CEP) for research support. This paper was prepared for the Annual Review of Economics. We are
grateful to Pol Antràs and Peter Neary for helpful comments and suggestions. Some of the research
reviewed in this paper was conducted while Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott were Special Sworn
Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center and Center for Economic
Studies. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau, the NBER, or any other institution to which the authors are
affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Empirics of Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 17627
November 2011
JEL No. F10,F12,F14
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the empirical evidence on firm heterogeneity in international trade. A first wave
of empirical findings from micro data on plants and firms proposed challenges for existing models
of international trade and inspired the development of new theories emphasizing firm heterogeneity.
Subsequent empirical research has examined additional predictions of these theories and explored
other dimensions of the data not originally captured by them. These other dimensions include multi-product
firms, offshoring, intra-firm trade and firm export market dynamics.

Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu
J. Bradford Jensen
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
jbj24@georgetown.edu

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Research in international trade has changed dramatically over the past fteen years as its focus has shifted
from industries and countries to rms and products. This transformation was instigated by the emergence
of a wide range of micro-datasets exhibiting sharp variation in rm outcomes and attributes, even within
narrow industries. Models developed in reaction to this challenge both rationalize this heterogeneity and oer
new insight into the ways in which economies respond to international trade. For example, the well-known
gravity equation relationship between aggregate trade and distance is largely accounted for by the extensive
margin of the number of heterogeneous rms and products participating in trade rather than the intensive
margin of the amount traded per rm and product.
One of the most striking features of the microdata is that rm participation in international trade is
exceedingly rare. Researchers nd that exporters and importers represent just a tiny fraction of producers
across many developed and developing economies. This participation is far from random. Indeed, the same
studies nd that exporters and importers are larger, more productive, more skill- and capital-intensive, and
pay higher wages prior to their entry into international markets than non-trading rms. These facts suggest
self-selection: exporters are more productive, not necessarily as a result of exporting, but because only the
most productive rms are able to overcome the costs of entering export markets. The most successful model
of such selection is the seminal Melitz (2003) model, which has dominated recent research in the eld. The key
insight of that model is that micro-heterogeneity inuences aggregate outcomes. When trade policy barriers
or transportation costs fall, high-productivity exporting rms survive and expand while lower-productivity
non-exporting rms shrink or exit.

This reallocation of economic activity across rms raises aggregate

productivity, an eect of globalization that was largely neglected in previous theories of international trade
based on comparative advantage and consumer love of variety.
Much of recent theoretical research in international trade has focused on generalizing or elaborating on
this basic model of selection.

Studies have explored the interaction between comparative advantage and

heterogeneous rms (Bernard et al. 2007a), variable mark-ups and market size (Melitz & Ottaviano 2008),
country asymmetries (Arkolakis et al. 2008), multi-product rms (Bernard et al. 2011, Eckel & Neary 2010,
Mayer et al. 2011), the decision whether to organize production activities within or beyond the boundaries of
the rm (Antràs & Helpman 2004, 2008), managerial hierarchies within the rm (Caliendo & Rossi-Hansberg
2011), labor market frictions (Amiti & Davis 2011, Egger & Kreickemeier 2009, Helpman and Itskhoki 2010,

1

and Helpman et al. 2011), and nancial constraints (Chaney 2005, Manova 2011), among other issues.

We begin by reviewing the empirical challenges to traditional theories of international trade that emerged
from micro data on plants and rms (Section 2).

We next briey discuss the development of theories of

heterogeneous rms that have shaped much subsequent empirical research (Section 3). More recently, the

1 For

reviews of the theoretical literature on heterogeneous rms and trade, see Helpman (2006) and Redding (2010).

2

availability of microdata on individual trade transactions within the rm has stimulated empirical research
on a whole host of new topics, including the extensive and intensive margins of trade (Section 4), multiproduct rms (Section 5), rm importing (Section 6), product quality (Section 7), intermediaries (Section
8), foreign direct investment (Section 9), intra-rm trade (Section 10), labor markets (Section 11), and rm
export market dynamics (Section 12).

2

Empirical Challenges to Existing Trade Theories

Traditional (or old ) theories of international trade emphasize comparative advantage - that is variation
in opportunity costs of production across countries and industries - as the basis for international trade. In
these theories, international commerce takes the form of

inter-industry trade, where countries export goods

in one set of industries and import goods in another set of industries. More recent (or new) theories of
international trade instead focus on increasing returns to scale and consumer love of variety as the basis for
international trade, as in Krugman (1980), Helpman (1981) and Ethier (1982).
natural explanation for

These theories provide a

intra-industry trade, where countries both export and import goods within the same

industry. The two theories were combined within the integrated equilibrium approach of Helpman & Krugman
(1985). When suitably augmented to allow for technology dierences and cross-country variation in factor
prices, they provided a relatively successful explanation for patterns of trade across countries and industries,
as reviewed in Helpman (1999).

A key simplication in this theoretical literature was the assumption of

a representative rm within each industry. With the increased availability of micro datasets on rms and
plants from the late 1980s and 1990s onwards, it became clear that there was in fact vast heterogeneity across
producers within industries, in terms of size, productivity, capital and skill-intensity, and wages. Furthermore
an emerging empirical literature began to explore the idea that this heterogeneity was systematically related
to trade participation in ways that could be inuential for aggregate outcomes.

2.1

Export Participation

Bernard & Jensen (1995) present evidence for U.S. manufacturing showing that typically a minority of plants
within an industry export. As illustrated in Table 1, which is taken from Bernard et al. (2007b) and uses
data from the 2002 U.S. Census of Manufactures, the overall share of U.S. manufacturing rms that export is
relatively small at 18 percent (column 3). But there is considerable variation in export market participation
rates across industries within manufacturing: the share of exporters ranges from 38 percent in Computer and
Electronic Products to only 8 percent in Apparel. These exporting rms also ship a relatively small share of
their total shipments abroad. As shown in column 4, the average share of shipments exported is 14 percent
for the manufacturing sector as a whole. But again there is substantial variation across industries: from 21
percent in Computers to 7 percent in Beverages. While the results here use U.S. data, similar ndings have

3

emerged for a wide range of other countries, as summarized for example in Mayer & Ottaviano (2007) and
World Trade Organization (2008).

2.2

Exporter Characteristics

The rst wave of microdata research demonstrated that not only is exporting rare but exporters are systematically dierent from non-exporters. Bernard & Jensen (1995) show that among U.S. manufacturing plants,
exporters are larger, more skill intensive, more capital intensive, and more productive. Table 2, also from
Bernard et al. (2007b), highlights these dierences for manufacturing rms. Each row of the table summarizes
the average percent dierence between exporters and non-exporters for a particular characteristic.
As shown in the rst column, there are substantial mean dierences between exporters and non-exporters.
On average, exporting rms are larger in employment and sales, more productive, and use a dierent input
mix. Since export participation is correlated with industry characteristics, the inclusion of industry eects
in the second column typically reduces the magnitude of these coecients. But exporters remain dierent
from non-exporters even within the same disaggregated industry: they are 97 percent larger in employment
and 108 per cent larger in shipments; they are more productive by 11 per cent for value-added per worker
and 3 per cent for total factor productivity; they also pay higher wages by around 6 percent.

Finally,

exporters are relatively more capital- and skill-intensive than non-exporters by approximately 12 and 11
percent, respectively.
While the correlation between rm size and exporting accounts for some of the dierences between
exporters and non-exporters, they remain even after controlling for log employment, as shown in the third

2

column. Qualitatively similar results have been found for many other countries and time periods.

The nding that U.S. exporters are more capital- and skill-intensive is consistent with old trade theory
forces of comparative advantage being at work within industries. If a rm's factor intensity reects the nature
of the products it supplies, then rms which are more capital- and skill-intensive are supplying products that
are more consistent with U.S. comparative advantage (Bernard et al. 2006b).
More dicult to square with old trade theory concepts of comparative advantage are empirical ndings
that exporters are also more capital- and skill-intensive in developing countries, which are plausibly abundant
in unskilled labor (Alvarez & Lopez, 2005). If exporting rms in these countries were supplying products
consistent with comparative advantage, they would be labor-intensive rather than capital- and skill-intensive.
Potential explanations for ndings that exporters are more capital- and skill-intensive in both developed
and developing countries include technology-skill complementarity, as explored in Burstein & Vogel (2010),
Harrigan & Reshe (2011) and Sampson (2011), and sorting by product quality within industries as in

2 Similar

dierences in performance are observed between rms shipping to remote versus proximate locations within the

U.S., as shown in Holmes & Stevens (2010).

4

3

Verhoogen (2008).

2.3

Sunk Costs and Selection into Exporting

The nding that exporters are more productive than non-exporters raises the question of the direction of
causality:

does high productivity induce rms to self-select into export markets or does exporting cause

productivity growth through learning by exporting. An extensive body of research for many industries and
countries conrms that high productivity precedes entry into export markets. These ndings are suggestive
of sunk costs of entry into export markets that only the most productive rms nd it protable to incur,
as emphasized in Roberts & Tybout (1997).
Early studies by Clerides et al.

Whether there is also learning by exporting is less clear.

(1998) using data for Mexico, Colombia and Morocco and Bernard &

Jensen (1999) using U.S. data found no evidence of dierences in productivity growth between exporters
and non-exporters.

Most research conrms these ndings, however, some studies have found evidence of

productivity improvements following export market entry, such as Van Biesebroeck (2005) and de Loecker
(2007).

Other recent research has provided evidence that export market entry may increase the return

to other complementary investments such as technology adoption, as examined theoretically in Atkeson &
Burstein (2010), Burstein & Melitz (2011), Constantini and Melitz (2008) and shown empirically in Bustos
(2011), Lileeva & Treer (2010) and Aw et al. (2011).

2.4

Trade Liberalization, Reallocation, and Productivity Growth

Empirical analyses using microdata on plants and rms reveal new channels through which trade liberalization can aect the aggregate economy. Beyond the eects of the expansion in the range of product varieties
available to consumers, there exists the potential for within-industry productivity growth arising from decreasing trade costs. Trade liberalization reforms are typically accompanied by the contraction and exit of
low-productivity rms and the expansion and entry into export markets of high-productivity rms.

This

reallocation of resources within industries raises average industry productivity.
Additionally, trade liberalization can have a pro-competitive eect in reducing mark-ups of price over
marginal cost, so that trade liberalization reduces average prices through both lower average costs and lower
average mark-ups. These reductions in average prices in turn provide sources of welfare gain.
In the context of the Chilean trade liberalization, Pavcnik (2002) nds that roughly two-thirds of the
19 percent increase in aggregate productivity is due to the relatively greater survival and growth of highproductivity plants. A similar pattern of results is found in a large number of studies of trade liberalization
reforms in developing countries, as surveyed in Tybout (2003). Within-industry reallocations of resources in
these studies typically dominate cross-industry reallocations of resources.

3 More

broadly, for a theoretical analysis of the idea that international trade is inherently more skill-intensive than domestic

production, see Matsuyama (2007).

5

One concern is that trade liberalization often occurs as part of a wider package of reforms. However, similar
patterns of productivity gains from the expansion of high-productivity exporting rms have been found in
response to reductions in trade barriers in both Canada (Treer, 2004) and the United States (Bernard et
al. 2006a). For example, Treer (2004) nds eects of Canadian tari reductions on industry productivity
that are roughly twice as large as those on plant productivity, implying market share reallocations favoring
high-productivity plants.
Another source of aggregate productivity growth following trade liberalization is improvements in productivity within plants or rms. In Pavcnik (2002), around one-third of the increase in aggregate productivity
following the Chilean liberalization was due to within-plant productivity gains. Similarly, in Treer (2004),
the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement is found to raise the labor productivity of Canadian manufacturing
plants by 7.4 percent or by an annual compound growth rate of 0.93 percent. These improvements in plant
or rm productivity may be themselves the result of reallocations across disparate economic activities within
the plant or rm, as discussed further below.

3

Heterogeneous Firm Theories

The empirical challenges to old and new trade theory from microdata have led to the development of recent
theories of rm heterogeneity and international trade. These theories not only account for the features of
disaggregated trade data noted above, but also yield additional predictions that have been the subject of
further empirical work. The seminal study of Melitz (2003) introduces rm heterogeneity into Krugman's
(1980) model of intra-industry trade to yield a tractable and exible framework that has become a standard

4

platform for analyzing a host of issues in international trade.

In Melitz (2003), there is a competitive fringe of potential rms who can enter an industry by paying
a xed entry cost which is thereafter sunk.

Potential entrants face

ex ante

uncertainty concerning their

productivity. Once the sunk entry cost is paid, a rm draws its productivity from a xed distribution and
productivity remains xed thereafter. Firms produce horizontally dierentiated varieties within the industry
under conditions of monopolistic competition. The existence of a xed production cost implies that rms
drawing a productivity level below the zero-prot productivity cuto  would make negative prots and
therefore exit the industry. Fixed and variable costs of exporting ensure that only those active rms that

5

draw a productivity above a higher export productivity cuto  nd it protable to export.

In this model, a symmetric reduction in trade barriers between all countries has a number of implications
for industry equilibrium.

4 An

High-productivity exporting rms experience increased revenue through greater

alternative framework for modeling rm heterogeneity is Bernard et al. (2003), which considers Bertrand competition in

the stochastic multi-country Ricardian model of trade of Eaton & Kortum (2002). Another approach is pursued in Yeaple (2005),
in which rms are ex ante identical, but rm heterogeneity emerges ex post through the endogenous allocation of heterogeneous
workers across rms.

5 For

empirical evidence of sunk costs of exporting, see Roberts & Tybout (1997), Bernard & Jensen (2004), and Das et al.

(2007).

6

export market sales.

The most productive non-exporters now nd it protable to enter export markets,

thereby increasing the fraction of exporting rms.

In contrast, low productivity rms exit and there is a

contraction in the revenues of surviving rms that only serve the domestic market. Each of these responses
reallocates resources towards high-productivity rms and raises aggregate productivity through a change in
industry composition.
This theoretical framework addresses a number of the empirical challenges from microdata.

Together

rm heterogeneity and xed exporting costs imply that only some rms export and these exporters are more
productive than non-exporters.

The productivity advantage of exporting rms reects self-selection into

export markets rather than learning by exporting.

Finally, the self-selection of rms into export markets

ensures that trade liberalization has uneven eects on low and high-productivity rms and hence raises
aggregate productivity through a change in industry composition.
While the assumption of constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences in Melitz (2003) ensures constant rm mark-ups of price over marginal cost, Bernard et al. (2003) and Melitz & Ottaviano (2008) develop
models of rm heterogeneity in which rm mark-ups are endogenous. In such settings, trade liberalization
can have a pro-competitive eect in reducing the price charged by a given rm through a lower mark-up
of price over marginal cost.

In models with variable mark-ups, a rm with a given productivity can also

charge dierent mark-ups in the domestic and export markets. Using Slovenian data, De Loecker & Warzynski (2011) provides empirical evidence of dierences in mark-ups between exporters and non-exporters and
discusses the implications of such variable mark-ups for estimated productivity dierences between exporters
and non-exporters.
In Bernard et al. (2007a), heterogeneous rms are integrated into the standard trade paradigm of Helpman
& Krugman (1985). The resulting framework simultaneously explains why some countries export more in
certain industries than in others (endowment-driven comparative advantage), why two-way trade is observed
within industries (rm-level horizontal product dierentiation combined with increasing returns to scale), and
why, within industries, some rms export and others do not (self-selection driven by trade costs). Consistent
with the empirical ndings reported in Table 1, the fraction of exporting rms and the share of exports in
rm shipments vary systematically with comparative advantage.

4

Gravity and the Extensive and Intensive Margins

One of the most successful empirical relationships in economics is the gravity equation, which relates the
value of total bilateral trade between countries to their economic size and the variable trade costs between
them. Under the assumption that rm productivity is Pareto distributed, the Melitz (2003) model yields a

7

6 One

gravity equation for total bilateral trade ows, as shown in Chaney (2008) and Arkolakis et al. (2008).

remarkable feature of this gravity equation is that the elasticity of trade ows with respect to variable trade
costs depends not on the elasticity of substitution between rm varieties but rather on the shape parameter
of the Pareto distribution for productivity.
The intuition for this result can be garnered by noting that aggregate bilateral trade between any two
countries (Xij ) can be decomposed into the
the

extensive margin

of the number of exporting rms (Mij ) and

intensive margin of average rm exports conditional on exporting (Xij /Mij ):

Xij = Mij

Xij
Mij


.

(1)

7

In the Melitz model, an increase in variable trade costs has two osetting eects on the intensive margin.
On the one hand, higher variable trade costs reduce the value of exports of a given exporter, which

reduces

average rm exports. On the other hand, higher variable trade costs imply that some exporters who were
previously close to the productivity threshold for exporting can no longer generate sucient variable prots
to cover the xed costs of exporting and exit the export market. Since these exiting exporters have smaller
export values than surviving exporters, this

raises average rm exports through a change in composition. In

the special case of a Pareto distribution, these two eects exactly oset one another, leaving the intensive
margin independent of variable trade costs.

As a result, variable trade costs only aect bilateral trade

through the extensive margin, and the elasticity of this extensive margin with respect to variable trade costs
is determined by the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution for productivity.
The special case of the Melitz (2003) model with a Pareto distribution for productivity lies within the
class of theoretical models considered by Arkolakis et al. (2011a), in which a country's share of trade with
itself is a sucient statistic for the welfare gains from opening the closed economy to trade. While empirical
studies have sought to quantify the contributions of particular sources of welfare gains, such as product
variety in Broda & Weinstein (2006), this theoretical analysis implies that the various sources of welfare
gains are related to one another in general equilibrium and that the overall eect of trade on welfare can
be determined simply from a country's share of trade with itself. See also Atkeson and Burstein (2010) for
a theoretical analysis of the relationship between the various possible sources of welfare gains from trade in
heterogeneous rm models.
A key implication of the Melitz (2003) model is that the extensive margin of the number of exporting
rms should vary systematically with export market size, since in larger markets rms of lower productivity
can generate sucient variable prots to cover the xed costs of exporting. Using French export data by

6 For

empirical evidence that the Pareto distribution provides a reasonable approximation to the observed distribution of rm

sizes, see for example Axtell (2001).

7 We

dene the intensive margin as average rm exports conditional on exporting because it facilitates the decomposition of

average exports in (1) and has a straightforward empirical implementation. Chaney (2008) instead denes the intensive margin
as exports of a given rm to a given destination, in which case the intensive margin is unaected by composition.

8

rm and destination market, Eaton et al.

(2004, 2011a) establish this and a number of other empirical

regularities. First, the number of French rms selling to a market (relative to French market share) increases
with market size according to an approximately log linear relationship. Second, this pattern of rm export
market participation exhibits an imperfect hierarchy, where rms selling to less popular markets are more
likely to sell to more popular markets, but do not always do so.

Third, export sales distributions are

remarkably similar across markets of very dierent size and extent of French participation. While the upper
tail of these distributions is approximately Pareto distributed, there are departures from a Pareto distribution
in the lower tail where small export shipments are observed. Fourth, average sales in France are higher for
rms selling to less popular foreign markets and to more foreign markets.
To explain these empirical regularities, Eaton et al. (2011a) consider an augmented version of the Melitz
model with a Pareto productivity distribution. To generate departures from a Pareto distribution of export
sales in the lower tail where small export shipments are observed, the xed costs of entering each export
market are allowed to vary endogenously with a rm's choice of the fraction of consumers within that market
to serve, as in the marketing costs formulation of Arkolakis (2010). To incorporate imperfect hierarchies of
markets, the xed costs of entering export markets are assumed to be subject to an idiosyncratic shock for
each rm and destination market. To allow for idiosyncratic variation in export sales conditional on entering
a given export market for rms with a given productivity, demand is also subject to an idiosyncratic shock for
each rm and destination market. While a rm's decision to enter an export market depends on a composite
of the market entry and demand shocks, a rm with a given productivity can enter a market because of a
low entry shock and yet still have low sales in that market because of a low demand shock.
The properties of the model depend on ve key parameters: (i) a composite parameter that includes
both the elasticity of substitution and the Pareto shape parameter, (ii) the convexity of marketing costs, (iii)
the variance of demand shocks, (iv) the variance of entry shocks, and (v) the correlation between demand
and entry shocks.

Eaton et al.

(2011a) use simulated method of moments to estimate these parameters

using moments of the French export data by rm and destination market. The ve parameters are precisely
estimated and the parameterized model is shown to provide a good t to the observed data. For the estimated
parameter values, rm productivity accounts for around half of the observed variation across rms in export
market participation, but explains substantially less of the variation in exports conditional on entering a
market.
Given the estimated parameter values, the model can be used to examine counterfactuals, such as a 10
percent reduction in bilateral trade barriers for all French rms. In this counterfactual, total sales by French
rms rise by around $16 million, with most of this increase accounted for by a rise in sales of the top decile of
rms of around $23 million. In contrast, every other decile of rms experiences a decline in sales, with around
half of the rms in the bottom decile exiting. Taken together, these results suggest that the intra-industry

9

reallocations emphasized by theories of heterogeneous rms and trade can be quantitatively large, even for

8

empirically reasonable changes in trade frictions.

Heterogeneous rm theories also shed light on the prevalence of zeros in bilateral trade ows. Using data
on trade between 158 countries from 1970-97, Helpman et al. (2008) nd that around one half of the country
pairs do not trade with one another. Motivated by this feature of the data, they develop a multi-country
version of the Melitz (2003) model, in which rm productivity is drawn from a truncated Pareto distribution.
In this framework, no rm exports between a pair of countries if the productivity threshold for exporting
exceeds the upper limit of the productivity distribution in each country.

Estimating a gravity equation

derived from the model, they show that controlling for both the non-random selection of positive trade ows
and the extensive margin of exporting rms has quantitatively important implications for estimates of the
eects of standard trade frictions on trade ows.

Of these two corrections, controlling for the extensive

margin of the number of heterogeneous rms that export is quantitatively more important than controlling

9

for the non-random selection of positive trade ows.

Although most research on heterogeneous rms and trade assumes a continuum of rms, Eaton et al.
(2011b) argue that the existence of a nite number of rms provides an alternative potential explanation for
zero bilateral trade ows. Even if the productivity distribution is unbounded from above, the existence of a
nite number of rms implies that there is a positive probability that no rm draws a productivity above the
threshold for exporting between a pair of countries. Using data on bilateral trade in manufactures among 91
countries, they show that the model accounts for the pattern of zero trade ows while maintaining the good
t of the standard gravity equation among country pairs with positive trade ows.

5

Multi-product Firms

One of the striking features of international trade data is the extent to which international trade is concentrated in the hands of a few rms. As reported in Bernard et al. (2009a), the top 1 percent of rms account
for around 90 percent of the value of U.S. trade, even though they account for only around 15 percent of
employment. Similar levels of concentration are observed in other countries, as summarized in World Trade
Organization (2008).
One reason why international trade is so concentrated is that larger exporters not only export more
of a given product to a given destination than smaller exporters, but also export more products to more
destinations. Table 3, from Bernard et al. (2007b), reports the distribution of exporters, export value and
employment by the number of products and export destinations. Around 40 percent of exporting rms export

8 Other

quantitative analyses of models of rm heterogeneity and trade include the study of trade integration in Corcos et al.

(2010), the analysis of the impact of China's productivity growth on world welfare in Hsieh & Ossa (2010), and the investigation
of patterns of trade in Bangladesh's apparel sector in Cherkashin et al. (2010).

9 Santos

Silva and Tenreyro (2006) consider an alternative approach to zero trade ows that uses the Poisson xed eects

estimator.

10

a single product to a single destinations (panel A), but these rms account for less than 1 percent of export
value (panel B). In contrast, the 12 percent of rms that export more than ve products to more than ve
destinations account for more than 90 percent of export value.
To make sense of rms' decisions over the extensive margins of products and destinations, Bernard et al.
(2011) develop a model of multi-product, multi-destination rms that is a generalization of Melitz's (2003)
framework. In order to enter, rms incur a sunk entry cost, which reveals their ability. Firms then choose
among a continuum of products and many export markets. Firm protability depends upon the interaction
of rm ability, which is common across products, and rm-product attributes, which are idiosyncratic across
products and possibly also across export destinations. Firms face xed costs in serving each market and in
supplying each product to each market. Higher ability rms can generate sucient variable prots to cover
the product xed cost at a lower value of product attributes and hence supply a wider range of products to
each market. For suciently low values of rm ability, the excess of variable prots over product xed costs
in the small range of protable products does not cover the xed cost of serving the market and therefore
the rm does not supply the market. The lowest-ability rms exit, intermediate-ability rms serve only the
domestic market and the highest ability rms export. Within exporters, products with the worst attributes
are supplied only to the domestic market, while products with the best attributes are exported to the largest
number of markets.
While the standard heterogeneous-rm model emphasizes selection
sizes selection

within

rms.

across rms, this model also empha-

Selection within rms provides a potential rationale for the eects of trade

liberalization on within-rm productivity found in the empirical studies discussed above, since trade liberalization induces rms to drop their least successful products with low revenue productivity. Using data from
the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA), Bernard et al. (2011) and Baldwin & Gu (2009) provide
empirical evidence of product rationalization following trade liberalization.
The extensive margins highlighted by models of multi-product rms have important implications for
the mechanisms underlying aggregate economic relationships.

Aggregate bilateral trade between any two

extensive margin of the number of rm-product observations
with positive exports (Oij ) and the intensive margin of average rm-product exports conditional on positive

countries (Xij ) can be decomposed into the

trade (x̄ij

= Xij /Oij ):

x̄ij ≡

Xij = Oij x̄ij ,

Xij
Oij


,

(2)

where the number of rm-product observations with positive trade can be decomposed in turn into the
extensive margins of the number of exporting rms (Mij ), the number of exported products (Nij ) and a
density term (Dij

= Oij / (Mij Nij ))

that captures the extent to which each rm exports each product:


Dij ≡

Oij = Mij Nij Dij ,

11

Oij
Mij Nij


.

(3)

Table 4 reports the results of estimating gravity equations for aggregate U.S. exports and each of the
extensive and intensive margins in (2) and (3). The table is taken from Bernard et al. (2011) and destination
market size and variable trade costs are proxied using destination market GDP and geographical distance
respectively. The well-known negative eect of distance on aggregate bilateral trade (column 1) is entirely
accounted for by the extensive margin of the number of rm-product observations with positive trade (column
3). In contrast, distance has a positive but statistically insignicant eect on the intensive margin of average
exports per rm-product conditional on positive trade (column 2). The extensive margins of the number of
exporting rms and the number of exported products both decline with distance (columns 4 and 5). The
opposite is true of density, because each rm is active in a limited subset of products, which implies that the
number of rm-product observations with positive trade (Oij ) increases less than proportionately than the
number of rms times the number of products (Mij Nij ).
The theoretical model discussed above provides a natural explanation for these empirical ndings.

A

reduction in variable trade costs lowers product prices in each export market which increases revenue and
variable prots.

Reductions in variable trade costs raise aggregate exports through the share of products

exported to a given country by incumbent exporters (within-rm product extensive margin), an increase in
the average number of countries to which a given product is supplied by incumbent rms (within-rm country
extensive margin), and the entry of lower-ability rms that previously only served the domestic market into
export markets (the across-rm extensive margin). In contrast, selection within rms implies that reductions
in variable trade costs have ambiguous eects on the intensive margin of average exports per rm-product,
because they increase exports of a given rm and product, but induce entry into export markets of rms and
products with smaller export values.
A growing theoretical and empirical literature in international trade has investigated a variety of implications of multi-product, multi-destination rms. While early contributions such as Ottaviano & Thisse
(1999) and Allanson & Montagna (2005) modeled rms and products symmetrically, more recent research
has explored the idea that rms have core competences. Eckel & Neary (2010) consider a model of exible
manufacturing where each rm faces rising marginal costs in producing products further from its core competence. Firms are large relative to the market and hence face a cannibalization eect, where introducing

10 Javorcik et al. (2010) consider

additional products diminishes the demand for the rm's existing products.

an augmented version of this model, in which rms can make endogenous investments in the quality of each
product and in their overall brand. Using Mexican trade transaction data, they provide empirical evidence
in support of the model's key predictions for the relationship between product prices and sales rank within
the rm.
Other recent research has concentrated on monopolistically-competitive models of multiple-product rms

10 See

also Feenstra & Ma (2008) and Dhingra (2010).

12

without cannibalization eects.

In Mayer et al.

(2011), rms face a product ladder, where productiv-

ity/quality declines discretely for each additional variety produced. Together with variable mark-ups, this
generates the prediction that rm sales are more skewed towards core competences in more competitive
markets. French export data provide strong empirical support for this prediction of the model. In Arkolakis
& Muendler (2010), rms face declining productivity for each additional variety supplied to a market and
market entry costs that are increasing in the number of varieties supplied to a market. Using Brazilian trade
transaction data, they present evidence in support of the model's prediction of a positive relationship between the number of products that a rm exports to a market and average exports per product. In contrast,
in Nocke and Yeaple (2006), rms with higher organizational capability produce more products and have
higher marginal costs for all products, which generates a negative relationship between rms' extensive and
intensive margins.
While most of the above research concentrates on the determinants of the products and destinations
supplied by multi-product rms at a given point time, there is evidence that product market entry and exit
within surviving rms is inuential for rm, industry and aggregate dynamics over time. Using U.S. Census
of Manufactures data, Bernard et al. (2010a) nd that around one half of surviving U.S. rms add and/or
drop products from their existing range every ve years, and the contribution of these added and dropped

11

products to aggregate output is of around the same magnitude as the contribution of rm entry and exit.

Consistent with a natural generalization of models of industry dynamics to incorporate selection with rms,
the probability that a product is dropped within a surviving rm exhibits the same pattern of age and scale
dependence as the probability that a rm exits. Taken together, these ndings suggest that reallocation may
be even more important than hitherto thought, in so far as it occurs across products within rms as well as
across rms.

6

Firm Importing

The early empirical literature on rm heterogeneity in international trade concentrated almost exclusively on
rm export behavior, since only exporting information was recorded in censuses of domestic production or
manufacturing. More recent work using rm-level trade transaction data has begun to examine heterogeneity
in rm import behavior.
Firm importing displays many of the same features as rm exporting. Bernard et al. (2007b) nd that,
for U.S. manufacturing rms, importing is somewhat rarer than exporting and there is substantial variation
across industries. The shares of exporting and importing rms are signicantly positively correlated (0.87)
across industries. Around 41 percent of exporters also import while 79 percent of importers also export. The

11 The

production of multiple products complicates the measurement of rm productivity when separate data on outputs,

inputs and prices are not available at the rm-product level, as considered in Bernard et al. (2009c) and De Loecker (2011).

13

share of export-only rms is positively and signicantly correlated with industry skill intensity, while the
share of import-only rms is negatively but not signicantly correlated with industry skill intensity.
Importers exhibit a number of the same performance dierences as exporters.

As reported in Table 5

from Bernard et al. (2007b), importers are bigger, more productive, pay higher wages and are more skilland capital-intensive than non-importers. From a comparison of the rst and second columns with the third
column, the performance dierences between rms that participate in international trade and those that do
not are partly driven by rms that both import and export, which exhibit the largest performance dierences
from domestic rms. These ndings suggest that trade liberalization is likely to benet the largest, most
productive, most skill- and capital-intensive rms within industries, not only through enhanced access to
export markets, but also through improved availability of imported intermediate inputs.
While empirical studies of the impact of trade liberalization on productivity have typically focused on
reductions in taris in output markets, more recent evidence suggests that reductions in taris on imported
intermediate inputs may be a prominent source of productivity gains. Amiti & Konings (2007) use manufacturing census data from Indonesia, which contains plant-level information on imported intermediate inputs,
to construct separate measures of input and output taris. Following the trade liberalization that occurred in
the 1990s, they nd that reductions in input taris are associated with an increase in productivity of around
12 percent for rms that import their inputs, which is around twice as large as the eect for reductions in
output taris.
Input taris may aect productivity through a number of potential channels, including learning about
foreign technologies, expansion in the variety of intermediate inputs available for production, and access to
higher-quality intermediate inputs. Following India's trade liberalization in the early 1990s, Goldberg et al.
(2010) nd that around two thirds of the growth in imports of intermediate inputs is accounted for by the
extensive margin of newly imported products. In industries that experienced greater tari reductions, there
is a larger increase in total value, a greater reduction in prices and a larger expansion in variety of imported
intermediate inputs. Consistent with the idea that the availability of new intermediate inputs expanded the
technological possibilities of rms, industries that saw greater increases in the variety of imported intermediate
inputs also experienced greater increases the range of products produced by Indian rms.
More generally, the presence of both importing and exporting within rms suggests the relevance of
theories of the fragmentation of production, such as Dixit & Grossman (1982) and Grossman & RossiHansberg (2008). In these models, rms can organize stages of production across national borders. Using
input-output tables for 10 OECD and four emerging-market countries, Hummels et al. (2001) estimate that
such vertical specialization accounts for around 20 percent of countries' exports and grew by around 30
percent between 1970 and 1990. As shown in Yi (2003), when stages of production are spread across national
boundaries in this way, changes in trade costs can have a magnied impact on trade ows, because they are

14

12

incurred each time the good is traded back and forth between countries.

7

Product Quality

Even within narrowly-dened product categories, such as the 8,000+ products of the ten-digit Harmonized
System (HS) classication, there is tremendous variation in unit values across trade partners.

A growing

literature in international trade argues that this variation in prices reects dierences in product quality

13 Furthermore, this variation in

across trade partners, as in Schott (2004) and Hummels & Klenow (2005).

prices is strongly related to country endowments, with more capital and skill-abundant countries supplying
varieties with higher prices within narrow product categories.

According to this view, capital and skill-

abundant countries use their endowments to supply products of higher quality, and this higher product
quality is reected in a higher price.
Many papers use microdata to study the relationship between price variation and trade patterns at the
rm level. For instance, Manova and Zhang (2011) use Chinese trade transaction data to highlight a number
of systematic features of exports and imports by rm, product and destination that are consistent with

14

heterogeneity in product quality.

For example, across rms selling a given product, rms that charge

higher export prices earn greater revenues in each destination, have bigger worldwide sales, and export to
more markets. Across destinations within a rm-product, rms set higher prices in richer, larger, bilaterally
more distant and overall less remote countries. Finally, rms that export pay a wider range of input prices
and source inputs from more countries.

Taken together these features of the data are consistent with a

heterogeneous rm model where more successful exporters use higher-quality inputs to produce higher-quality
goods and rms vary the quality of their products across destinations.
Using Colombian census of manufactures data, Kugler & Verhoogen (2011) provide evidence of dierences
in product quality and highlight the relationship between rm export and import decisions. Within narrowly
dened industries, larger rms charge more for their outputs and pay more for their inputs than smaller
rms, and similar dierences exist between exporters and non-exporters. This pattern of results is consistent
with an extension of Melitz (2003), in which rms endogenously choose both input and output quality and
there is a complementarity between the quality of inputs and outputs.
In Melitz (2003), the assumptions of constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences and monopolistic competition imply that rm productivity and product quality are isomorphic in the sense that they
enter equilibrium rm revenue in exactly the same way. An empirical literature has sought to distinguish
productivity and product quality by exploiting variation in prices across rms on the grounds that higher

12 For

a discussion of how global supply chains inuenced the impact of the recent earthquake and tsunami in Japan, see

Economist (2011).

13 For
14 See

evidence on the role of product quality in explaining patterns of bilateral trade, see Hallak (2006).
also Bastos and Silva (2008) for evidence using Portuguese trade transaction data.

15

productivity implies lower prices whereas higher product quality can lead to higher prices, as explored in
Baldwin & Harrigan (2011) and Johnson (2010).
One empirical challenge facing this literature is that rms supply horizontally dierentiated varieties in
Melitz (2003) and the specication of consumer preferences in which all varieties enter utility symmetrically
implicitly imposes a choice of units in which to measure the quantity of each variety. There is no necessary
relationship between this normalization and the units in which physical quantities of output are measured for
each rm in the data. As a result, data on physical quantities of output cannot be directly compared across
rms in the presence of horizontal product dierentiation, which complicates the interpretation of variation
in unit values across rms.
Using unit values to make inferences about the role of product quality in determining export patterns
can be misleading because many factors other than quality aect prices. For instance, holding quality xed,
more ecient rms may nd it optimal to charge lower prices for their products.

Instead, recent papers

obtain a proxy for product quality from demand residuals. Because consumers decide how much to purchase
of each good by comparing quality-adjusted prices, two rms that charge the same price but have dierent
market shares must sell varieties of dierent quality. In particular, rms that sell large quantities of physical
output conditional on price are classied as high quality producers. Khandelwal (2011) applies this method
to estimate quality for a broad sample of countries using aggregate trade data.

He nds that markets

characterized by relatively small scope for quality dierentiation are associated with larger employment and
output declines resulting from low-wage competition. Similarly, Hallak & Schott (2011) estimate quality for a
panel of 43 countries between 1989 and 2003. They nd that export quality is correlated with the exporter's
income per capita, but they also nd that during this period quality levels are converging whereas income
per capita is not.

Finally, Gervais (2011) uses US Census data to estimate quality at the plant-level and

decomposes cross-plant variation in price and export status into quality and eciency margins. Prices are
found to be increasing in quality and decreasing in eciency, but, selection into exporting is driven mainly
by quality.

8

Intermediaries

While in many models of international trade consumers purchase imports directly from foreign producers, the
prevalence of rm importing has stimulated recent research on the role of intermediaries, such as wholesalers
and retailers, in the process of international trade. Bernard et al. (2010c) examine the dierences between
wholesalers, retailers and other categories of U.S. trading rms using data from the U.S. Linked/Longitudinal

15 While wholesale rms comprise 35 percent of exporters and

Firm Trade Transaction Database (LFTTD).

15 As

in most international trade datasets, rms that trade directly in LFTTD cannot be compared to those that trade

indirectly via wholesalers or retailers, since the latter's sales or purchases within the U.S. are not observed.

16

42 percent of importers, they account for only 8 percent of export value and 15 percent of import value.
Retailers are less prevalent and smaller than wholesalers, accounting for 9 percent of exporters and 13
percent of importers but only 1 percent of export and import value. In contrast, rms with operations that
span wholesale or retail and other sectors (typically large rms) comprise around only 5 percent of exporters
and importers, but account for more than 60 percent of export value and more than 50 percent of import
value. Therefore the vast majority of trade is undertaken by a relatively small number of large traders that
vertically integrate wholesale/retail activities within rm boundaries. Using Italian trade transaction data,
Bernard et al. (2010d) nd that the share of exports mediated by wholesalers is positively correlated with
proxies for country-specic xed costs, including the World Bank's Doing Business measures of the number
of documents for importing, cost of importing and time to import.
Using Chinese trade transaction data, Ahn et al. (2011) consider a dierent denition of intermediaries
based on rms having the English-equivalent meaning of importer, exporter, and/or trading in their
name. Such intermediary rms account for around $168 billion of China's exports or around 22 percent of the
total. The paper develops a model in which intermediaries are used by relatively small rms that do not nd

16 Consistent with

it protable to incur the xed costs of directly exporting to foreign markets by themselves.

intermediaries handling the products of other rms, they export relatively more products per destination
market than other trading rms. In line with the idea that the xed costs of direct exporting are more likely
to be prohibitive in a small and remote foreign markets, intermediaries account for larger export shares in
smaller markets and markets with higher trade costs.
Blum et al. (2011) provide further indirect evidence on intermediation using matched importer-exporter
transaction data for Chile and Colombia. Consistent with the concentration of U.S. trade discussed above,
the distributions of bilateral exports and imports between Chile and Columbia are highly skewed across
rms. More than half of exporters sell to only one importer, whereas the 99th percentile exporter sells to 19
importers. Similarly, more than half of importers deal with only one exporter, whereas the 99th percentile
importers deals with 9 exporters. More generally, while one party to a transaction can be small and engage
with few other traders, the other party to the transaction is typically large and deals with many other traders.
This pattern of results is consistent with the idea that ecient trades involve large trade volumes, which
can be achieved either by small importers matching with large exporters or small exporters matching with
large importers. Motivated by these ndings, the paper develops a theoretical model in which rms choose
whether to access markets directly or indirectly via intermediaries. Since the direct exporting technology is
characterized by increasing returns to scale, it is used by large exporters selling directly to many importers. In
contrast, the intermediation technology is employed by large importers that spread the costs of intermediation
over many small exporters.

16 Other

models of intermediation with similar patterns of selection of rms into intermediation and direct exporting include

Akerman (2010) and Felbermayr & Jung (2008).

17

More broadly, a key challenge in international trade is opening the black box of trade costs. Theories of
heterogeneous rms and international trade posit the existence of xed and variable trade cost parameters,
but there is still little understanding of what these parameters capture. The literature on intermediaries in
international trade takes some rst steps towards understanding the chains of decisions involved in conducting goods from production to nal consumption. Recent empirical research suggests that these trade and
distribution networks may be important for a variety of issues in international trade, such as the border eect,
exchange rate pass-through and the relationship between nominal and real exchange rates, as in Burstein
et al. (2005) and Li et al. (2011). Other micro evidence on the potential importance of rm distribution
networks comes from empirical ndings of Carry-Along Trade (CAT) in Bernard et al. (2010e), where more
than three quarters of the exported products and more than one quarter of export value from Belgian manufacturers are in goods that are not produced by rms. Recent theoretical research on search, networks and
intermediation in international trade (e.g. Rauch & Trinidade 2003, Petropoulou 2007, Antràs & Costinot
2011) provides further guidance for future empirical work.

9

Foreign Direct Investment

Multinational rms play a central role in the global economy, with U.S.-based multinationals mediating more
than 90 percent of U.S. trade in Bernard et al. (2009a). Indeed, for countries whose rms have large networks
of overseas subsidiaries, the sales of these subsidiaries can dwarf international trade ows.
While Melitz (2003) focuses on exports, Helpman et al.

(2004) generalize the analysis to incorporate

horizontal foreign direct investment (FDI), allowing rms to choose between incurring a xed cost of exporting
or a xed cost of establishing an overseas aliate. If the xed costs of FDI are suciently high relative to
the xed costs of exporting, the most productive rms serve the foreign market through FDI; rms with an
intermediate range of productivities export; rms with a lower range of productivities only serve the domestic
market.

With a Pareto productivity distribution, the importance of FDI relative to exporting as a mode

for serving the foreign market is decreasing in the shape parameter of the Pareto productivity distribution
(increasing in rm productivity dispersion). Consistent with this prediction, Helpman et al. (2004) show
that the share of total foreign market sales accounted for by the sales of foreign aliates is larger in industries
with smaller estimated shape parameters for the distribution of rm sales (which in the model is directly
related to the distribution of rm productivity).
Using Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) microdata on U.S. rms and their overseas aliates, Yeaple
(2009) provides further evidence in support of theories of heterogeneous rms and FDI. Consistent with rm
selection, more productive U.S. rms own aliates in a larger number of countries and these aliates generate
greater revenue from sales in their host countries. Consistent with country selection, as a country becomes
more attractive to U.S. multinationals, it attracts progressively smaller and less productive rms. While the

18

model accounts for many features of the data, there are others that are less well explained. The dispersion in
the number of foreign countries entered is smaller than predicted by the model given the observed dispersion
in U.S. market shares: large rms invest in too few foreign locations and small rms invest in too many, with
the largest rms underrepresented among the least attractive locations.
Using Norwegian data, Irarrazabal et al. (2010) show that patterns of multinational activity by rm and
destination market exhibit a number of similarities with the patterns of trade by rm and destination market
in Eaton et al. (2011a). In particular, while total aliate sales and the number of foreign aliates are less
sensitive to distance than exports, they both decline with distance.

This gravity-equation relationship is

inconsistent with a simple model of horizontal FDI, in which FDI should become more attractive as a mode

17 To explain these ndings, Irarrazabal et al. (2010)

for serving the foreign market as trade costs increase.

extend the model of rm heterogeneity and FDI of Helpman et al. (2004) to incorporate traded intermediate
inputs and nd empirical support for the extended model. To analyze the joint determination of patterns
of trade and FDI, Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2010) develop an extension of Eaton and Kortum (2002)
that incorporates both of these modes of serving foreign markets. Within this framework, the welfare gains
from trade can be more than twice as large as in a model with only trade, while the gains from multinational
production are slightly lower than in a model with only multinational production.

10

Intra-Firm Trade

Multinational rms not only dominate international trade ows but also undertake a substantial proportion
of their trade within the boundaries of the rm. Such trade between related parties accounts for around one

18 While many of the models of FDI discussed above assume that overseas production

half of U.S. imports.

is organized within the boundaries of the rm, more recent research has sought to explicitly model this
choice of rm organization. When overseas production is organized within the boundaries of the rm, foreign
aliates may either specialize in dierent stages of production from the parent rm (vertical FDI) or may
undertake the same production activities in a dierent location (horizontal FDI). To the extent that stages
of production are traded across national borders, vertical FDI involves intra-rm trade.
As well as dominating U.S. imports, intra-rm trade is concentrated in capital-intensive industries and
between capital-abundant countries.

To explain these features of the data, Antràs (2003) models a nal

goods producer who decides whether to outsource foreign production of an intermediate input to a standalone supplier or to engage in foreign direct investment (FDI) in which case the overseas production of the
intermediate input is vertically integrated within the rm. The nal goods producer and the intermediate

17 In

principle, the gravity equation relationship for aliate sales and the number of aliates can be reconciled with a model

of horizontal FDI if there there are costs of operating foreign aliates that increase with distance. See, for example, Keller &
Yeaple (2011) and Arkolakis et al. (2011b).

18 U.S.

import partners are dened as being related if either party owns, directly or indirectly, 6 percent or more of the other

party.

19

input supplier make relationship-specic investments in capital and labor respectively. Contracts are incomplete because neither the quality of the intermediate input nor the amount of investments in capital and labor
can be veried by a third party and contracts cannot be written on sales revenues. The only contractibles are
therefore the allocation of residual rights of control and an

ex ante transfer between the nal goods supplier

and intermediate input producer. Since the nal goods producer's investment in capital is relatively more
important in a capital-intensive industry, vertical integration is more likely in the capital-intensive industry,
matching the empirical ndings for U.S. imports discussed above.

Furthermore, the model is also consis-

tent with the empirical nding of a higher share of intra-rm trade in U.S. imports from capital-abundant
countries, because there is greater intra-industry trade in the capital-intensive industry with these countries.
Antràs & Helpman (2004) augment this analysis to incorporate rm heterogeneity. Since the xed costs of
producing abroad are lower when outsourcing to a foreign supplier than when using foreign direct investment,
only the most productive rms can generate sucient variable prots to oset the large xed costs of vertical
integration. As a result, the share of U.S. imports that are intra-rm is predicted to increase not only in the
share of relationship-specic investments undertaken by the headquarters rm but also in the dispersion of
rm productivity. To examine these predictions, Nunn & Treer (2008) use U.S. data on related-party and
arms-length trade by disaggregated HS 6-digit product and on capital and skill-intensity for more aggregated
industries.

Consistent with the predictions of the model, the share of intra-rm trade in U.S. imports is

increasing in industry capital and skill-intensity (as proxies for the importance of headquarters investments),
in the dispersion of U.S. exports within each 6-digit product (as a proxy for the dispersion of productivity),
and in interactions between these two variables.
Antràs & Helpman (2008) generalize the theoretical analysis to allow inputs to be partially contractible.
In this framework, an improvement in foreign property rights has two osetting eects on the share of
intra-rm trade through the two productivity cutos which separate domestic production (low productivity),
foreign outsourcing (intermediate productivity) and foreign vertical integration (high productivity). On the
one hand, an improvement in foreign property rights reduces the productivity cuto for outsourcing, as some
inputs that were previously produced domestically are now outsourced abroad, which reduces the share of
intra-rm trade. On the other hand, as foreign property rights improve, the intermediate input supplier's
share of non-contractible inputs falls, which implies that the party whose investments require relatively more
incentives is the headquarters rm. As a result, the productivity cuto for vertical integration falls, as some
inputs that were previously outsourced abroad are now vertically integrated abroad, which increases the
share of intra-rm trade.

For a range of parameter values, the second eect can dominate, which yields

the surprising prediction that an improvement in foreign property rights can

increase the extent of vertical

integration. Consistent with this prediction, Nunn & Treer (2008) nd that the share of intra-rm trade
is positively related to interactions between capital and skill-intensity (as proxies for the importance of

20

headquarters investments) and an empirical measure of the rule of law (as a proxy for the quality of foreign

19

property rights).

Additional empirical support for the above theoretical predictions is provided by Yeaple (2006), which
uses Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data on the value of imports by U.S. parent rms from their foreign
aliates as a measure of intra-rm trade. Consistent with the theoretical predictions of Antràs & Helpman
(2004), the share of intra-rm trade in U.S. imports is increasing in both industry capital-intensity and
research and development (R&D) intensity (as proxies for the importance of headquarters investments) and
the dispersion of sales across establishments within industries (as a proxy for the dispersion of productivity).
These estimated eects vary with U.S. trade partners' levels of development, with the largest and most

20

precisely estimated coecients found for the least-developed and newly-developing countries.

To further examine the determinants of intra-rm trade, Bernard et al. (2010b) use the trade-transaction
and establishment-employment data in LFTTD to construct a new measure of products' revealed contractibility, which is based on the idea that contracting is likely to be easier for products passing through
intermediaries such as wholesalers. Intra-rm trade exhibits a non-linear relationship with country and industry characteristics. On the one hand, higher quality property rights are associated with a higher probability
of related-party trade taking place. On the other hand, conditional on positive related-party trade occurring,
higher quality property rights are correlated with a lower share of related-party trade, which is consistent
with the idea that higher quality property rights facilitate arms-length transactions.

11

Labor Markets

A key implication of the Melitz (2003) model is that rms are unevenly aected by trade liberalization: lowproductivity rms exit, intermediate-productivity domestic rms contract, and high-productivity exporting
rms expand.

In contrast, workers are symmetrically aected by trade liberalization, since workers are

identical and the labor market is frictionless, so that all workers are employed for a common wage. These labor
market implications sit awkwardly with the large empirical literature on the employer-size wage premium
(see, for example, the survey by Oi & Idson 1999) and empirical ndings of wage dierences between exporters
and non-exporters even after controlling for rm size (see, in particular, Bernard & Jensen 1995, 1997).
More recently, the theoretical literature on heterogeneous rms and trade has highlighted two sets of
reasons why wages can vary with revenue across rms.

One line of research assumes competitive labor

markets, so that all workers with the same characteristics are paid the same wage, but wages vary across
rms as a result of dierences in workforce composition (see for example Bustos 2007, Verhoogen 2008 and

19 For more general evidence on the role of property rights in determining the pattern of trade, see Nunn (2007).
20 Corcos et al. (2010) and Defever & Toubal (2010) examine the determinants of intra-rm trade using French trade transaction
data. While Defever & Toubal (2010) explore the implications of dierent assumptions about the relative magnitude of the xed
costs of outsourcing and vertical integration, Corcos et al. (2010) emphasize the distinction between the extensive and intensive
margins. See Kohler & Smolka (2011) for evidence using Spanish data.

21

Yeaple 2005).

Another line of research introduces labor market frictions, so that workers with the same

characteristics can be paid dierent wages by dierent rms. One source of labor market imperfections is
search and matching frictions, where bargaining over the surplus from production can potentially induce
wages to vary with revenue across rms (see for example Davidson et al.

2008, Cosar et al.

2011, and

Helpman et al. 2010). Another source of labor market imperfections is eciency or fair wages, where the
wage that induces eort or is perceived to be fair varies with revenue across rms (see for example Amiti &
Davis 2011, Davis & Harrigan 2011, and Egger & Kreickemeier 2009).
This class of theoretical models highlights a new mechanism for trade to aect wage inequality based on

21 Helpman et al. (2011)

wage variation across rms and the selection of rms into international markets.

provide evidence on the quantitative importance of this new mechanism for understanding the relationship
between wage inequality and trade using Brazilian employer-employee and trade transaction data. Consistent
with the class of theoretical models discussed above, wage inequality between rms within sector-occupations
accounts for a substantial proportion of the level and growth of overall wage inequality, and this betweenrm wage inequality remains important after controlling for observable worker characteristics. To the extent
that existing empirical studies inspired by neoclassical trade theory focus on changes in relative wages between dierent sectors and types of workers, they abstract from an important channel through which trade
liberalization can aect wage inequality.
A number of recent empirical studies have used matched employer-employee data to try to determine
whether wage dierences between exporters and non-exporters (as found by Bernard & Jensen 1995, 1997)
are the result of dierences in the composition of workers across rms or wage premia for workers with the
same characteristics. Following Abowd et al. (1999, 2001), this literature typically estimates worker and rm
xed eects under the strong identifying assumptions that switches of workers between rms are random
conditional on the covariates and that each worker's wage is a log linear function of their ability and does
not depend directly on the ability of their co-workers. Empirical studies within this literature generally nd
contributions from both dierences in workforce composition and wage premia, with the relative magnitude
of these contributions varying across studies. Using Mexican data, Frías et al. (2009) nd that approximately
two-thirds of the higher level of wages in larger, more productive plants is explained by higher levels of wage
premia and that nearly all of the dierential changes in wages across plants as a result of the shock of the
peso devaluation are explained by changes in wage premia. Using German data, Schank et al. (2007) nd
that wage dierences between exporters and non-exporters become smaller but do not completely vanish once
observable and unobservable characteristics of workers are controlled for. For other evidence using Brazilian
and Swedish employer-employee data, see Krishna et al. (2010) and Davidson et al. (2010) respectively.
Amiti & Davis (2011) examine the separate impacts of input and output taris on rm wages. Extending

21 In

the presence of labor market frictions, trade may also aect income inequality through changes in unemployment, as in

Felbermayr et al. (2011) and Helpman & Itskhoki (2010).

22

the Melitz (2003) model to incorporate rm importing, they show that a fall in output taris lowers wages at
import-competing rms, but boosts wages at exporting rms. Additionally, a fall in input taris raises wages
at import-using rms relative to those at rms that only source inputs locally. Using Indonesian rm-level

22

census of manufactures data, they nd strong empirical support for both predictions.

In parallel to this research on labor market frictions, another line of related work has considered capital
market imperfections.

Manova (2011) develops a heterogeneous-rm model, in which countries vary in

nancial development and sectors dier in nancial vulnerability, and provides empirical evidence on the
model's predictions.

Using disaggregated trade data by country and product, more nancially-advanced

countries are found to be more likely to enter any given destination market and to export more conditional
on trading. These eects are statistically signicantly stronger in sectors with greater requirements for outside
nance or with fewer collateralizable assets.

12

Firm Export Market Dynamics

Much of the theoretical and empirical literature on heterogeneous rms and trade focuses on the cross-section
distribution of trade across rms, products and countries. More recent research has begun to explore the
dynamics of rms' decisions to enter export markets and its implications for the impact of trade liberalization.
Using transaction-level customs data for Colombia for the period 1996-2005, Eaton et al. (2008) establish
a number of key features of rm export dynamics. In a typical year, nearly one half of all Colombian exporters
were not exporters in the previous year. These new exporters are small as a share of total exports and most
do not continue exporting in the following year. Total exports are instead dominated by a small number of
large and stable exporters. Nonetheless, out of each cohort of new exporters, a fraction of rms go on to
rapidly expand exports, and over a period of less than one decade, these successful new exporters account
for almost half of total export growth. Firms typically begin exporting in a single foreign market and, if they
survive, gradually expand into additional destinations. The geographic pattern of their expansion paths, and
their likelihood of survival as exporters, depend on their initial destination market.
One line of research has sought to explain these export dynamics in terms of learning, as in Eaton et al.
(2011c), Akhmetova (2011), Albornoz et al. (2011) and Segura-Cayuela and Vilarrubia (2008). According
to this view, rms update their priors about protability in export markets based upon their sales, and
hence either exit or expand their penetration of export markets over time. Albornoz et al. (2011) consider a
setting in which export market protability is uncertain but correlated across export markets. As a result, a
rm may enter an export market even if the expected prots from entering that market alone are negative,
because of the option value of expanding to additional export markets if successful. An implication of this

22 For

evidence on the relationship between the rm skill premium and input and output taris, see Amiti and Cameron

(2011).

23

framework is that rm export market growth should be particularly rapid in the rst year of exporting, which

23

receives empirical support in Argentinian trade transaction data.

Another line of research tries to explain these export dynamics through stochastic shocks to productivity,
as in Arkolakis (2011) and Ruhl and Willis (2011). As productivity evolves over time, rms decide whether
to enter or exit individual export markets and whether or not to continue production. In Arkolakis (2011),
these stochastic shocks to productivity are combined with a model of endogenous market penetration.

A

rm enters a market if it is protable to incur the marginal cost to reach the rst consumer and pays an
increasing market penetration cost to reach additional consumers. The model is calibrated using data on the
cross-section of rms and their sales across markets as well as the rate of incumbent rm exit. The calibrated
model is shown to be quantitatively successful in predicting rm exit, growth, and the resulting rm-size
distribution in U.S. manufacturing data.
Bernard et al. (2009b) use U.S. transaction-level data to compare the role of the extensive and intensive
margins in accounting for cross-section and time-series patterns of trade.

The extensive margins of the

number of rms and products explain the majority of the variation in trade ows across countries.

In

contrast, year-on-year changes in trade are driven by the intensive margin of trade within continuing rmproduct-country trade relationships. One reason for the relative small contributions of the extensive margins
over short time intervals is that entering and exiting exporters, as well as recently added and about-tobe-dropped rm-product-country trade relationships, are on average relatively small compared to continuing
rm-product-country trade relationships. Conversely, conditional on survival, entering exporters and recently
added rm-product-country trade relationships grow more rapidly than incumbent exporters and continuing
rm-product-country trade relationships. Analysis of the Asian crisis in the late 1990s conrms these timeseries results: while there are substantial changes in the extensive margin of the number of exporters, the
majority of the change in the dollar value of trade around the Asian crisis is driven by the intensive margin.
Notably, the extensive and intensive margins behave dierently for arms-length and related-party trade,
suggesting that the global production networks of multinational corporations play a role in inuencing the
response of the macroeconomy to shocks.

13

Conclusion

Empirical ndings from microdata on plants and rms have presented challenges to traditional theories
of international trade and stimulated the development of recent models of heterogeneous rms and trade.
These recent theories explain empirical ndings that only some rms export, exporters are larger and more

23 In

the presence of learning and imperfect contract enforcement, Araujo et al.

(2011) argue that institutions may aect

export dynamics. Other things equal, exporters have higher initial exports and remain as exporters for longer in countries with
better contracting institutions. However, conditional on survival, the growth rate of a rm's exports to a country decreases with
the quality of the country's institutions.

24

productive than non-exporters, and trade liberalization raises average productivity through reallocations of
resources across rms within industries.
These new theories highlight additional mechanisms through which the aggregate economy is aected by
the opening of trade and have stimulated further empirical research exploring these mechanisms. Aggregate
economic relationships such as the gravity equation are largely driven by the extensive margins of rms
and products rather than the intensive margin of average exports per rm-product.

Reductions in trade

costs induce endogenous changes in internal rm organization as rms adjust their range of products, their
decisions about whether to serve foreign markets through trade or overseas production, and their choices
about whether to organize foreign production within or beyond the boundaries of the rm. To the extent
that wages vary with rm revenue and only some rms export, rm heterogeneity provides a new mechanism
for trade to aect wage inequality.
While early empirical studies examined export behavior using plant or rm-level data, the more recent
availability of customs data on individual trade transactions has enhanced our ability to look inside the black
box of the rm and led to an explosion of research across a broad range of areas.

These include multi-

product rms, intra-rm trade, intermediation, and the dynamics of rm entry into export markets. There
remain many fundamental issues ahead, such as the microfoundations of trade costs, further exploration of
the boundaries of the rm, and further consideration of the relationship between ndings from disaggregated
data and the economy's aggregate response to trade.

25

Acknowledgements
Bernard. Jensen and Schott thank the National Science Foundation (SES-0241474, SES-0552029 and SES0550190) and Redding thanks Princeton University and the Centre for Economic Performance (CEP) for
research support.

This paper was prepared for the

Annual Review of Economics.

We are grateful to Pol

Antràs and Peter Neary for helpful comments and suggestions. Some of the research reviewed in this paper
was conducted while Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S.
Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center and Center for Economic Studies. Research results and
conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reect the views of the Census Bureau,
the NBER, or any other institution to which the authors are aliated.

References
Abowd JM, Kramarz F, Margolis DN. 1999.

High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms.

Econometrica.

67(2): 251-333.
Abowd JM, Creecy RH, Kramarz F. 2002. Computing Person and Firm Eects Using Linked Longitudinal
Employer-Employee Data. (Cornell University, Unpublished).

Journal of Interna-

Ahn JB, Khandelwal A, Wei SJ. 2011. The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating Trade.

tional Economics. Forthcoming.
Akerman A. 2010. A Theory on the Role of Wholesalers in International Trade Based on Economies of Scope.
(Stockholm University, Unpublished).
Akhmetova Z. 2011. Firm Experimentation in New Markets. (University of New South Wales, Unpublished).
Albornoz F, Calvo-Pardo H, Corcos G, Ornelas E. 2011. Sequential Exporting. (London School of Economics,
Unpublished).
Allanson P, Montagna C. 2005. Multi-product Firms and Market Structure: An Explorative Application to
the Product Lifecycle.

International Journal of Industrial Organization. 23: 587-97.

Alvarez R, López RA. 2005. Exporting and Performance: Evidence from Chilean Plants.

Canadian Journal

of Economics. 38(4): 1384-400.
Amiti M, Cameron L. 2011. Trade Liberalization and the Wage Skill Premium: Evidence from Indonesia.
New York Federal Reserve Bank, mimeograph.
Amiti M, Davis DR. 2011. Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence.

Review of Economic Studies.

Forthcoming.
Amiti M, Konings J. 2007. Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity.

American Economic

Review. 97(5): 1611-38.
Antràs P. 2003. Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.

26

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4): 1375-1418.

Journal of Political Economy. 112(3): 552-80.
Antràs P, Helpman E. 2008. Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing. In The Organization of Firms in a
Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Antràs P, Costinot A. 2011. Intermediated Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 126: 1319-1374.
Antràs P, Helpman E. 2004. Global Sourcing.

Araujo L, Mion G, Ornelas E. (2011) Institutions and Export Dynamics (London School of Economics,
Unpublished).
Arkolakis C. 2010. Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade.

Journal

of Political Economy. 118(6): 1151-99.
Arkolakis C. 2011. A Unied Theory of Firm Selection and Growth. (Yale University, Unpublished).
Arkolakis C, Klenow P, Demidova S, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2008.
Trade.

Endogenous Variety and The Gains from

American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 98(2): 444-50.

Arkolakis C, Costinot A, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2011a.

New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?

American

Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Arkolakis C, Ramondo N, Rodriguez-Clare A, Yeaple S. 2011b. Proximity Versus Comparative Advantage:
A Quantitative Theory of Trade and Multinational Production. (Yale University, Unpublished).

The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products: A Firm-level Analysis. NBER

Arkolakis C, Muendler M. 2010.
Working Paper. 16641.
Atkeson A, Burstein A. 2010.

Innovation, Firm dynamics, and International Trade.

Journal of Political

Economy. 118(3): 433-84.
Aw BY, Roberts MJ, Xu DY. 2011. R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics.

American

Economic Review. 101 (4): 1312-44.
Axtell RL. 2001. Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes.

Science. 293:1818-20.

Baldwin J, Gu W. 2009. The Impact of Trade on Plant Scale, Production-Run Length and Diversication.
In

Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, ed. T Dunne, JB Jensen, MJ Roberts. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.
Baldwin R, Harrigan J. 2011.

Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and Trade Evidence.

American

Economic Journal: Microeconomics. 3: 6088.
Bastos P., Silva J. 2008. The Quality of a Firm's Exports: Where you Export to Matters.

GEP Research

Paper 2008/18. University of Nottingham.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 1995. Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US Manufacturing: 1976-87.

Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity: Microeconomics. 67-112.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 1997.

Exporters, Skill Upgrading and the Wage Gap.

Economics. 42: 3-31.

27

Journal of International

Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 1999.

Exceptional Exporter Performance:

Journal of

Cause, Eect, or Both?

International Economics. 47(1): 1-25.
Bernard AB, Eaton J, Jensen JB, Kortum SS. 2003. Plants and Productivity in International Trade.

Amer-

ican Economic Review. 93(4): 1268-90.
Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(2): 561-69.
Trade Costs, Firms and Productivity. Journal of Monetary

Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 2004. Why Some Firms Export.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Schott PK. 2006a.

Economics. 53(5).
Bernard AB, Jensen JB and Schott PK. 2006b. Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries

Journal of International Economics. 68: 219-37.
Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms. Review of

and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing Plants.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2007a.

Economic Studies, 74(1): 31-66.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2007b. Firms in International Trade.

Journal of Economic

Perspectives. 21(3): 105-30.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Schott PK. 2009a. Importers, Exporters and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms
in the U.S. that Trade Goods. In

Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, ed.

T Dunne,

JB Jensen, MJ Roberts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2009b. The Margins of U.S. Trade.

American Economic

Review. Papers and Proceedings. 99(2): 487-93.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2009c. Products and Productivity.

Scandinavian Journal of Economics.

111(4): 681-709.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2010a. Multi-product Firms and Product Switching.

American Eco-

nomic Review. 100(1): 70-97.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2010b.

Intra-rm Trade and Product Contractibility.

American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 100(2): 444-48.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2010c. Wholesalers and Retailers in U.S. Trade.

American

Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 100(2): 408-13.
Bernard AB, Grazzi M, Tomasi C. 2010d. Intermediaries in International Trade: Direct versus Indirect
Modes of Export. National Bank of Belgium Working Paper. 199.
Bernard AB, Van Beveren I, Vandenbussche H. 2010e. Multi-Product Exporters, Carry-Along Trade and the
Margins of Trade. National Bank of Belgium Working Paper. 203.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2011. Multi-product Firms and Trade Liberalization. Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 126: 1271-1318.
Blum BS, Claroz S, Horstmann IJ. 2011.

Intermediation and the Nature of Trade Costs:

Evidence. (University of Toronto, Unpublished).

28

Theory and

Broda C, Weinstein D. 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety.

Quarterly Journal of Economics,

121(2): 541-85.
Burstein A, Eichenbaum M, Rebelo S. 2005. Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange Rate.

Journal of

Political Economy. 113(4): 742-784.
Burstein A, Melitz MJ. 2011.

Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics.

In

Advances in Economics and

Econometrics, ed. D Acemoglu, M Arellano, E Deckel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burstein A, Vogel J. 2010.

Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium: A Quantitative Analysis.

(Columbia University, Unpublished).
Bustos P. 2007. The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading: Evidence from Argentina. (CREI,
Unpublished).
Bustos P. 2011.

Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading:

MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms.

Evidence on the impact of

American Economic Review. 101(1): 304-40.

Caliendo L, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2011. The Impact of Trade on Organization and Productivity. (Princeton
University, Unpublished).
Chaney T. 2005. Liquidity Constrained Exporters. (University of Chicago, Unpublished).
Chaney T. 2008. Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade.

American

Economic Review. 98(4): 1707-21.
Cherkashin I, Demidova S, Kee HL, Krishna K. 2010. Firm Heterogeneity and Costly Trade: A New Estimation Strategy and Policy Experiments. (Penn State University, Unpublished).
Clerides S, Lach S, Tybout J. 1998. Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-dynamic Evidence from
Columbia, Mexico and Morocco.

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 113: 903-47.

Constantini J, Melitz MJ. 2008. The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liberalization. In

The

Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 4:107-41. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press. 356 pp.
Corcos G, Del Gatto M, Mion G and Ottaviano GIP. 2010. Productivity and Firm Selection: Quantifying
the New Gains from Trade. (London School of Economics, Unpublished).
Coçsar AK, Guner N, Tybout J. 2011. Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage Distributions in an Open
Economy. (Penn State University, Unpublished).
Cuñat A, Melitz MJ. 2011. Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility and Comparative Advantage.

Journal of the

European Economics Association. Forthcoming.
Das M, Roberts MJ, Tybout J. 2007. Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity and Export Dynamics.

Econometrica. 75(3): 837-73.
Davidson C, Matusz S, Shevchenko A. 2008. Globalization and Firm-level Adjustment with Imperfect Labor
Markets.

Journal of International Economics. 75: 295-309.
29

Davidson C, Heyman F, Matusz S, Sjoholm F, Zhu S. 2010.

Globalization and Imperfect Labor Market

Sorting. (Michigan State University, Unpublished).
Davis DR, Harrigan J. 2011.

Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization.

Journal of International

Economics. Forthcoming.
De Loecker, J. 2007.

Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity?

Evidence from Slovenia.

Journal of

International Economics. 73: 69-98.
De Loecker J. 2011.

Product Dierentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact of Trade

Liberalization on Productivity.

Econometrica. Forthcoming.

De Loecker J, Warzynski F. 2011. Markups and Firm-level Export Status. (Princeton University, Unpublished).
Defever F, Toubal F. 2010. Productivity and the Sourcing Modes of Multinational Firms: Evidence from
French Firm-Level Data. (University of Nottingham, Unpublished).
Dhingra S. 2010. Trading Away Wide Brands for Cheap Brands. (London School of Economics, Unpublished).
Dixit A, Grossman GM. 1982.

Trade and Protection with Multi-Stage Production.

Review of Economic

Studies. 49(4): 583-94.
Eaton J, Kortum SS. 2002. Technology, Geography, and Trade.
Eaton J, Kortum SS, Kramarz F. 2004.

Dissecting Trade:

Econometrica. 70(5): 1741-79.

Firms, Industries, and Export Destinations.

American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 94: 150-54.
Eaton J, Eslava M, Kugler M, Tybout JR. 2008. Export Dynamics in Colombia: Firm-level Evidence. In

The

Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 8:231-72. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press. 356 pp.
Eaton J, Kortum SS, Kramarz F. 2011a. An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French Firms.

Econometrica, forthcoming.
Eaton J, Kortum SS, Sotelo S. 2011b. International Trade: Linking Micro and Macro. (University of Chicago,
Unpublished).
Eaton J, Eslava M, Krizan CJ, Kugler M, Tybout J. 2011c.

A Search and Learning Model of Export

Dynamics. (Penn State University, Unpublished).
Eckel C, Neary JP. 2010. Multi-product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in the Global Economy.

Review

of Economic Studies. 77(1): 188-217.
Economist. 2011. Broken links: The disruption to manufacturers worldwide from Japan's disasters will force
a rethink of how they manage production. 31 March 2011. http://www.economist.com/node/18486015.
Egger H, Kreickemeier U. 2009. Firm Heterogeneity and the Labour Market Eects of Trade Liberalization.

International Economic Review. 50(1): 187-216.

30

Ethier WJ. 1982. National and International Returns to Scale in the Modem Theory of International Trade.

American Economic Review. 72: 389-405.
Feenstra R, Ma H. 2008. Optimal Choice of Product Scope for Multiproduct Firms. In

Firms in a Global Economy, ed.

The Organization of

E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier. Cambridge MA: Harvard University

Press.
Felbermayr G, Jung B. 2008. Trade Intermediaries, Incomplete Contracts, and the Choice of Export Modes.
(University of Hohenheim, Unpublished).
Felbermayr G, Prat J, Schmerer HJ. 2011. Globalization and Labor Market Outcomes: Wage Bargaining,
Search Frictions, and Firm Heterogeneity.
Frías J, Kaplan D, Verhoogen E. 2009.

Journal of Economic Theory. 146(1): 39-73.

Exports and Wage Premia:

Evidence from Mexican Employer-

Employee Data. (Unpublished, Columbia University).
Gervais, A. 2011. Product Quality, Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade. (Unpublished, University
of Notre Dame).
Goldberg PK, Khandelwal AK, Pavcnik N, Topalova P. 2010. Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 125(4): 1727-67.
Grossman GM, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2008. Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Oshoring. American Economic
Review. 98(5): 1978-97.
Hallak JC. 2006. Product Quality and the Direction of Trade. Journal of International Economics. 68(1):
Product Growth: Evidence from India.

238-65.
Hallak JC, Schott PK. 2011. Estimating Cross-Country Dierences in Product Quality.

Quarterly Journal

of Economics, 126(1): 417-74.
Harrigan J, Reshe A. 2011. Skill-biased Heterogeneous Firms: Trade Liberalization and the Skill Premium
Redux. (University of Virginia, Unpublished).
Helpman E. 1981. International Trade in the Presence of Product Dierentiation, Economies of Scale, and
Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin model.

Journal of International Economics.

11: 305-40.

Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13(2): 121-44.
FDI and the Organization of Firms. Journal of Economic Literature. XLIV:

Helpman E. 1999. The Structure of Foreign Trade.
Helpman E. 2006.

Trade,

589-630.
Helpman E, Itskhoki O. 2010.

Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment.

Review of Economic

Studies. 77(3): 1100-37.
Helpman E, Itskhoki O, Redding S. 2010. Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy.
78(4): 1239-83.

31

Econometrica.

Helpman E, Itskhoki O, Muendler M, Redding S. 2011. Wage Inequality and Trade: Evidence from Brazil.
(Princeton University, Unpublished).

Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Helpman E, Melitz MJ, Yeaple SR. 2004. Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic
Review. 94(1): 300-16.

Helpman E, P Krugman. 1985.

Helpman E, Melitz MJ, Rubinstein Y. 2008. Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes.

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(2): 441-87.
Holmes TJ, Stevens JJ. 2010. Exports, Borders, Distance, and Plant Size. NBER Working Paper. 16046.
Hsieh C, Ossa R. 2010. A Global View of Productivity Growth in China and India. (University of Chicago,
Unpublished).
Hummels D, Klenow P. 2005. The Variety and Quality of a Nation's Exports.

American Economic Review.

95: 704-23.
Hummels D, Ishii J, Yi K. 2001. The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World Trade.

Journal

of International Economics. 54: 75-96.
Irarrazabal A, Moxnes A, Opromolla LD. 2010. The Margins of Multinational Production and the Role of
Intrarm Trade. (Dartmouth College, Unpublished).
Javorcik B, Neary JP, Eckel C, Iacovone L. 2010. Multi-Product Firms at Home and Away: Cost- Versus
Quality-Based Competence. (University of Oxford, Unpublished).
Johnson R. 2010. Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms. (Dartmouth College, Unpublished).
Keller W, Yeaple S. 2011. Gravity in the Weightless Economy. (Penn State University, Unpublished).
Khandelwal, A. 2011.

The Long and Short (of ) Quality Ladders.

Review of Economic Studies.

77(4):

1450-76.
Kohler WK, Smolka M. 2011.

Sourcing Premia with Incomplete Contracts: Theory and Evidence.

B.E.

Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. 11: 1-37.
Krishna P, Poole JP, Senses MZ. 2010. Trade Liberalization, Firm Heterogeneity and Wages: New Evidence
from Matched Employer-Employee Data. (Johns Hopkins University, Unpublished).
Krugman P. 1980. Scale Economies, Product Dierentiation, and the Pattern of Trade.

American Economic

Review. 70: 950-59.
Kugler M, Verhoogen E. 2011.

Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality.

Review of Economic Studies.

Forthcoming.
Li N, Gopinath G, Gourinchas P, Hsieh C. 2011.

International Prices, Costs and Markup Dierences.

American Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Lileeva A, Treer D. 2010. Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level Productivity . . . for Some
Plants.

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 125(3): 1051-99.
32

Manova K. 2011. Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade. (Stanford University,
Unpublished).
Manova K, Zhang Z. 2011. Export Prices across Firms and Destinations.

Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Forthcoming.
Mayer T, Melitz MJ, Ottaviano G. 2011.

Market Size, Competition, and the Product Mix of Exporters.

NBER Working Paper. 16959.
Matsuyama, K. 2007.

Beyond Icebergs: Towards a Theory of Biased Globalization.

Review of Economic

Studies. 74: 237-253.
Mayer T, Ottaviano GIP. 2007.

The Happy Few: New Facts on the Internationalisation of European Firms.

Bruegel  CEPR EFIM Report. Bruegel Blueprint Series.
Melitz MJ. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.

Econometrica. 71: 1695-725.
Melitz, MJ, Ottaviano GIP. 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity.

Review of Economic Studies.

75:

295-316.

Globalization and Endogenous Firm Scope. NBER Working Paper. 12322.
Nunn N. 2007. Relationship-Specicity, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern of Trade. Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 122(2): 569-600.
Nunn N, Treer D. 2008. The Boundaries of the Multinational Firm: An Empirical Analysis. In The
Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 55-83. Cambridge
Nocke V, Yeaple SR. 2006.

MA: Harvard University Press.
Oi WY, Idson TL. 1999.

Firm Size and Wages.

In

Handbook of Labor Economics, ed.

O Ashenfelter, D

Card, 3, 33, 2165-214, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ottaviano GIP, Thisse J. 1999.

Monopolistic Competition, Multiproduct Firms and Optimum Product Diver-

sity. CEPR Discussion Paper. 2151.
Pavcnik N. 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants.

Review of Economic Studies. 69(1): 245-76.
Petropoulou D. 2007. Information Costs, Networks and Intermediation in International Trade.

Discussion

Paper. 370. Department of Economics. University of Oxford.
Ramondo N, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2010.

Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains from Openness.

(Penn State University, Unpublished).
Rauch J, Trindade V. 2003. Information, International Substitutability, and Globalization.

American Eco-

nomic Review. 93: 775-91.
Redding SJ. 2011. Theories of Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.

33

Annual Review of Economics. Forthcoming.

Roberts MJ, Tybout J. 1997. The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk
Costs.

American Economic Review. 87(4): 545-64.

Ruhl KJ, Willis JL. 2008. New Exporter Dynamics. (NYU Stern School of Business, Unpublished).
Sampson, T. 2011. Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality. (London School of Economics, Unpublished).
Santos Silva JMC, Tenreyro S. 2006. The Log of Gravity.
Schank T, Schanbel C, Wagner J. 2007.

Review of Economics and Statistics. 88(4): 641-58.

Do Exporters Really Pay Higher Wages?

German Linked Employer-Employee Data.

First Evidence from

Journal of International Economics. 72: 52-74.

Schott PK. 2004. Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade.

Quarterly

Journal of Economics. 119(2): 647-78.
Segura-Cayuela, R, Vilarrubia, JM. 2008. Uncertainty and Entry into Export Markets.

Banco De España

Working Paper. 0811.
Treer D. 2004. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.

American Economic Review.

94: 870-95.
Tybout J. 2003. Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on the `New' Trade Theories. In

Handbook of International

Trade, ed. EK Choi and J Harrigan, 13. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Van Biesebroeck J. 2005.

Exporting Raises Productivity in Sub-Saharan African Manufacturing Firms.

Journal of International Economics. 67(2): 373-91.
Verhoogen E. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector.

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(2): 489-530.
World Trade Organization. 2008. World Trade Report: Trade in a Globalizing World. Geneva: World Trade
Organization.
Yeaple SR. 2005.

A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages.

Journal of

International Economics. 65: 120.
Yeaple SR. 2006. Oshoring, Foreign Direct Investment, and the Structure of U.S. Trade.

Journal of the

European Economic Association. 4: 60211.
Yeaple SR. 2009.
Analysis.

Firm Heterogeneity and the Structure of U.S. Multinational Activity:

An Empirical

Journal of International Economics. 78(2): 206-15.

Yi K. 2003. Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?
111(1): 52-102.

34

Journal of Political Economy.

Table 1: Exporting by U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 2002

NAICS Industry
311
Food Manufacturing
312
Beverage and Tobacco Product
313
Textile Mills
314
Textile Product Mills
315
Apparel Manufacturing
316
Leather and Allied Product
321
Wood Product Manufacturing
322
Paper Manufacturing
323
Printing and Related Support
324
Petroleum and Coal Products
325
Chemical Manufacturing
326
Plastics and Rubber Products
327
Nonmetallic Mineral Product
331
Primary Metal Manufacturing
332
Fabricated Metal Product
333
Machinery Manufacturing
334
Computer and Electronic Product
335
Electrical Equipment, Appliance,
336
Transportation Equipment
337
Furniture and Related Product
339
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Aggregate Manufacturing

Percent of Firms
6.8
0.7
1.0
1.9
3.2
0.4
5.5
1.4
11.9
0.4
3.1
4.4
4.0
1.5
19.9
9.0
4.5
1.7
3.4
6.4
9.1
100.0

Mean Exports as a
Percent of Firms Percent of Total
that Export
Shipments
11.6
14.8
22.9
7.4
25.1
12.5
12.2
11.7
7.7
13.5
24.4
13.4
8.5
18.5
23.8
9.0
5.5
14.4
17.8
11.5
36.1
14.3
28.1
10.3
9.5
12.1
30.2
10.4
14.3
11.6
33.0
15.5
38.3
21.3
37.7
12.9
28.0
13.0
6.5
10.1
1.6
14.9
17.6
14.1

Source: Bernard et al. (2007).
Notes: Data are from the 2002 U.S. Census of Manufactures. Column 2 summarizes the distribution of
manufacturing firms across three-digit NAICS manufacturing industries. Column 3 reports the share of
firms in each industry that export. The final column reports mean exports as a percent of total shipments
across all firms that export in the noted industry.

35

Table 2: Exporter Premia in U.S. Manufacturing
(1)
1.19
1.48
0.26
0.02
0.17
0.32
0.19

Log Employment
Log Shipments
Log Value Added per Worker
Log TFP
Log Wage
Log Capital per Worker
Log Skill per Worker

Additional Covariates

None

(2)
0.97
1.08
0.11
0.03
0.06
0.12
0.11

(3)
.
0.08
0.10
0.05
0.06
0.04
0.19

Industry Fixed
Industry Fixed Effects, Log
Effects
Employment

Source: Bernard et al. (2007).
Notes: Data are for 2002 and are from the U.S. Census of Manufactures. All results
are from bivariate OLS regressions of firm characteristic in first column on a
dummy variable indicating firm's export status. Columns two and three include
industry fixed effects and industry fixed effects plus log firm employment,
respectively, as additional controls. Total factor productivity (TFP) is computed as
in Caves et al (1982). Capital and skill per worker are capital stock and nonproduction workers per total employment, respectively. All results are significant at
the 1 percent level.

36

Table 3: Distribution of Exporters and Export Value by Number of Products
and Export Destinations, 2000
A. Share of Exporting Firms
Number of
Number of Countries
Products
1
2
3
4
1
40.4
1.2
0.3
0.1
2
10.4
4.7
0.8
0.3
3
4.7
2.3
1.3
0.4
4
2.5
1.3
1.0
0.6
5+
6.0
3.0
2.7
2.3
All
64.0
12.6
6.1
3.6

5+
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.7
11.9
13.7

All
42.2
16.4
9.3
6.2
25.9
100.0

B. Share of Export Value
Number of
Products
1
1
0.2
2
0.2
3
0.2
4
0.1
5+
2.6
All
3.3

2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
1.2
1.5

4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
1.0

5+
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
92.2
92.9

All
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.6
98.0
100.0

C. Share of Employment
Number of
Products
1
1
7.0
2
1.9
3
1.3
4
0.5
5+
3.5
All
14.2

Number of Countries
2
3
4
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.6
0.1
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.0
0.4
0.3
0.2
2.6
4.3
4.1
6.7
5.5
4.3

5+
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.2
68.8
69.2

All
7.1
4.6
3.3
1.6
83.3
100.0

Number of Countries
3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.0
1.2

Source: Bernard et al. (2007).
Notes: Data are from the 2000 LFTTD. Table displays the joint distribution of
U.S. manufacturing firms that export (top panel), their export value (middle
panel) and their employment (bottom panel), according to the number of products
firms export (rows) and their number of export destinations (columns). Products
are defined as ten-digit Harmonized System categories.

37

Table 4: Gravity the Margins of Trade
ln(Valuec) ln(Avg Exportsc) ln(Obsc) ln(Firmsc) ln(Productsc)
ln(Distancec)
ln(GDPc)
Constant
Observations
Fixed Effects
R2

-1.37
0.17
1.01
0.04
7.82
1.83
175
No
0.82

0.05
0.1
0.23
0.02
6.03
1.07
175
No
0.37

-1.43
0.17
0.78
0.04
1.8
1.81
175
No
0.75

-1.17
0.15
0.71
0.03
0.52
1.59
175
No
0.76

-1.1
0.15
0.55
0.03
3.48
1.55
175
No
0.68

ln(Densityc)
0.84
0.13
-0.48
0.03
-2.2
1.37
175
No
0.66

Source: Bernard et al. (2011).
Notes: Table reports results of OLS regressions of U.S. export value or its components on tradingpartners' GDP and great-circle distance (in kilometers) from the United States. All five columns are
country-level regressions. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are noted below each coeficient. Data
are for 2002.

38

Table 5: Trading Premia in U.S. Manufacturing, 1997

Log Employment
Log Shipments
Log Value Added per Worker
Log TFP
Log Wage
Log Capital per Worker
Log Skill per Worker

Exporter
Premia
1.50
0.29
0.23
0.07
0.29
0.17
0.04

Importer
Premia
1.40
0.26
0.23
0.12
0.23
0.13
0.06

Exporter &
Importer
Premia
1.75
0.31
0.25
0.07
0.33
0.20
0.03

Source: Bernard et al. (2007)
Notes: Data are for 1997 and are for firms that appear in both the U.S. Census of
Manufacturers and the LFTTD. All results are from bivariate OLS regressions of
firm characteristic in first column on dummy variable noted at the top of each
column as well as industry fixed effects and firm employment as additional controls.
Employment regressions omit firm employment as a covariate. Total factor
productivity (TFP) is computed as in Caves et al (1982). Capital and skill per
worker are capital stock and non-production workers per total employment,
respectively. All results are significant at the 1 percent level.

39

