                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA

                                          Stelios Michalopoulos
                                            Elias Papaioannou

                                          Working Paper 17620
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17620


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2011




We would like to thank the Editor and 4 referees for insightful comments and useful suggestions. We
also thank Alberto Alesina, Maarten Bosker, Chris Blattman, Francesco Caselli, Giorgio Chiovelli,
Jeremiah Dittmar, Joan Esteban, James Fenske, Fabrizio Dell’ Acqua, Federico Finan, David Laitin,
Horacio Larreguy Arbesú, Stathis Kalyvas, Sebastian Hohmann, Janina Matuszeski, Ted Miguel, Nathan
Nunn, Gregorios Siourounis, Neils Weidman, Andreas Wimmer, and participants at the AEA meetings
in Denver, Yale, UC Berkeley, Princeton, ALBA, UC Irvine, UC Merced, American University, Brown,
the Institute for Economic Analysis, Autonoma University, George Washington University, CERGE-EI,
Surrey, City University, the NBER Political Economy meetings, the CEPR meeting on the Political
Economy of Conflict, the NBER Summer Institute Meetings on the Development of the American
Economy and Income Distribution and Macroeconomics for useful comments and suggestions. All
errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa
Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 17620
November 2011
JEL No. N17,N47,O10,Z10

                                               ABSTRACT

We examine the long-run consequences of ethnic partitioning, a neglected aspect of the Scramble for
Africa, and uncover the following regularities. First, apart from the land mass and presence of water
bodies, historical homelands of split and non-split groups are similar across many observable characteristics.
Second, using georeferenced data on political violence, that include both state-driven conflict and
violence against civilians, we find that the incidence, severity and duration of violence are higher in
the historical homelands of partitioned groups. Third, we shed some light on the mechanisms showing
that military interventions from neighboring countries are much more likely in the homelands of split
groups. Fourth, our exploration of the status of ethnic groups in the political arena reveals that partitioned
ethnicities are systematically discriminated from the national government and are more likely to participate
in ethnic civil wars. Fifth, using individual-level data we document that respondents identifying with
split groups have lower access to public goods and worse educational outcomes. The uncovered evidence
brings in the foreground the detrimental repercussions of ethnic partitioning.


Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu

Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
1       Introduction
The predominant explanations on the deep roots of contemporary African development are centered around
the influence of Europeans during the colonial period (Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002, 2005)), but also in the
centuries before colonization when close to 20 million slaves were exported from Africa (Nunn (2008)). Yet
in the period between the ending of the slave trades and the beginning of the colonial rule, another major
event took place that according to the African historiography had malicious long-lasting consequences.
During the "Scramble for Africa" -that starts with the Berlin Conference of 1884 − 1885 and is completed
by the turn of the 20th century- Europeans partitioned Africa into spheres of influence, protectorates, and
colonies. The borders were designed in European capitals at a time when Europeans had barely settled in
Africa and had limited knowledge of local conditions. Despite their arbitrariness, boundaries outlived the
colonial era. As a result in many African countries today a significant fraction of the population belongs
to ethnic groups that are partitioned among diﬀerent states.1
        Many African scholars (e.g., Asiwaju (1985), Wesseling (1996), Dowden (2008), Thomson (2010))
have maintained that the main channel of Europeans’ influence on development was not colonization per se,
but the improper border design. Herbst (2000) succinctly summarizes the argument: "for the first time in
Africa’s history [at independence], territorial boundaries acquired salience...The boundaries were, in many
ways, the most consequential part of the colonial state." The artificial borders fostered ethnic struggles
and conflict primarily by splitting groups across the newly-minted African states. Horowitz (1985) argues
that ethnic partitioning led to irredentism and helped create an ideology of secession and nationalism.
Moreover, split groups have often been instrumentally used by governments to destabilize neighboring
countries, setting the stage for discrimination of split ethnicities in the political sphere and the eruption of
ethnic wars.
        Despite the wealth of anecdotal evidence, there is little work formally examining the ramifications
of ethnic partitioning in the context of the Scramble for Africa. Some cross-country studies have touched
upon this issue, showing, that the likelihood of conflict increases when there is an ethnic war in adjacent
states (Bosker and de Ree (2014)) and that countries with straight borders, where a large share of the
population belongs to ethnicities that are present in neighboring nations, perform economically worse
(Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011)). Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge there is no empirical
work directly exploring the consequences of ethnic partitioning for African groups (the relevant unit of
analysis), where the arbitrary border design and the large number of split groups oﬀer the opportunity to
cleanly identify the impact of partitioning. This study is a step in this direction.
    1
    Asiwaju (1985) identifies 177 partitioned ethnicities. Englebert, Tarango, and Carter (2002) estimate that partitioned
groups constitute on average 40% of the total population; Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011) estimate that in several
African countries the percentage of the population that belongs to a split group exceeds 80% (e.g., Guinea-Bissau (80%);
Guinea (884%); Eritrea (83%); Burundi (974%); Malawi (89%); Senegal (91%); Rwanda (100%); Zimbabwe (99%)).




                                                            1
      Results To formally assess the claim that African borders were drawn with little respect to the
local political geography, we investigate whether partitioned ethnicities diﬀer systematically from non-split
groups across several geographic-ecological traits. With the exceptions of the land mass of the historical
ethnic homeland and the presence of lakes, there are no significant diﬀerences between split and non-
split homelands along a comprehensive set of covariates. And there are no systematic diﬀerences across
several pre-colonial, ethnic-specific, institutional, cultural, and economic features, such as the size of the
settlements, the type of subsistence economy, and proxies of pre-colonial conflict. These results oﬀer support
to a long-standing assertion within the African historiography regarding the largely arbitrary nature of
African borders, at least with respect to ethnic partitioning.
      We then employ the Scramble for Africa as a "quasi-natural" experiment to assess the impact of
ethnic partitioning on civil conflict. Using a newly-assembled dataset (Armed Conflict Location & Event
Data Project (ACLED)) that reports georeferenced information for the 1997 − 2013 period on incidents
of political violence, including battles between government forces, rebels and militias and violence against
civilians, we document that civil conflict is higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. This applies
to conflict intensity, duration, casualties, and the likelihood of conflict. Our estimates suggest that conflict
intensity (likelihood) is approximately 40% (8%) higher in areas where partitioned ethnicities reside, as
compared to homelands of ethnicities that have not been separated by national borders. The results are
similar when we restrict estimation to ethnic homelands near the national borders.
      We then exploit the richness of the data to examine what type of conflict is more likely to aﬄict
partitioned homelands. In line with the thesis put forward by African historians, that split groups are
often used by neighboring countries to stage proxy wars and destabilize the government on the other
side of the border, we find that military interventions from adjacent countries are more common in the
homelands of partitioned groups, rather than in nearby border areas where non-split groups reside. We
also examine the impact of ethnic partitioning on the diﬀerent forms of political violence. Partitioning
matters crucially for two-sided conflict between government troops and rebel groups "whose goal is to
counter an established national governing regime by violent acts" and to a lesser extent with one-sided
violence against civilians. These patterns are corroborated with a diﬀerent georeferenced conflict database
(Uppsala Conflict Data Program Georeferenced Event Dataset, UCDP - GED) that records only deadly
events associated with civil wars. In contrast, there is no link between ethnic partitioning and riots
and protests, which are predominantly a capital-city phenomenon; and there is no association between
partitioning and conflict between non-state actors. These results are in accord with African historiography
pointing out that partitioned groups face discrimination from the national government and often engage in
rebellions (often with the support of their co-ethnics on the other side of the border) to counter repression.
      In an attempt to dig deeper on the partitioning - repression - civil war nexus we use the Ethnic Power
Relations (EPR) dataset (Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009)) that oﬀers an assessment of formal and
informal degrees of political participation of ethnic groups in the political arena over the post-independence


                                                       2
period. The within-country analysis shows that partitioned ethnicities are significantly more likely (11% −
14% increased likelihood) to engage in civil wars that have an explicit ethnic dimension; moreover, the
likelihood that split ethnicities are subject to political discrimination from the national government is
approximately 7 percentage points higher compared to non-split groups.
       We complement the group-based and the location-based analysis with individual-level evidence from
the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) spanning more than 85 000 households across 20 African
countries. Members of partitioned groups have fewer household assets, poorer access to utilities, and worse
educational outcomes, as compared to individuals from non-split ethnicities in the same country (and even
in the same enumeration area). This applies both to respondents residing in their ethnicity’s ancestral
homeland and to individuals residing outside of it (both in non-split and in partitioned ethnic homelands).


       Related Literature Our paper belongs to the genre of studies that investigate the historical
origins of comparative development (see Nunn (2014) for a review). The literature has mainly focused
on the impact of colonization via institutions (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005), Acemoglu,
Reed, and Robinson (2014)), infrastructure (e.g., Huillery (2009), Jedwab and Moradi (2015)), and human
capital (e.g., Easterly and Levine (2015), Wantchekon, Klasnja, and Novta (2015)). We emphasize instead
an aspect of the colonial legacy that has been largely neglected by economics research: the drawing of
political boundaries in the end of the 19th century that resulted in a large number of partitioned ethnicities
after independence. As such our work is related to Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011), who show
that countries with more straight-line-like borders and nations where a significant part of their population
also resides in diﬀerent countries underperform economically.
       A related body of research traces the origins of African countries’ weak state capacity to the pre-
colonial period. Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) document that the slave trades (1400 −
1900) have shaped development by spurring ethnic conflict and lowering trust. Gennaioli and Rainer
(2006, 2007) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) show that pre-colonial political centralization at
the group level is a significant correlate of contemporary development both across and within countries.
Our paper relates to these contributions, as we also study the long-run implications of historical legacies
focusing on ethnic traits. Yet, rather than studying pre-colonial features, we examine the impact of ethnic
partitioning during colonization. Assessing the impact of ethnic-specific characteristics in Africa is crucial,
as Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014) show that states’ capacity to broadcast power within a country
rapidly diminishes for regions further from the capitals (Herbst (2000)).2
       Our paper also contributes to the literature on the origins of civil conflict that mainly examines
the role of country-level characteristics (see Collier and Hoeﬄer (2007), Blattman and Miguel (2010)
   2
     In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014) we employ a spatial regression discontinuity design to quantify the impact of
national institutions on regional development (as reflected on satellite images of light density at night) at the border, exploiting
within-ethnicity across-country variation. The analysis reveals two key results. First, diﬀerences in contemporary national
institutions do not translate to diﬀerences in development. Second, the average non-eﬀect masks considerable heterogeneity,
which is linked to the limited penetration of national institutions in remote from the capital areas.


                                                                 3
for reviews, and Collier and Sambanis (2005) for case studies in Africa). Of most relevance are works
studying the role of ethnic heterogeneity. Since the influential work of Easterly and Levine (1997), Africa’s
underdevelopment and conflict intensity has been linked to its widespread ethnolinguistic diversity. While
the correlation between ethnic fragmentation and civil war is weak (Fearon and Laitin (2003)), ethnic
polarization (Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005), Esteban, Mayoral, and Ray (2012)), and inequality
across and within ethnic lines (Huber and Mayoral (2014), Esteban and Ray (2011)) correlates significantly
with civil conflict. And a growing literature in political science (and recently in economics) shows the
prevalence of ethnic politics, ethnic discrimination and repression from the central government, and poor
public goods provision across all parts of the continent (Posner (2005), Franck and Rainer (2012), Hodler
and Raschky (2014), Luca, Hodler, Raschky, and Valsecchi (2015), Burgess, Jedwab, Miguel, Morjaria,
and Padro-i-Miguel (2015)). Moreover, Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009) show that the likelihood of
ethnic conflict increases when groups are excluded from national power.
      We complement this research by uncovering that ethnic minorities partitioned across Africa’s bor-
ders present a much greater problem for governance than non-split groups. Because split ethnicities are
more capable of organizing rebellions through assistance from co-ethnics across the border, armed conflict
between partitioned groups and the governments are more likely. We show that the heightened propensity
of split groups to participate in conflict is particularly strong for ethnicities and periods when excluded
from the central government. This finding is consistent with Fearon and Laitin (2003) who link conflict
onset to opportunity cost rather than grievances. Moreover, our finding that foreign interventions from
neighboring countries are more common in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities implies that the latter
serve as vehicles of instability.
      The correlations found in studies linking cross-country variation in border features and ethnic com-
position to development proxies (income or conflict) are informative (e.g., Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski
(2011), Englebert, Tarango, and Carter (2002), Bosker and de Ree (2014)), but they cannot be easily inter-
preted (see Blattman and Miguel (2010) and Fuchs-Schundeln and Hassan (2015)). The main endogeneity
concern is that the process of border drawing is usually an outcome of state formation that determines
both economic performance and conflict. As the recent literature on state capacity shows, nation building,
development, and conflict are inter-linked and jointly determined by hard-to-account-for factors related to
the societal structure, geography, and historical legacies (Besley and Persson (2011b)). Thus, selection,
reverse causality, and omitted variables are non-negligible issues. Likewise, due to measurement error in
the main independent variables, multi-colinearity, and the limited degrees of freedom, the cross-country
correlations are sensitive to small permutations and data revisions (see Hegre and Sambanis (2006) and
Ciccone and Jarocinski (2010)).
      By exploiting variation across ethnic homelands, we account for some of the shortcomings of cross-
country works. First, by showing that there are no systematic diﬀerences in geographic, economic, and
cultural characteristics between split and non-split ethnic homelands, our analysis oﬀers large-scale econo-


                                                     4
metric evidence on the accidental nature of most African borders, at least with respect to the ethnic
partitioning dimension.3 Second, using information on the spatial distribution of ethnicities in the end
of 19th century, well before the current national boundaries came into eﬀect, alleviates concerns related
to the migratory flows ignited by the border design itself. Since borders were drawn by Europeans with
limited respect to local conditions and did not change at independence, we focus on cases where country
boundaries were not the result of political, economic, and military developments. Third, focusing on eth-
nic groups is conceptually appealing in the context of Africa, where ethnic identification is strong, ethnic
segregation high and political violence has a strong ethnic component. In their synthesis of the case-study
evidence on conflict in Africa and the results of cross-country regressions, Collier and Sambanis (2005) note
"the country-year is not the appropriate unit of observation to study such wars. Instead it would be more
appropriate to focus on the ethnic group or we should analyze patterns of violence in a geographical region
that does not necessarily correspond to predefined national boundaries." Fourth, by looking into diﬀerent
subsets of conflict and exploiting group-level data from the Ethnic Power Relations Database on political
discrimination and ethnic wars as well as individual-level data from the DHS we shed some light on the
potential mechanisms at work. In this regard our empirical study builds on Besley and Persson (2011a),
who stress the need to jointly study one-sided violence (repression), two-sided violence (civil war), and
public goods.


        Structure The next section provides a synopsis of the historical background and presents the
key arguments on the impact of the Scramble for Africa. In Section 3 we first discuss how we identify
partitioned ethnicities and then examine whether there are systematic diﬀerences between split and non-
split groups with respect to an array of geographic and historical features that may independently aﬀect
conflict. Section 4 reports our estimates on the eﬀect of partitioning on various aspects of civil conflict
(likelihood, intensity, duration and fatalities). In Section 5 we explore the diﬀerent aspects of conflict
aﬀecting partitioned homelands, so as to shed light on the potential mechanisms at work. In Section 6
we explore the connection between partitioning, ethnic-based discrimination from the national government
and ethnic wars. Section 7 presents the individual-level analysis linking education and access to public
utilities to ethnic partitioning. In Section 8 we summarize and discuss avenues for future research.


2       Historical Background
2.1     The Scramble for Africa

The "Scramble for Africa" starts in the 1860s when the French and the British begin the systematic
exploration of West Africa, signing bilateral agreements on spheres of influence. During the next 40 years,
    3
     Admittedly, we cannot entirely rule out that some unobserved factor may have been taken into account in the process
of border drawing. Nevertheless, given the exhaustive list of covariates considered and the overwhelming evidence of the
African history on the arbitrariness of borders, our results suggest that the impact of unobservable factors are unlikely to be
of first-order significance.


                                                              5
Europeans signed hundreds of treaties that divided the largely unexplored continent into protectorates,
free-trade areas, and colonies. The event that stands for the partitioning of Africa is the conference
that Otto von Bismarck organized in Berlin from November 1884 till February 1885. While the Berlin
conference discussed only the boundaries of Central Africa (the Congo Free State), it came to symbolize
ethnic partitioning, because it laid down the principles that would be used among Europeans to divide the
continent. The key consideration was to preserve the "status quo" preventing conflict among Europeans
for Africa, as the memories of the European wars of the 18th-19th century were alive. As a result, in
the overwhelming majority of cases, European powers drew borders without taking into account local
conditions. African leaders were not invited and had no say. Asiwaju (1985) notes that "the Berlin
conference, despite its importance for the subsequent history of Africa, was essentially a European aﬀair:
there was no African representation, and African concerns were, if they mattered at all, completely marginal
to the basic economic, strategic, and political interests of the negotiating European powers". In many cases,
European leaders were in such a rush that they did not wait for the information arriving from explorers,
geographers, and missionaries. As the British prime minister at the time Lord Salisbury (Robert Cecil)
put it, "we have been engaged in drawing lines upon maps where no white man’s feet have ever tord; we
have been giving away mountains and rivers and lakes to each other, only hindered by the small impediment
that we never knew exactly where the mountains and rivers and lakes were." Asiwaju (1985) summarizes
that "the study of European archives supports the accidental rather than a conspiratorial theory of the
marking of African boundaries." In line with the historical evidence, Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski
(2011) document that eighty percent of African borders follow latitudinal and longitudinal lines, more
than in any other part of the world.
       Several factors have been proposed to rationalize the largely accidental border design. First, at
the time Europeans had little knowledge of local geography, as with the exception of few coastal areas,
the continent was unexplored. There was a constant imperialist back and forth with European powers
swapping pieces of land with limited (at best) idea of what they were worth of.4 Second, Europeans
were not drawing borders of prospective states, but of colonies and protectorates; clearly at the time none
could foresee independence. Third, demarcation was poor.5 Fourth, Europeans were unwilling to change
colonial borders despite new information arriving from the ground.6 Fifth, as locals could freely move
across colonial borders, African chiefs did not oppose much the colonial design, as little changed on the
    4
      An illustrative example is the annexation of Katanga in Congo Free State that turned out to be its richest province. King
Leopold got Katanga in exchange for the Niari-Kwilu area that the French insisted on getting themselves. Wesseling (1996)
writes "what impelled him [Leopold] was a general imperialist surge, the desire for compensation for the Niari-Kwilu, and the
objective of making the new state as large as possible and filling as much of the Congo basin as possible."
    5
      Poor demarcation and imprecise colonial treaties of the exact boundaries have contributed to conflict after independence.
Examples include the war between Tanzania and Uganda in 1978 over the Kagera region (a 1800 2 strip of land) and the
conflict between Burkina Faso and Mali over the Agacher strip in 1985.
    6
      Wesseling (1996) writes "in later years, Katanga was to become a most desirable possession in the eyes of British imperi-
alists such as Cecil Rhodes and Harry Johnston. When they approached the British government on the subject, it stuck to its
guns. Anderson let them know that Leopold’s map had been recognized in 1885 and that his territory unmistakably comprised
the mining region of Katanga. What was done, was done."


                                                              6
ground. Asiwaju (1985) cites the Ketu king, saying that "we regard the boundary (between Benin-Dahomey
and Nigeria) separating the English and the French, not the Yoruba." Wesseling (1996) summarizes the
situation: "The partition of Africa was recorded by the Europeans on their maps, but the matter rested
there for the time being....In Europe conquests preceded the drawing of maps; in Africa the map was drawn,
and then it was decided what was going to happen. These maps did not therefore reflect reality but helped
to create it."
       African independence occurred at a speed that not even the key protagonists expected (Herbst
(2000)). The independence of Northern African countries in the 1950s was soon followed by Ghana’s and
Guinea’s independence in 1957 and in 1958, respectively. By the end of 1966, 40 countries had become
independent. While at the time many proposed changing the borders, African leaders and departing Euro-
peans did not touch this issue. The leaders of the newly-crafted African states believed that nation-building
and industrialization would sideline ethnic divisions. African leaders feared that border realignment would
threaten their position, whereas Europeans’ main objective was to maintain the special rights and cor-
porate deals with their former colonies, and, as such, they were also reluctant to open the border issue.
Almost all African countries accepted the colonial borders when signing the Charter of the Organization
of African Union (OAU) in 1964. Only Somalia and Morocco did not accept the borders, while Ghana
and Togo raised some objections on their boundary that splits the Ewe, but the border did not change.
The freezing of the colonial borders by the OAU compact allows us to explore their consequences in a
"quasi-experimental" setting that facilitates causal inference.

2.2    Channels and Case Studies

       Irredentism, secession, and autonomy                    The literature has stressed the impact of ethnic par-
titioning on generating irredentist demands, as split ethnicities may want to unify with their peers across
the border.7 In line with this argument, Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009) estimate that 20% of all
civil wars in Africa have a secessionist component.8 While, compared to the number of civil wars in Africa,
there have been few instances of secession (Englebert (2009)), irredentism and the associated ideology
have played an important role in some major conflicts, mostly in Somalia, Mali, and Senegal. Somalis,
for example, were split during colonization between four diﬀerent European colonies, while Ethiopia also
got a slice, the Ogaden region which is almost exclusively occupied by Somalis. The five-pointed star in
the flag of Somalia symbolizes the desire of unifying the five regions inhabited by Somali clans (Italian
   7
     Horowitz (1985) notes "a quick tour d’horizon reveals the rich range of possibilities (for conflict and irredentism). The
Ghana-Togo border divides the Ewe, as the Nigeria-Benin border divides the Yoruba. There are Hausa in Nigeria and Hausa
in Niger. There are Fulani across a wide belt of West and Central Africa, Beteke in Gabon and Congo (Brazzaville), and Fang
in Cameroon, Gabon, and Equatorial Guinea. The Bakongo are divided among, Zaire, Congo (Brazzaville) and Angola; the
Lunda among Zaire, Zambia, and Angola. There are Somalis in Somalia, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Djibouti. There are Wolof in
Mauritania, in Gambia, and in Senegal, Kakwa in Sudan and in Uganda. And various Berber groups are distributed among
more than one North African state."
   8
     Civil wars with a secession demand are almost absent in Central and South America. Besides Africa, secession-driven
conflicts are found in the Middle East, India, and the Caucasus.



                                                              7
Somaliland, Northern Kenya, Southern Ethiopia, French Somaliland - Djibouti, and British Somaliland);
three long-lasting wars have been partly driven by the desire of Somalis in Ethiopia to become part of
Somalia (Meredith (2005)). UCDP describes the event as follows: "When Somalia became independent
and began spreading the idea of Somali nationalism, it found fertile soil in the Ogaden region. Irredentist
agitation and armed clashes soon commenced, and increased as the Ethiopian government launched its first
systematic attempt to collect taxes in the region." Similarly, in the initial years after independence Kenya
experienced conflict in the Northern Frontier District when Somali insurgents fought for annexation to
Somalia (Touval (1967)). In Section 8 of the Supplementary Appendix we discuss in detail the case of the
partitioning of the Somalis and perform a counterfactual analysis of its impact on conflict.


       Repression Ethnic-based discrimination is pervasive and a large body of research provides ample
evidence on ethnic-based politics (Posner (2005)). National governments frequently attempt to suﬀocate
ethnicities by seizing property, imposing high taxation and restrictions on the activities of specific groups
(Bates (1981)). Examples include the (Hu)Ambo and the Chokwe in Angola, the I(g)bo in Nigeria, Tuareg
clans in Mali and Niger, and the Oromo and Somalis in Ethiopia. What is diﬀerent between partitioned
and non-split groups, though, is that split ones can seek shelter within their ancestral homeland on the
other side of the border. Members of split ethnicities can re-organize, obtain arms, and get assistance
from their co-ethnics across the border both when they are on the defense and when they attack. Thus
quite often episodes of repression lead to civil wars, as partitioned groups have a lower opportunity cost of
conflict. Moreover, the instrumental use of split ethnicities by neighboring governments provides a pretext
for their inferior treatment by home governments.
       The recurrent conflict in the Casamance region in Southern Senegal, where the partitioned Di-
ola (Jola) and some smaller groups reside, oﬀers an illustration. As Gambia eﬀectively splits Senegal,
Casamance is disconnected from the central government in Dakar. Moreover, Casamance was ruled inde-
pendently from the rest of Senegal for most of the colonial time. Locals objected to the land reform of
1964 that transferred to the state all non-registered land, eﬀectively transferring property to the capital
over local ethnic groups, that had communal property rights. The violent riots in 1980 were soon followed
by the formation of the separatist, "Movement of the Democratic Forces of Casamance (MDFC)" in 1982.
While initially MDFC used low-level violence, in the 1990 conflict intensified as MDFC was supported
by Guinea-Bissau and Gambia, where the Diola exert significant influence. The Senegalese government
has accused the Gambian President Yahya Jammeh, a Diola himself, and Guinea-Bissau’s army for assist-
ing MDFC insurgents, providing them with arms and shelter (Humphreys and Mohamed (2005), Evans
(2004)).9 Moreover, MFDC rebels from Senegal participated in the 1998 civil war in Guinea-Bissau, aiding
General Mane in his eﬀorts to dispose President Vieira (Wagane (2006)).
   9
     There is a debate whether MFDC is a Jola-based irredentist movement or it reflects the aspirations of other groups in
the region. MFDC has consistently asserted that it represents all Casamance groups, denying accusations from the central
government that it is a Diola movement.


                                                            8
         Spillovers Population displacements across the border are more common within split groups.
Such refugee flows, however, may change the ethnic composition in adjacent countries fomenting conflict. A
pertinent example is the Alur, a group partitioned between the Belgian Congo and the British Protectorate
of Uganda during the late phase of the Scramble for Africa (1910−1914). When Mobutu Sese Seko initiated
the subjugation of several minority groups in Zaire, many Alur were pushed to Uganda. This in turn
generated opposition from the Buganda leading to conflict (Asiwaju (1985)). Fearon and Laitin (2011)
report that 31% of civil wars (and 57% of ethnic wars) involve "members of a regional ethnic group that
considers itself to be the indigenous sons-of-the-soil and recent migrants from other parts of the country".10


         Other Aspects of the Scramble for Africa Besides ethnic partitioning, the artificial border
design may have contributed to underdevelopment and conflict via other channels that we do not consider.
Border drawing shaped each and every country-specific geographic and cultural characteristic including a
country’s ethnic heterogeneity, land size, and access to the coast that aﬀect development. Herbst (2000)
argues that civil conflict is more pervasive in large African countries because their size limits their ability to
broadcast power across their territories. Collier (2007) discusses how the border design resulted in Africa
having the largest proportion of landlocked countries hampering their growth potential. While our analysis
focuses on a single aspect of the Scramble for Africa, that of ethnic partitioning, by exploiting within-
country variation we are able to account for common—to—all—homelands, country-specific characteristics.
Moreover, in the Supplementary Appendix, we examine how these diﬀerent nationwide by-products of the
border design interact with ethnic partitioning in influencing conflict intensity.


3        Ethnic Partitioning and Border Artificiality
3.1      Identifying Partitioned Ethnic Groups

We identify partitioned groups projecting contemporary country borders, as portrayed in the 2000 Digital
Chart of the World, on George Peter Murdock’s Ethnolinguistic Map (1959) that depicts the spatial
distribution of African ethnicities at the time of the European colonization in the late 19th and early 20th
century (Figure 1).11 Murdock’s map divides Africa into 843 regions. The mapped ethnicities correspond
roughly to levels 7 − 8 of the Ethnologue’s language family tree. 8 areas in the Sahara are "uninhabited
upon colonization" and are therefore not considered. We also drop the Guanche, a small group in the
Madeira Islands that is currently part of Portugal and the Comorians, as the conflict databases do not
cover the Comoros. This leaves us with 833 groups. We also exclude 8 regions where population according
    10
     Fearon and Laitin (2011) list eight conflicts in Africa (26% of all wars) that involved indigenous versus within-country
migrants (e.g., Tuareg in Mali in 1989, Senegal in 1989 involving Diolas in Casamance, etc.).
  11
     Murdock’s map is based on primary sources covering the period 1860 − 1940. Most observations correspond to 1890, 1900,
and 1910. After intersecting ethnic boundaries with country borders, we drop ethnicity-country polygons of less than 100
2 , as such small areas are most likely an outcome of error in the underlying mapping of ethnicities.




                                                             9
to the earliest post-independence census is zero.12 So our analysis focuses on 825 ethnicities.




                                                                    Ethnic Homelands
                                                                   and National Borders

                                                                       National Boundaries
                                                                       Non-Partitioned Groups
                                                                       Partitioned Groups
                                                                                            Ü
                             Figure 1                                                       Figure 1

       The homeland of 357 groups falls into more than one country. Yet for several of these groups the
overwhelming majority of their ancestral land (usually more than 99%) belongs to a single country. For
example, 995% of the area of the Ahaggaren falls into Algeria and only 05% in Niger. Since Murdock’s
map is bound to be drawn with some error, we identify as partitioned those ethnicities with at least 10% of
their total surface area belonging to more than one country (  ). As such the Ahaggaren is classified
as a non-split group. There are 229 ethnicities (277% of the sample) with at least 10% of their historical
homeland falling into more than one contemporary state (Figure 1).13 Appendix Table  lists partitioned
ethnicities. When we use a broader threshold of 5% we identify 266 partitioned groups.
       Our procedure identifies most major ethnic groups that have been split by the African borders. For
example, the Maasai are partitioned between Kenya and Tanzania (62% and 38% respectively), the Anyi
between Ghana and the Ivory Coast (58% and 42%), and the Chewa between Mozambique (50%), Malawi
(34%), and Zimbabwe (16%). Other examples include the Hausa (split between Nigeria and Niger) and the
Ewe (split by the Togo-Ghana border). We also checked whether our coding is in line with Asiwaju (1985),
who provides the only comprehensive (to our knowledge) codification of partitioned African groups. Our
strategy identifies almost all ethnic groups that Asiwaju (1985) lists as partitioned.14
  12
      These groups are the Bahariya, the Fertit, the Ifora, the Kimr, the Matumbi, the Midobi, the Mituku, and the Popoi.
The results are identical if we were to retain these ethnic areas, assigning to them a very small population number.
   13
      We apply the same threshold, as in our previous work assessing the within-ethnicity across-the-border impact of national
institutions on contemporary development. In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014) we focus, however, on 220 split groups.
The 9−groups diﬀerence emerges because: (i) three ethnicities were dropped in Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014) as
they are split between Western Sahara and Morocco and there are no data on national institutions for Western Sahara; (ii)
six groups were dropped because the population estimate is zero in one of the two partitions in 2000.
   14
      Our approach of identifying split groups is imperfect. Ethnic groups’ homelands partially overlap and there is certainly


                                                             10
       It is perhaps instructive to assess how much of the cross-country variation in ethnic diversity in Africa
can be attributed to ethnic partitioning. In this regard, we estimated simple cross-country regressions
linking the widely-used ethnic fragmentation measures (of Alesina, Devleeschauwer, Easterly, Kurlat, and
Wacziarg (2003) and Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín, and Wacziarg (2012)) to the log number of partitioned groups
in a country (with and without controls for size); we find that approximately a fourth to a third of the
cross-country variation of the measures of ethnic diversity can be accounted for by partitioned ethnicities.

3.2    Border Artificiality

The African historiography provides ample evidence arguing that, in the majority of cases, Europeans did
not consider ethnic features and local geography in the design of colonial borders. In a few instances,
nevertheless, Europeans did try taking into account political geography, as, for example, in Swaziland, and
Burundi. And some borders were delineated in the early 20th century, when Europeans conceivably had
some knowledge of local conditions.15 Moreover, some contemporary borders in Western Africa follow the
French administrative divisions. And in some cases (Cameroon-Nigeria; Ghana-Togo) there were referenda
on the redrawing of these border segments at independence. Yet what is key for establishing causality is
not that all borders were randomly drawn (though many were); what is needed for causal inference is that
there are no systematic diﬀerences between partitioned and non-split ethnic homelands with respect to
(un)observable characteristics that may independently aﬀect contemporary conflict.
       In this section we examine whether there are significant diﬀerences between the two sets of ethnicities
across a host of observable traits. We estimate simple (linear probability) models associating the binary
ethnic partitioning index (  ) with various geographic, ecological, natural resource variables and
proxies of pre-colonial conflict and development.16 Table 1 reports the results. In all specifications we
include region-specific constants to account for the diﬀerent timing and patterns of colonization. Below
the estimates, we report double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the ethnic-family level using
the method of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011) that accounts for spatial correlation and arbitrary
residual correlation within each dimension.17
noise in Murdock’s map. As such our partitioning index is noisy. For example, our procedure identifies as non-split the Ogaden
(it enters as partitioned when we adopt the 5% threshold) and the Sab groups in Ethiopia. Our readings suggest that these
groups have been impacted by the Ethiopian-Somali border. Since our classification is solely based on the intersection of the
historical tribal map with the contemporary country boundaries, such errors are unlikely to be systematic (correlated with
contemporary conflict or the key controls). In presence of classical measurement error our estimates will be attenuated.
   15
      Yet our reading suggest that even in cases where European were aware of borders splitting ethnicities (as in the case of
the Abyssinia-Ethiopia border), this did not seem to factor in their decisions.
   16
      Appendix Table 1 reports summary statistics for all variables at the ethnic homeland level. The Data Appendix gives
variable definitions and sources. The results are similar with probit and logit ML estimation.
   17
      Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011) explicitly cite spatial correlation as an application of the multi-way clustering
method. Murdock (1959) assigns the 833 ethnicities into 96 ethnolinguistic clusters. We also used the method of Conley
(1999) to account for spatial dependence of an unknown form, finding similar standard errors.




                                                             11
      Geography, Ecology, Natural Resources and Ethnic Partitioning In Table 1 - Panel 
we examine the impact of geography, ecology and natural resources. The positive and highly significant
estimate of (log) land area in column (1) suggests that ethnic groups spanning large territories were more
likely to be partitioned. In column (2) we augment the specification with two dummy variables that identify
ethnic homelands with a large lake and a main river, respectively. The coeﬃcient on the lake dummy is
positive and significant at the 10% level, while the river indicator enters with a small and statistically
insignificant coeﬃcient. These results are in accord with the narrative of Europeans attempting to use
natural barriers while delineating spheres of influence, apparently with limited success. In column (3) we
add an index reflecting land quality for agriculture and elevation. Both variables enter with small and
insignificant coeﬃcients. In column (4) we examine the role of ecological conditions using a malaria index
and distance to the coast. Since Europeans settled mostly in coastal areas and regions where malaria was
less pervasive, these specifications shed light on whether early contact with colonizers predicts partitioning.
Both variables enter with insignificant estimates. In column (5) we include indicators identifying ethnic
areas with diamond mines and petroleum. While in the initial phase of colonization Europeans were
mostly interested in agricultural goods and minerals, adding these indicators allows investigating whether
partitioned and non-split groups diﬀer across these aspects that correlate with contemporary conflict (see
Ross (2012)). There are no systematic diﬀerences between the two sets of ethnic homelands. In column
(6) we augment the specification with the share of adjacent ethnicities that are of the same ethnolinguistic
family, to examine whether Europeans took into account broad cultural diﬀerences when delineating the
borders. This does not seem to be the case. Column (7) includes all the geographic, ecological, and natural
resource measures. No factor other than the size of the ethnic area (and to a lesser extent the presence of
lakes) correlates with ethnic partitioning.


      Pre-colonial Features and Ethnic Partitioning While at the time of the colonial border design
Europeans had limited understanding of local political geography, it is useful to examine the association
between ethnic partitioning and pre-colonial conflict, as recent cross-country works (Fearon and Laitin
(2012)) and cross-regional studies reveal a legacy of conflict from the pre-colonial times to the present
(Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014), Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), Depetris-Chauvin (2014)). Table 1 -
Panel  examines the association between ethnic partitioning and proxies of pre-colonial conflict.
      Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014) show that contemporary conflict is higher in regions that suﬀered
from pre-colonial wars (such as the Songhai-Gourma conflict in Mali in the end of the 15th century or the
war between the Banyoro and Buganda kingdoms around 1600 AD). Specification (1) shows the lack of a
systematic association between ethnic partitioning and pre-colonial violence, as reflected in an indicator
that takes the value one for ethnic homelands that experienced conflict over the period 1400−1700. Column
(2) shows that ethnic partitioning and proximity to the nearest pre-colonial conflict are not related (the
results are similar with log distance). These results suggest that ethnic partitioning captures a potential


                                                      12
source of contemporary conflict distinct to that emphasized by Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014).
      Africa experienced conflict during the slave trades, as the most common method of enslavement
was “through raids and kidnapping conducted by members of diﬀerent groups or even between members of
the same ethnicity” (Nunn and Puga (2012)). Djankov and Reynal-Querol (2010) present cross-country
evidence of a positive association between enslavement and civil war. In column (3) we regress ethnic
partitioning on an indicator that equals one for ethnicities that were aﬀected directly by the slave trades,
while in column (4) we follow Nunn (2008) and use the log of one plus the number of slaves normalized
by the area of each homeland. The coeﬃcient on slave trades is quantitatively small and statistically
insignificant, assuaging concerns that the ethnic partitioning index captures pre-colonial violence.
      In columns (5) and (6) we associate ethnic partitioning to the proximity of a group to a large pre-
colonial kingdom, using data from Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014). There is no systematic association
between ethnic partitioning and the group being part of a large kingdom or the distance to the centroid
of the closest pre-colonial kingdom. So, pre-colonial political centralization, that has been found to confer
long-lasting beneficial eﬀects on regional development (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013)) does not
seem to correlate with partitioning.
      In column (7) we associate ethnic partitioning to the pre-slave trade level of development using an
indicator that equals one if a city with population exceeding 20 000 people in 1400  was present in
the historical homeland and zero otherwise (using data from Chandler (1987)). There is no evidence that
ethnicities with historical urban centers were disproportionately impacted by the border design.


      Further Checks In Appendix Table 8 we provide additional evidence on the lack of a systematic
association between ethnic partitioning and other measures of pre-colonial, societal, economic, political,
and cultural traits, such as the family organization, the type of inheritance rules, the presence of local
elections, and settlement patterns, using data from Murdock (1967) available for 450 − 490 groups.
      These checks corroborate that in the beginning of the colonial era, apart from a group’s landmass,
there were no diﬀerences between split and non-split groups. However, one would like to verify that also
ex-post, i.e., after the borders were set, the resulting split groups within a country are no diﬀerent than non-
split ones. In Appendix Table 9 we report "balancedness tests" along various geographic, ecological, and
natural resource characteristics both for the full sample of country-ethnic homelands and for the country-
ethnic homelands close to the national border. The "similarity regressions" show that within countries
with the exception of (log) land area for groups close to the border, there are no systematic diﬀerences in
numerous observable characteristics between split and non-split groups.


      Summary Our results are consistent with the historical account on the largely arbitrary nature
of African borders. Yet, they do not imply that all African borders were randomly designed, something
that is not the case. The econometric evidence suggests is that -on average- there are no systematic



                                                      13
diﬀerences between partitioned and non-split ethnic homelands across observable characteristics that may
independently aﬀect conflict.


4     Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
This section reports the baseline estimates associating various aspects of civil conflict to ethnic partition-
ing. First, we present the conflict data. Second, we lay down the econometric specification and discuss
estimation. Third, we report the benchmark estimates along with additional results.

4.1    Main Conflict Data

Our baseline data come from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset (ACLED 4, Raleigh, Linke,
and Dowd (2014)) that provides information on the location and some other characteristics of political
violence events across all African countries from 1997 to 2013. Political violence is defined as the use of
force by a group with a political purpose or motivation. ACLED is by far the most complete georeferenced
conflict dataset; and while the data are noisy they have several desirable features.18
       First, ACLED does not only record conflicts that take place within the context of a civil war, but also
"violent activity that occurs outside of civil wars, particularly violence against civilians, militia interactions,
communal conflict and rioting". The reporting of violence against civilians is particularly desirable, as
Africa is plagued by civil strife that the standard data sources of civil war miss. Not only violence against
civilians, such as child-soldiering raids, rapes, and abductions is rampant, but these incidents are often
deadly, economically harmful, and devastating for the victims and the local community.
       Second, ACLED categorizes conflict into four groups, allowing for a finer decomposition. The main
categories are (percentage of total events): (1) Battles, either without change of control (32%) or where
rebels or government troops gain control (4%); (2) Violence against unarmed civilians (315%); (3) Riots
and protests (25%); and (4) Non-violent activities by violent actors, such as recruiting rallies (75%).
       Third, ACLED reports an estimate of casualties, so, we can study the impact of partitioning on
conflict intensity. Battles and violence against civilians are by far the most deadly types, as 45% of these
incidents result in at least one fatality; in contrast, only 65% of riots and protests result in casualties and
non-violent acts of conflict actors almost never result in casualties (less than 1%).
       Fourth, the events are classified by the main conflict actors (government, rebels, militias, foreign
interventions) allowing us to examine whether partitioning is mostly linked to state-driven violence and
interventions from nearby countries.
       Original Sources.          The data are based on a diverse set of sources. For almost all countries
data come from more than ten diﬀerent sources, while for the more war-prone nations data come from
around twenty sources. This diversity assuages concerns of systematic biases in reporting from government
 18
    Parallel works studying various driving forces of civil conflict using ACLED data, include Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014),
Harari and La Ferrara (2014), and Berman, Couttenier, Rohner, and Thoenig (2014).


                                                              14
controlled media. The data are mostly based on international sources, such as the BBC (around 10 000
incidents), Reuters (more than 5 000 incidents), the Associated Press (around 2 500 incidents), and the
Agence France Press (around 5 000 incidents). A considerable fraction (around 10%) comes from media
outlets from the United Kingdom, Portugal, Canada, the United States, and Australia. ACLED also relies
on reports from NGOs, such as the Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, and the United
Nations.19 Even in cases of data coming from local sources (around 25% of the sample), most incidents
come from pan-African news agencies, such as the All Africa network and independent newspapers.




       Type of Violent                                           Violent Events Across
       Events in ACLED                                           Ethnic Homelands 97-13
                                                                      African Boundaries
           African Boundaries
                                                                 ACLED: Violent Events
           Battle                                                     0
                                                                      1-2
           Non-violent activity
                                                                      3-6
           Riots/Protests


                                                Ü                                                         Ü
                                                                      7 - 13
                                                                      14 - 31
           Violence against civilians
                                                                      32 - 89
                                                                      90 - 5423

                                  Figure 2                                                Figure 2

        Figure 2 illustrates the spatial distribution of conflict events. The map plots 64 650 precisely
georeferenced incidents of political violence. In total there are 79 765 recorded events, but given the
spatial nature of our study, we drop events where the location of the conflict is not accurately known.
There is significant heterogeneity in the incidence of political violence across countries (see Appendix
Table 6). There are numerous events in Central Africa, mostly in Eastern Congo, Rwanda, Burundi,
and Uganda. In Western Africa, conflict and political violence are mostly present in Nigeria and Sierra
Leone. Violence is also pervasive in Somalia, Ethiopia, and Zimbabwe. In contrast, there are few events in
Botswana, Zambia, Tanzania, Namibia, and Gabon. There is also considerable variation within countries.
For example, while conflict incidence in Tanzania is low, there are several violent events along the border
with Kenya and Rwanda. Likewise, most of the conflict in Angola is close to the northern border with Congo
and in the Cabinda enclave. Battles and violence against civilians are correlated, but the correlation is far
from perfect (064; see Appendix Table 7). For example, in Zimbabwe we observe lots of violence against
  19
    Going over the documentation it seems that the data are based on verified information and not simply the reproduction of
state-press releases. For example, in Zimbabwe, most events come from the BBC, Reuters, and the Zimbabwe Human Rights
NGO Forum, a coalition of 19 NGOs that get data from their representatives on the ground.


                                                            15
civilians (3 701 incidents) and few battles (59). Conversely, in Ethiopia and Angola we predominantly
observe conflict between government troops and rebels rather than violence against civilians.
       To construct conflict intensity at the country-ethnic homeland level, we project ACLED’s mapping
(Figure 2) on the intersection of Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map with contemporary borders (Figure 1).
Figure 2 portrays the spatial distribution of all conflicts at the country-ethnic homeland level.

4.2    Econometric Specification and Estimation

We estimate the long-run eﬀect of ethnic partitioning on contemporary civil conflict running variants of
the following specification:

                                                                          0
                                 = exp( +   +   +  Φ +  )                                      (1)

       The dependent variable,  , reflects civil conflict in the historical homeland of ethnic group  in
country .   is a binary (dummy) variable that identifies partitioned ethnic areas in each country.
Each partition of group  is assigned to the corresponding country . For example, the part of Lobi’s
homeland in Ivory Coast is assigned to Ivory Coast, while Lobi’s land mass in Burkina Faso gets a Burkina
Faso indicator. At the country-ethnic homeland level, we have 518 partitioned areas and 694 non-split
homelands.20 Given the lack of systematic association between the ethnic partitioning index and various
historical, ecological, and geographical variables that correlate with conflict (Table 1 and the "balanced-
ness tests" in Appendix Table 9), the  coeﬃcient captures the local average treatment eﬀect of ethnic
partitioning. To capture potential spatial externalities of partitioning, we augment the specification with a
spillover index ( ), reflecting the fraction of adjacent groups in the same country that are partitioned.
In the sample of 1212 country-ethnic areas, we have 274 areas without a partitioned neighbor, 146 areas
are fully surrounded by split groups. [The mean (standard deviation) of   is 041 (032).]
                              0 , follows Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014) and other related
       The conditioning set, 
works (e.g., Fenske (2013, 2014)) and includes log land area, log population according to the first post-
independence census, indicators for the presence of rivers and lakes and several geographic, ecological, and
natural resource measures.  denotes country-specific constants that account for countrywide factors that
may aﬀect conflict, related to the type of colonial rule, colonial and contemporary institutions, national
policies, etc.
       As the dependent variable is a count, we estimate negative binomial (NB) models with maximum
likelihood (ML) (Wooldridge (2002), Cameron and Trivedi (2013)).21 The negative binomial model ac-
   20
      Since in our empirical analysis we primarily explore within-country variation, in many specifications we lose observations
from countries with either a single ethnicity or without variability in ethnic partitioning. These countries are Burundi, Djibouti,
Swaziland, Madagascar, and Western Sahara.
   21
      Due to overdispersion in the dependent variable, specification tests reject the Poisson, favoring the negative binomial
model. Across all specifications in Tables 2 − 5 the 2 value of the likelihood ratio test for the null hypothesis of a Poisson
model (where the mean equals standard deviation) exceeds 100 [ −  : 000], and as such the negative binomial model is
adopted. This LR test is asymptotically equivalent to a -test on whether the alpha overdispersion parameter is zero.


                                                                16
counts for the many zeros and for some extreme observations in the right tail of the distribution of the
dependent variable. Following Cameron and Trivedi (2013), we use the unconditional negative binomial
(NB2) model with country constants that allows for arbitrary over-dispersion.22 To further account for
outliers, we report specifications excluding homelands hosting the capital city or homelands where the
dependent variable is in the top 1%. In the Appendix we also report fixed-eﬀects Poisson ML estimates
dropping the top 5% of the dependent variable. To isolate the impact of ethnic partitioning on the likeli-
hood of conflict, we always report linear probability model (LPM) estimates where the dependent variable
is an indicator that takes on the value one if a country-ethnic area has been aﬀected by conflict over the
sample period. And we also estimate non-linear models focusing on conflict duration and fatalities.

4.3     Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict

Table 2 reports the baseline specifications. Panel  gives (unconditional) NB-ML estimates with country-
specific constants focusing on conflict events, while Panel  gives country-fixed eﬀects LS estimates focusing
on the likelihood of conflict.
       Let us start with the NB specifications. The coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index in the
parsimonious specifications in columns (1) and (2) is positive and more than two standard errors larger
than zero. In column (3) we control for distance to the national border, the sea coast, the capital, and
also include a capital city dummy and an indicator for coastal homelands. The coeﬃcient on the ethnic
partitioning index slightly increases and becomes more precisely estimated.23 Column (4) includes controls
reflecting geography-ecology (land quality for agriculture, elevation, malaria, an island dummy) and natural
resources (indicators for diamond mines and oil deposits). We also include an indicator for the presence
of a major city in 1400. The coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index remains unaﬀected. This is
consistent with our findings that partitioning is uncorrelated with these characteristics. In column (5)
we drop outliers (top 1% of the dependent variable) and in column (6) we exclude homelands where
capitals fall. The estimates imply that partitioned ethnicities experience an increase of approximately 145
log points in the number of conflict incidents. This translates into an 57% increase in political violence
(exp(045) − 1 = 0568). The eﬀect of ethnic partitioning on conflict is quantitatively as strong as the
eﬀect of the petroleum indicator that enters with a significant coeﬃcient (044 in specification (4)). The
share of adjacent partitioned ethnicities (to the total number of neighboring ethnic areas) also enters with
a positive estimate that in some specifications is significant at the 90% level. This implies that the negative
  22
      This model reduces to the Poisson when the overdispersion parameter converges to zero. While the estimation of the
fixed-eﬀects suﬀers from the "incidental parameters" problem, the estimator has good properties (Greene (2005), Guimaraes
(2008), Allison and Waterman (2002)). The NB2 model with fixed-eﬀects has been used recently by Fisman and Miguel
(2007), Aghion, Reenen, and Zingales (2013), and Bloom, Schankerman, and Reenen (2013), among others.
   23
      Distance to the coast enters with a positive and significant estimate suggesting that there is less conflict in areas closer to
the coast. Distance to the capital enters with a positive estimate suggesting that there is more conflict in regions further from
the capitals, though the coeﬃcient is not always significant. Distance to the border enters with a negative though insignificant
coeﬃcient. As violence against civilians, riots, and protests often take place in the capitals, the capital city indicator enters
with a positive and highly significant coeﬃcient in almost all specifications.



                                                                 17
repercussions of ethnic partitioning are not present solely in split homelands, but also aﬀect nearby regions.
The coeﬃcient on   (043 − 049) suggests that conflict intensity is approximately 30% higher in the
homelands of groups that are surrounded by 50% of split groups ((exp(047) − 1) ∗ 05 = 030).
       In columns (7)-(12) we restrict estimation to areas close to the border, using the median distance
from the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland (613 ). This allows us to compare conflict between
partitioned and other at-the-border groups. Across all permutations the coeﬃcient on the partitioning
index is positive (around 060) and highly significant; this assures that our estimates in the full sample are
not capturing an overall border eﬀect (which itself could reflect the impact of partitioning). The coeﬃcient
in the border sample is somewhat larger compared to the estimate in the full sample; yet a Hausman-Chow
test shows that these diﬀerences are not statistically significant. The coeﬃcient on   is also stable
(around 045), though standard errors increase and the estimate loses significance.24
       Table 2-Panel  reports LPM estimates with country fixed eﬀects. Looking at the "extensive" margin
accounts for the non-linear nature of the dependent variable; it also sheds light on the margin at which
ethnic partitioning operates. The likelihood of conflict is approximately 7% − 8% higher for partitioned,
as compared to non-split, groups. The magnitude is similar (008 − 009) when we restrict estimation to
groups close to the national border.25 The LPM reveals sizable spillovers, as   always enters with a
highly significant estimate. The specification in (4) implies that compared to ethnic homelands where none
of the nearby groups are split (  = 0), in homelands where half of the adjacent groups are partitioned
(  = 05) the likelihood of conflict increases by 7%.


       Observables vs Unobservables A noteworthy result of both the NB ML and the LPM estimates
is the stability of the coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index. The NB estimate on   in the
specification that includes country fixed eﬀects and a rich set of controls is similar to the parsimonious
specification (in (1)), where we simply condition on log land area, log population and the presence of water
bodies. The heuristic test of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) implies that the bias from unobservable
features has to be very large, way larger than the impact of the geographic and location traits and country-
specific fixed factors. The 2 jumps from 037 in the parsimonious model without country fixed eﬀects
to 055 when we add the latter, as country-level characteristics matter crucially for conflict. When we
further add the geographic and location controls, the 2 increases to 065. As pointed out by Oster (2015),
the sizable increase in the model fit, as we include country constants and relevant controls, coupled with
the coeﬃcient stability imply that it is unlikely that unobservable omitted variables spuriously drive our
estimates. This is because as the model’s fit increases, the portion of the variance that is left to be explained
  24
     The estimates in columns (10) and (11) are identical because all outliers (observations where conflict exceeds the 99
percentile) are not in the border sample. The border sample is somewhat smaller than 606 observations, because there is no
variability on ethnic partitioning for some countries when we zoom in the border.
  25
     We obtain similar results when we replace the country-fixed eﬀects with regional constants and estimate the limited
dependent variable model with logit or probit ML. The probit marginal eﬀect with the full set of controls is 009 and 012 in
the full and the border sample, respectively.



                                                             18
by unobservables shrinks.

4.4    Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict Intensity

ACLED reports both deadly events and incidents of violence without casualties (that, nevertheless, involve
conflict actors). Which type of conflict is more common across split homelands? To answer this question,
we constructed measures of conflict reflecting the number of deadly incidents, the likelihood of deadly
conflict, fatalities and conflict duration. By employing these diﬀerent proxies of conflict severity, we also
address concerns that the comprehensive nature of ACLED lumps together events of political violence that
diﬀer substantially in the underlying intensity of violence and the casualties involved (Eck (2012)).
       Table 3 reports the results. Columns (1) and (6) give NB-ML estimates looking on the number of
deadly events in the full and the border sample, respectively. The coeﬃcient on   is 0335 and 0465,
implying that deadly conflict is 40% − 60% higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. This eﬀect
is similar to that of the petroleum dummy (coeﬃcient 041). Columns (2) and (7) report LPM estimates,
where the dependent variable is a binary index identifying homelands that have experienced at least one
deadly incident. There is a 6% to 8% increased likelihood of a deadly event in the homelands of split
groups. Again the LPM estimates reveal sizable spillovers. Columns (3) and (8) report NB-ML estimates
associating fatalities (aggregated across all types of conflict in all years for each country-ethnic area) to
ethnic partitioning. Given the extreme skewness of casualties, the estimate is somewhat unstable;26 yet
  enters with a significantly positive coeﬃcient both in the full and the border sample. In columns
(4) and (9) we focus on conflict duration, i.e., the number of years that there has been some conflict in each
homeland, while in columns (5) and (10) we focus on the duration of deadly conflict. Since outliers are not
an issue when we examine duration (the mean - variance equality holds), we report country-fixed-eﬀects
Poisson ML estimates. There is a strong link between partitioning and conflict duration. The estimate
in (10) implies that conflict duration is on average 55% higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities
(exp(0435) − 1 = 055). The highly significant estimate on   further shows that if a homeland is
surrounded exclusively by split groups then conflict duration further increases by 60%, as compared to
homelands where none of the adjacent groups is split.


       Example Senegal oﬀers an illustration of our results. ACLED records 565 events across its 12
ethnic homelands. In the isolated Casamance region in the South, where the Diolas/Jolas (a major group
of half a million people) and the Banyun (a smaller group of approximately 10 000 people) are partitioned
by the colonial border between France and Portugal, we observe 154 and 85 events, respectively.27 This is
  26
     The mean (median) of fatalities is 317 (3) with a standard deviation of 3 307. This is because of few extreme outliers.
The threshold for the top 1% percentile is 435 and the maximum value is 107 554. See Appendix Table 2.
  27
     The contemporary border follows the 1886 convention between Portuguese Guinea and (French) Senegal. The seeds of
the current conflict may be traced in early 1900, when the Diolas opposed the French, who fought the local resistance and
imprisoned King Sihalebe and other chiefs. Even during the colonial era, the Diolas were organizing their resistance at the
Portuguese side of the border (Tomas (2006)). Moreover, Casamance was ruled directly from French administrators till 1939,



                                                             19
425% of all events (63% if we exclude conflicts in the capital) though these two regions jointly correspond
to 112% of Senegal’s area and only 6% of the country’s population. Conflict severity is also high. In
these two homelands we observe 615% of the country’s 182 deadly events and 74% of the country’s 1 210
fatalities. The overwhelming majority of these events involve government troops (129 events) and/or rebels
(114 in the homeland of the Diola and 63 in the Banyun territory). And in both ethnic areas we observe
conflict for 16 out of the 17 years between 1997 − 2013, much longer than in all other ethnic regions (with
the exception of the capital, the mean is 5).
       In the Supplementary Appendix we discuss extensively two more case studies where partitioning has
played a prominent role, namely, conflict in Eastern Congo and in Eastern Africa, where the Somalis are
split across five countries.

4.5    Ethnic Partitioning and Type of Conflict

In Table 4 we take advantage of ACLED’s detailed conflict classification to distinguish between battles,
violence against civilians, and riots and protests. Panel  reports NB-ML estimates and Panel  shows
linear probability models with country constants.


       Battles Examples of battles include the fights of the Lord’s Resistance Army, the Sudanese People’s
Liberation Army, and Uganda’s People Defence Force; and the fighting between the Rwandan forces against
Hutu rebels in Rwanda and Eastern Congo. Battles result often (on average 47%) in fatalities; for example,
ACLED describes that in a single event in September 1999 the Ugandan army killed 42 Pian warriors from
the Karamojong group that is split between Uganda, Sudan, and Kenya. The specifications in (1) and (4)
show that (compared to non-split ethnicities) partitioned groups experience 55% − 60% ((045) − 1 =
057) more battles between government forces and militias/rebels. The LPM coeﬃcient on   is also
positive and significant implying that battles are 9% more likely to take place in the historical homelands
of partitioned ethnicities.   also enters with a positive (though noisy) estimate, suggesting the weak
presence of spatial externalities.


       Violence Against Civilians A useful feature of the ACLED is the reporting of violence against
the civilian population, a socially and economically devastating aspect of conflict that the commonly-
employed civil war datasets leave unaccounted. Approximately 20% of violence against civilians is per-
petrated by government troops, 20% from rebel groups with the remaining events coming from militias.
Examples include the raids of the Janjaweed against civilians in Darfur and the assaults of the Central
Intelligence Organization in Zimbabwe. Violent events include the burning of churches, hostage-taking and
child-soldiering raids by rebels in Nigeria and in Sierra Leone. Going over the event narratives reveals that
they are often devastating (43% of these events result in at least in one fatality). For example, in a single
when its administration was transferred to Dakar.



                                                     20
event in Eastern Congo in May 1997 "ADLF rebels moved in and took control of Mbandaka slaughtering
200 Rwandan Hutu refugees". The NB-ML estimate in the full sample (in (2)) implies that there are 55%
((043) − 1 = 054) more violent events against civilians in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. Re-
stricting estimation to ethnic regions close to the national border (in (5)) yields somewhat larger estimates
(although the diﬀerence is not statistically significant). The LPM estimate on   is 0052 and 0065
in the full and the border sample, respectively. While the coeﬃcient is insignificant (-stat around 15), it
implies that the likelihood of violence against the civilian population is approximately 5% − 6% higher in
the homeland of split ethnicities. The LPM reveals sizable spillovers. The coeﬃcient on   is 018 and
significant at the 1% level; a one standard deviation (034) increase in the share of adjacent groups within
the country increases the likelihood of one-sided violence by 65%.


      Riots and Protests In columns (3) and (6) we examine the link between ethnic partitioning and
riots and protests. Protests and riots are (relatively) non-violent events taking place usually in major
urban centers. Examples include the protests in South Africa during and after the Marikana miners’ strike
(in 2012), the protests in Zimbabwe during the periods of hyperinflation and food shortages (2005 − 2009),
and the Arab Spring events. Given the nature and usual location of these events, it is not surprising that
there is no association with ethnic partitioning.

4.6   Sensitivity Checks

We performed numerous sensitivity checks that for brevity we report and discuss in the on-line Supple-
mentary Appendix. Specifically: (1) As the number of conflict events recorded in the ACLED increases
considerably in 2011, 2012 and 2013, we repeat estimation focusing on the period 1997 − 2010. (2) We
estimate the specifications with the conditional negative binomial model of Hausman, Hall, and Griliches
(1984) that parameterizes the over-dispersion parameter rather than the mean. (3) To further account
for outliers we drop the top 5% of the dependent variable and estimated country-fixed-eﬀects Poisson ML
models as in this case the mean-variance equality approximately holds and Poisson models have good
small-sample properties. (4) We do not account for spillovers. (5) We reclassify groups into split and
non-split using a 5% land-area threshold. (6) We augment the specification with a 3rd (or a 4th) order
polynomial in distance to the border to further account for unobserved factors that vary smoothly by
border proximity. (7) We include ethnic-family fixed eﬀects (on top of country fixed eﬀects) to account
for local conditions and broad cultural, institutional, and other hard-to-observe ethnic-family factors. (8)
To account for diﬀerent colonial and post-independence policies we drop iteratively homelands from each
of the five main African regions. (9) We estimate formal spatial models that account for spillovers. (10)
We account for conflict spillovers from regions in the same country and the same ethnolinguistic family.
(11) We control for the historical legacy of violence from the pre-colonial period. (12) We condition on
regional income (overall there is a small and usually insignificant eﬀect of partitioning on proxies of regional


                                                      21
income). Across all these permutations the coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index retains its economic
and statistical significance. And most specifications reveal sizable spillovers of ethnic partitioning.

4.7       Heterogeneous Eﬀects

We searched for potential heterogeneous eﬀects of ethnic partitioning. In particular, we explored whether
the coeﬃcient on partitioning varies by ethnic features related to: (1) the group’s population share in the
country; (2) the population of a group’s co-ethnics on the other side of the border; (3) the share of adjacent
groups that belong to the same ethnic family; (4) the share of groups in the country that belong to the
same ethnic family; (5) the share of partitioned groups among neighboring ethnicities; (6) whether the
bilateral border intersecting split groups is straight or wiggly; (7) whether a group is split within the same
colonizer or between diﬀerent colonizers, and (8) the number of countries a split group belongs to. The
analysis (reported in Section 41 of the Supplementary Appendix) does not reveal much heterogeneity. We
also examined whether the impact of partitioning depends on level of country’s ethnic, linguistic, religious
diversity, country size and geographic position. Besides some weak evidence that partitioning is particularly
harmful for ethnicities in landlocked countries, its eﬀect on conflict is quite homogeneous.


5        Further Evidence. Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict by Key Actors
In this Section we utilize ACLED’s grouping of events by conflict actors to shed on the parties involved
in violence. We then complement the analysis using georeferenced data on civil wars using an alternative
conflict database (UCDP GED).

5.1       ACLED
5.1.1      Data

ACLED categorizes events by main conflict actors, namely: (1) government forces; (2) rebel groups,
"defined as political organizations whose goal is to counter an established national governing regime by
violent acts. Rebel groups have a stated political agenda for national power, are acknowledged beyond
the ranks of immediate members, and use violence as their primary means to pursue political goals"; (3)
political and (4) ethnic militias, groups that "are not subsumed within the category of government or
opposition, but are noted as an armed associated wing"; (5) riots and (6) protests, defined "as violent and
non-violent spontaneous groupings (respectively)"; (7) violence against civilians; and (8) outside/external
forces.
         We merge rebels and militias (since there is some degree of arbitrariness distinguishing between the
two)28 ; and we distinguish foreign interventions from international peace-keeping forces (United Nations
or African Union) and from government troops of neighboring countries. If neighboring countries intervene
    28
    ACLED notes, "militias are more diﬃcult to assess since they can be created for a specific purpose or during a specific time
period (i.e., Janjaweed) and may be associated with an ethnic group, but not entirely represent it (i.e., Kenyan Luo militias)."


                                                              22
to assist their co-ethnics across the border, we would expect a significant link between ethnic partitioning
and military interventions from adjacent countries. In contrast, there is no reason to expect other types
of foreign interventions (from the UN, AU, or NATO) to be related to ethnic partitioning.

5.1.2     Results

Table 5 reports NB-ML (in Panel ) and linear probability model (in Panel ) estimates linking conflict
by each actor to ethnic partitioning.29
        Government Forces. The specifications in (1) and (5) reveal a strong link between partitioning
and conflict where government forces are involved. The NB estimates in the full sample imply that there
are 70% more conflicts involving state troops whereas the LPM suggests that the likelihood of such conflict
is 11% − 125% higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. The LPM specifications indicate sizable
externalities of ethnic partitioning; a one standard deviation (034) increase in the share of adjacent groups
that are split increases the likelihood of state-driven violence by 45% − 65%.
        Rebels and Militias. There is a significant association between ethnic partitioning and conflict
where rebels and militias participate (columns (2) and (6)). The LPM suggests that the probability
of conflict involving rebel groups is approximately 65% − 85% higher in the homelands of partitioned
ethnicities. Since ACLED classifies as rebel groups those that explicitly challenge national authority via
violent means, these results show that the partitioning - conflict link operates (to some extent) via groups
challenging the central government. In line with this interpretation when we separately focus on rebels
and militias, we find a stronger eﬀect of partitioning for conflict of rebel groups as compared to militias
(results not shown).30
        Interventions from Neighboring Countries.                        In columns (3) and (7) we examine whether
interventions from neighboring countries are related to ethnic partitioning. This is a key conjecture of the
African historiography linking the Scramble for Africa with political violence. While we do report NB-ML
specifications (where   enters with a highly significant coeﬃcient), we focus on the LPM estimates,
as the dependent variable is highly skewed. Overall 269 country-ethnic homelands (222%) experienced an
incursion from a neighboring country. Examples include the interventions of Ugandan and Rwandan troops
in DRC, the fighting of Military Forces of Kenya against rebels in Southern Somalia, and the interventions of
the military forces of Chad in Mali and the Central African Republic. The estimates imply that there is a 7%
increased likelihood of a military intervention from a neighboring country in the homelands of split groups.
A simple test of means illustrates the regression estimates. In the border sample (606 observations) that
consists of 416 partitioned and 190 non-split ethnic homelands, interventions from neighboring countries
have taken place in 113 regions (19%). 94 of these homelands (83%) are partitioned, while overall 69% of
  29
      Since we have already reported specifications with riots and protests and violence against civilians (in Table 4), for brevity
we do not repeat them in Table 5.
   30
      In the full sample the NB-ML (linear probability model) estimate with rebels only is 088 (0087), while for militias only
it is 023 (0056). Moreover, events featuring rebels are quite deadly, especially when fighting against government troops.



                                                                23
ethnic homelands are split. Not only the likelihood but also the frequency of interventions from government
forces of nearby countries is higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. In the border sample, we
observe 708 interventions from nearby countries in the homelands of split groups, as compared to just 100
interventions in the homelands of non-split groups. Perhaps indicative of the highly targeted nature of
military aggressions from neighboring states is the absence of spatial externalities associated with it.
        Interventions by International Forces. ACLED also reports conflict associated with interna-
tional, usually peace-keeping forces, such as the United Nations/African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group and United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, Liberia, and Guinea at the end of the civil war, and the military interventions of NATO in Libya.
We examined whether ethnic partitioning correlates with such type of outside interventions —that we use
as a "placebo" as a priori these interventions should not be associated with partitioning. We focus again
on the LPM estimates as the variable is highly skewed. The coeﬃcient on   is small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero.

5.2     UCDP GED
5.2.1    Data

To shed further light on the link between ethnic partitioning and conflict we used data from the Uppsala
Conflict Data Program Georeferenced Events Dataset (UCDP GED) that covers the period 1989 − 2010
(Sundberg, Lindgren, and Padskocimaite (2010), Sundberg and Melander (2013)). The UCDP focuses on
deadly incidents associated with civil wars, as identified by the UCDP-PRIO Armed Conflict Database.
UCDP conflicts are grouped into three mutually exclusive categories.
        (1) State-based armed conflict is defined as a "contested incompatibility that concerns government
and/or territory where the use of armed force between two parties, of which at least one is the government
of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in one calendar year ”. Examples of state-based conflict
where ethnic partitioning has played a role include the fights between the Ethiopian government and Somali
rebels in the Ogaden region and the fighting between the Tuareg rebels and government troops in Mali
and Niger. In total there are 7 512 state-conflict events.
        (2) One-sided violence defined as the "use of armed force by the government of a state or by a formally
organized group against civilians which results in at least 25 deaths in a year ". Examples include the public
killings and executions against civilians carried in Angola by both government troops and UNITA (mostly
during 1997 − 2003); and ethnic-based violence during the transition to democracy in Congo (1997 − 1999).
In total there are 5 219 such events.
        (3) Non-state conflict "between two organized armed groups, neither of which is the government of
a state, which results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year." Examples include conflict between the
various factions of the African National Congress (ANC) and between the ANC and other anti-apartheid
movements during the democratic transition in South Africa; and conflict between militias in Kenya’s Rift


                                                       24
Valley. In total UCDP includes 3 645 events, though 60% of these incidents are from South Africa during
the democratic transition. Amodio and Chiovelli (2014) analyze political violence in South Africa during
the democratic transition using UCDP non-state conflict data.
        Appendix Figures 4 and 5 − 5 portray the distribution of conflict events across ethnic homelands
according to UCDP-GED, while Appendix Table 6 gives the number of each type of conflict by country.

5.2.2    Results

Table 6 reports the results linking each type of civil conflict to ethnic partitioning. Appendix Table 9
reports tests of means and medians across ethnic homelands.
        State-driven conflict. In Panel  we associate state conflict to ethnic partitioning. The NB
estimate in (1) implies that state conflict intensity is 65% higher in the homelands of split ethnicities
((050) − 1 = 065). So, this estimate is quite similar to the one obtained with ACLED’s data on
conflict involving government troops. The correlation between state-driven conflict in UCDP and battles in
ACLED is 072. The coeﬃcient on   retains significance when we restrict estimation to border areas
in column (4). Columns (2) and (5) give LPM estimates. The likelihood of state-driven conflict is 5% − 8%
higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities. Columns (3) and (6) report NB estimates (specification
tests reject the mean - variance equality) focusing on the duration (in years) of state-driven conflict.  
enters with a significant coeﬃcient in both samples; the duration of state conflict is approximately 75%
higher for partitioned ethnic groups. Across all specifications   enters with a positive coeﬃcient that
is significant in the full sample. We also estimated NB-ML models linking fatalities from state conflict to
ethnic partitioning (results not shown). While the casualty estimates are highly skewed, there is a strong
link between partitioning and the number of fatalities. The coeﬃcients (s.e.) on   and   in the
full sample are 078 (035) and 174 (070), respectively, implying large eﬀects.
        One-sided violence. Panel  focuses on one-sided violence. The coeﬃcient on   is positive
both in the NB specifications with the number of incidents ((1) and (4)) and duration ((3) and (6)) and
the LPM specifications (in (2) and (5)). Yet the estimates do not pass the standard significance thresholds.
The same applies to the coeﬃcient on the spillover measure ( ). The results are similar with fatalities
(results not shown).   and   enter with positive though weakly insignificant coeﬃcients (-stats
around 14). Overall, the UCDP GED data point out that there is a weak link between ethnic partitioning
and one-sided violence. The key diﬀerence with ACLED -where ethnic partitioning appears to have a
somewhat stronger impact on civilian violence- is that UCDP covers way fewer events, as it records events
where conflict actors can be succinctly identified and linked to a major war. ACLED reports events that
are not part of a full-scale civil war and/or incidents where the perpetrators are not clearly identified.
This diﬀerence in coverage explains the modest correlation (043) between the ACLED-based and UCDP
GED-based measures.
        Non-State Conflict. In Panel  we look at non-state-driven conflict. Across all permutations


                                                      25
the ethnic partitioning index enters with a small, unstable, and statistically insignificant coeﬃcient. This
should not be surprising as the non-state conflict events predominantly reflect violence in South Africa
after the fall of the apartheid (that is clearly unrelated to ethnic partitioning) and other low-intensity
communal violence mostly between pastoral groups over livestock and land.31
         Example. The UCDP GED mapping of conflict in Casamance in Southern Senegal illustrates the
results. 36 and 45 from a total of 91 events of state-driven conflict have taken place in the homelands of
the partitioned Banyun and the Diola, respectively. Those events have resulted in 322 and 427 fatalities,
out of a total of 827 deaths from state-driven conflict in Senegal (90%). Looking at one-sided violence
yields a similar picture. There have been 79 violent events against civilians resulting into 243 fatalities
in Casamance whereas one-sided violence in Senegal outside these two groups is minimal (15 events).
The UCDP documentation states that all these events involved either state conflict against the MFDC or
one-sided civilian violence conducted by MFDC rebels.

5.2.3     Summary

Both the ACLED and UCDP analysis shows that ethnic partitioning matters crucially for two-sided political
violence where government troops fight against rebels and militias. The analysis further shows that there
is a weaker link between ethnic partitioning and one-sided violence; and no association with conflict where
only non-state actors are involved.32 This ordering is in line with the theoretical work of Besley and
Persson (2011a), who argue that when the opportunity cost of conflict is low and political institutions are
non-cohesive, then political violence takes more often the form of two-sided violence (civil war) rather than
one-sided violence (repression). Below we examine this issue in greater detail.


6        Partitioning and Ethnic Power Relations
6.1      Motivation and Data

Political violence is multifaceted; so far we have focused on the instances that materialize into conflict.
However, a growing empirical literature in African political economy provides compelling evidence that
national politics are characterized by ethnic favoritism, patronage, and discrimination (Posner (2005));
Asiwaju (1985) discusses case studies pointing out that split groups not only participate in state-driven
conflict, but also become targets of abusive policies. We thus examine the impact of ethnic partitioning on
various forms of political violence using data from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) dataset (Wimmer,
Cederman, and Min (2009)).
    31
      Non-state conflict is weakly correlated with the other conflict aspects both in UCDP and ACLED (correlations around
015). See Appendix Table 7.
   32
      Arguably conflict incidents are not perfectly measured by either ACLED or UCDP. To account for error-in-variables in
the Supplementary Appendix we combine the two datasets to obtain a more precise picture on the presence of conflict. The
link between ethnic partitioning and civil conflict is quite strong.




                                                           26
       EPR focuses on politically relevant ethnic groups and relies on expert input to assess formal and
informal degrees of political participation and exclusion along ethnic lines. An ethnic group is classified
as politically relevant "if at least one significant political actor claims to represent the interests of that
group in the national political arena, or if members of an ethnic entity are systematically and intentionally
discriminated against in the domain of public politics." EPR provides information on 758 politically relevant
ethnic groups in 134 states around the world. The coverage for Africa spans 40 countries and 196 groups.
Using a multitude of sources, we linked the 196 EPR groups to 593 ethnicities on Murdock’s (1959) map.33
Among the 593 ethnicities 234 (395%) are partitioned and 359 (605%) are non-split. EPR provides ethnic-
specific information on political representation (or exclusion) in the national government. Participation
in the governing coalition may take the following forms (in ascending order) from junior to senior to
dominant partner, to being the monopolist in the national politics. Among groups excluded from the
central government there are three mutually exclusive categories: those enjoying some regional autonomy;
those that are powerless but are not discriminated against; and ethnicities that face active discrimination
from the central government. EPR also identifies civil wars with an explicit ethnic angle.

6.2    Ethnic Wars

We start by exploring the link between partitioning and civil wars that have an ethnic dimension. Using
ethnic wars as the outcome of interest has several advantages. First, we look at major breakouts of
violence. The coding of civil wars is based on the widely-used UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflicts Data Set
(Petter, Wallensteen, Eriksson, Sollenberg, and Strand (2002)). From this dataset, EPR identifies ethnic
wars as those that "typically involve conflicts over ethno-national self-determination, the ethnic balance
of power in the government, ethno-regional autonomy, ethnic or racial discrimination (whether alleged
or real), and language and other cultural rights." Second, instead of relying on the incidence of conflict
in a given location, we directly assess whether members of partitioned groups have participated in an
ethnic war irrespective of the location of actual violence. By doing so, we account for the imprecision
in the anthropological maps and the georeferenced conflict data. Third, EPR has a long time horizon
covering the entire post-independence period. Fourth, by looking at politically relevant groups, we check
the robustness of our findings to focusing on ethnicities with a presence in the national political sphere.
       A simple tabulation reveals the stark disparities with respect to civil war participation between split
and non-split groups. On the one hand, 72 out of the 234 partitioned ethnicities (31%) have taken part
in an ethnic war. On the other hand, only 19% (69 out of the 359 non-split groups) have participated
  33
    Such sources include the Joshua Project, the Ethnologue dataset and the A-MAR project. In several instances the matching
procedure is straightforward. For example, the "San (Bushmen, Basarwa)" group in Namibia in the EPR is linked to the
"Bushmen and their kin" cluster in Murdock (1959). In other instances, the matching is less straightforward. For example,
in Nigeria EPR blends the "Hausa-Fulani and Muslim Middle Belt" in a single category. In this case we used the A-MAR
correspondence (Wilkenfeld, Brancati, Fearon, Gurr, Laitin, Pate, and Saideman (2014)). We also used the georeferenced
version of EPR so as to identify the corresponding location of groups on Murdock’s map. This method is the least satisfactory
and, hence, was only used for roughly 10% of cases. Results are unaﬀected if such matches are excluded.



                                                             27
in an ethnic war. Examples of split groups that have been involved in ethnic wars include the Afar in
North-East Ethiopia, that have also faced large-scale discrimination and marginalization policies by the
central government for many years. For example, in 1975 the Dergue administration nationalized all land
and annulled the de facto autonomy of the Afar leading to a secessionist rebellion (Vaughan (2003)).
         In columns (1)-(4) of Table 7 we formally assess the impact of ethnic partitioning on ethnic-war
incidence. Column (1) tests for cross-sectional mean diﬀerences in the likelihood of ethnic wars between
split and non-split groups. In column (2) we add country fixed eﬀects, while in (3) and (4) we account for
diﬀerences across groups in terms of population in 1960, land area, and the presence of water bodies (river
or lake), location and geography. The pattern is robust. The estimate in the specification with the rich set
of controls suggests that partitioned groups have roughly an 11% increased likelihood of participating in
an ethnic war, as compared to non-split groups. This magnitude is similar to the LPM estimate focusing
on conflict where government forces are involved using the ACLED (011, column (1), Panel B of Table
5). In line with the baseline coeﬃcients (in Tables 3 − 5) ,the EPR-based estimates also reveal sizeable
externalities. The coeﬃcient on   suggests that a one-standard-deviation increase (025) in the share
of adjacent partitioned groups increases the probability of involvement in an ethnic war by roughly 7%,
contributing significantly to the eruption of ethnically-tainted large-scale violence.

6.3      Ethnic Discrimination

We now turn our focus on repression using the EPR’s information on ethnic discrimination, defined as:
"group members are subject to active, intentional, and targeted discrimination with the intent of excluding
them from both regional and national power. Such active discrimination can be either formal or informal.
Formal discrimination legally limits access to government positions to citizens who speak a certain mother
tongue, display certain phenotypic features, or are members of certain religious groups. Informal discrimi-
nation actively and intentionally inhibits individuals with certain ethnic backgrounds from rising within the
ranks of government."
         During the post-independence period, 110 (out of 593) groups have being discriminated by the
national government at some point (185%).34 This average masks considerable diﬀerences between parti-
tioned and non-split ethnicities. 58 of the 234 split groups have been subject to political discrimination by
the government (25%), while the likelihood of discrimination for non-split groups is ten percentage points
lower, 15%, as 52 of the 359 non-split groups faced discrimination. Examples of discriminated partitioned
groups include the Bushmen (San/Basarwa) in Botswana that have faced restrictions on residence, lim-
ited access to the civil service and no recognition of their traditional chiefs. Another example is that of
the Karamojong in Uganda, a group split along the Kenyan-Ugandan border that has suﬀered from land
confiscation, abuses, and raids by government forces (MercyCorps (2011)).
         Table 7, columns (5)-(8) report LPM estimates that explore the association between ethnic dis-
 34
      On average these 110 ethnicities have faced discrimination post-independence for 21 years.


                                                              28
crimination and partitioning. Column (5) reports the unconditional specification, while in column (6) we
include country-specific constants. The coeﬃcient of   is 0078 and highly significant. Controlling
for group size in terms of (log) land area and (log) population in 1960 and the rich array of location and
geographic traits does not alter the economic or statistical significance of the estimate. The likelihood
of discrimination is approximately 72% for partitioned, as compared to non-split, groups.   enters
with a small and statistically indistinguishable from zero coeﬃcient. Perhaps not surprisingly there are no
spatial externalities on political discrimination from partitioning.

6.4   Political Violence (Repression and Civil Wars)

So far, we have analyzed the relationship between partitioning and two forms of political violence, ethnic
wars and ethnic discrimination, without attempting to disentangle which form of political violence comes
first. The case of the Diolas in Senegal discussed above suggests that discrimination may precede conflict,
but other cases such as that of the Somalis in Northern Kenya covered in Section 8 of the Online Appendix
indicate that the reverse is not uncommon. Moreover, Besley and Persson (2011a) criticize theoretical
and empirical works on civil war and repression for having moved in parallel and stress the importance
of studying these aspects of political violence jointly, since they have common roots and are naturally
interrelated. Besley and Persson (2011a) develop a model where groups compete for the control of central
government whose resources can either be used for group-specific consumption or for public goods invest-
ments. Their model that allows both for one-sided (repression) and two-sided violence (civil war) links
group-level opportunity cost of fighting and nationwide resource rents to an ordered measure of political
violence when institutions are non-cohesive. Following their approach we examined the impact of ethnic
partitioning on a trichotomous index of political violence that equals two if the group has ever engaged in
an ethnic war, one when the group has been subject to ethnic discrimination from the central government
but not in a civil war, and zero when the group has neither been discriminated against nor involved in an
ethnic war.
      The descriptive statistics are telling. Among partitioned groups 72 out of the 234 (308%) have en-
gaged in an ethnic war, while 22 (940%) have suﬀered from ethnic discrimination only. The corresponding
likelihoods of civil war and political repression for non-split groups are 192% (69 groups out of 359) and
67% (24 ethnicities), respectively. Table 7, columns (9)-(12) report ordered logit ML estimates associating
the trichotomous index of political violence to ethnic partitioning. To avoid the incidental parameters
problem, in columns (9) and (10) we replace the country dummies with regional constants; in columns (11)
and (12) we follow Besley and Persson (2011a) and implement the fixed-eﬀects logit estimator of Ferrer-
i-Carbonell and Fritjetrs (2004). In all specifications the ethnic partitioning index enters with a highly
significant coeﬃcient. As logit coeﬃcients are not easily interpretable, we compared the model predictions
for the likelihood of each outcome (0 = peace, 1 = repression, 2 = ethnic war) for split and non-partitioned
ethnicities. The estimates in (9)-(10) imply that the likelihood of civil war increases from 195% to 315%


                                                     29
for partitioned ethnicities, while the likelihood that an ethnicity will experience political discrimination is
7% for non-split groups and 9% for partitioned ones. These estimates, that take into account various ethnic
characteristics and regional heterogeneity, are close to the simple tabulations, showing that unobservables
are unlikely to matter much.
      So, ethnic partitioning is more strongly associated with ethnic wars compared to repression. This
result is in line with Besley and Persson (2011a) theoretical argument that in weakly institutionalized
countries, a low opportunity cost of fighting translates more often into two-sided violence. In our context
this is driven by two empirical regularities. First, political violence in Africa overall takes more often
the form of two-sided violence, rather than repression (24% versus 185%); second, when a group faces
discrimination from the national government, it is also more likely to engage in an ethnic war (out of the
110 groups that have ever been discriminated against, 64 have also participated in an ethnic war), i.e.,
one-sided violence often escalates into full-fledged conflict.
      In the Supplementary Appendix we provide additional sensitivity checks, showing that the ethnic
partitioning- discrimination-ethnic war link is present when: (1) we classify a group as split if at least 5%
of its homeland falls into more than one country; (2) we drop iteratively each African region; and (3) we
estimate alternative linear and non-linear models with the ordered index of political violence.

6.5   Further Evidence

We should stress here that the disproportionate incidence of ethnic wars and political discrimination among
split groups does not imply that the latter are never part of the central government. For example, the
Yakoma in Central African Republic, the Oroma and the Tigray in Ethiopia, and the Alur, the Madi
and the Lugbara in Uganda although they have been subject to discrimination and have participated in
ethnic wars, they also seem to have taken part in some capacity (either as junior or senior partners) in the
various government coalitions over time. This result echoes Francois, Rainer, and Trebbi (2015) finding
that groups’ participation in the government is widespread. Empirically, this oscillation of split groups
between a state of conflict and discrimination at some point and members of governing alliances at other
instances translates into an insignificant relationship between partitioning and the probability of a group
having ever been a partner in the central government.
      Moreover, this nuanced political status of split groups suggests that the vicious cycle of discrimination
and conflict in which they are often embroiled, comes into play primarily when excluded from the governing
coalition. We checked the empirical validity of this conjecture exploiting the time-series information of
group’s political status from the EPR. Specifically, we run year-country-ethnicity regressions with country
and year fixed eﬀects associating the onset of ethnic wars in period  with ethnic partitioning separately
for groups that have been excluded from political power in any of the past three (or five) years and those
that have been included in the national power-sharing coalition during the same time. The estimates
reported in the Supplementary Appendix imply that the likelihood of ethnic war onset is 06% higher for


                                                       30
partitioned as compared to non-split groups, when ethnicities are excluded from national power. This eﬀect
is considerable, as the yearly likelihood of war onset across the 593 groups during post independence is 07%.
In contrast, the diﬀerence in the likelihood of civil war between split and non-split ethnicities when they
take part in the central government is much smaller (015%).35 These findings show that the link between
exclusion from political power and ethnic-based civil wars, documented by Cederman, Wimmer, and Min
(2010), disproportionately aﬀects split groups. The rationale is straightforward. Partitioned ethnicities
have a lower cost of engaging in armed rebellions against the government, as they can get assistance from
their co-ethnics on the other side of the border; hence split groups are more likely to react violently against
their marginalization and exclusion from the central government.


7        Ethnic Partitioning and Individual Well-Being
Our evidence suggests that partitioned ethnic groups are more likely to engage in conflict (predominantly
against the government), to experience violence against their civilian population and to suﬀer from repres-
sion. To further understand how the ethnic partitioning - political violence link operates, in this Section
we employ micro-level data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) to examine how individuals
of partitioned groups fare economically compared to citizens from non-split groups in the same country.
Exploiting individual-level variation has some straightforward advantages. First, we can directly assess
whether individuals identifying with split groups under-perform compared to those from non-split ethnic-
ities using direct measures of well-being and self-reported ethnic aﬃliation. Second, we can account for
a host of individual level characteristics, so as to better isolate the impact of ethnic partitioning. Third,
since we observe people residing within and outside their group’s historical homeland, we can evaluate
whether ethnic partitioning has negative repercussions irrespective of respondents’ residence or whether
the negative eﬀects are concentrated among individuals residing in partitioned homelands.

7.1      Data and Specification

The Demographic and Health Surveys are based on nationally representative samples and include infor-
mation on households’ wealth, education, occupation, and health. We use all georeferenced surveys with
information on the respondents’ ethnic identity. Our sample comprises 20 countries and covers 88 171 male
respondents. We focus on two outcome variables. First, we use household’s composite wealth index that
ranges from 1 to 5 and corresponds to the quintiles of the distribution of household wealth in each country.
This index reflects access to basic public goods (electricity, sewage system, piped water) and ownership of
    35
    We also pooled all ethnicities across all years and interacted the ethnic partitioning index with an indicator that equals
one in period  when a group has been excluded for at least one year from the central government in any of the previous
three (or five) years. The interaction term between exclusion from the governing coalition and ethnic partitioning enters with
a positive and highly significant estimate (05%), implying that the likelihood of civil war onset increases considerably for
partitioned ethnicities when they are politically excluded. A similar pattern obtains in the cross-section. See in the Online
Appendix the discussion in Section 52 and the corresponding Tables 34 and 34.



                                                             31
various assets. Second, we use years of schooling.
       Our empirical specification reads:
                                                                    0          0
                                 =  +   +  Φ +  Γ +                                  (2)

       The dependent variable,  , reflects economic conditions and education of individual  that self-
                                                                                                                        0
identifies with ethnic group  and resides in enumeration area (village/town/city)  in country .  is
a vector of individual characteristics; in most specifications we include a set of 62 year-of-birth dummies,
                                                                                   0
a set of 6 marital-status fixed eﬀects, and 7 religion fixed eﬀects.  includes location controls (at the
enumeration area). We also include a dummy variable that identifies respondents residing outside their
ethnicity’s ancestral homeland. All specifications include country-specific constants,  , that among others,
capture survey diﬀerences across countries.   , the variable of interest, is an indicator that takes on
the value of one if individual  identifies with an ethnicity,  that has been partitioned across diﬀerent
countries. Overall 38 887 individuals come from partitioned ethnicities (44%) while 49 284 individuals
(56%) identify with non-split ones. To account for spatial correlation and the fact that the split indicator
takes on the same value for individuals belonging to the same group, we cluster standard errors at the
ethnic identity and ethnic homeland level.

7.2    Baseline Estimates

Table 8 columns (1)-(6) report the baseline estimates linking the composite wealth index to ethnic par-
titioning. The coeﬃcient on the partitioning index in (1), that only includes a set of country-specific
constants and an indicator reflecting whether the individual currently resides outside his ancestral home-
land, is negative and highly significant. Individuals who identify with split ethnicities have on average
lower access to public goods and worse living conditions. In column (2) we add a vector of location con-
trols, namely distance terms to the national border, the capital, and the coast. To adequately capture the
capital city eﬀect we also include an indicator for enumeration areas, whose distance to the capital is less
than the 25th percentile.36 The coeﬃcient drops, but retains significance at standard confidence levels. In
column (3) we account for individual characteristics. The estimate implies that respondents identifying
with split ethnicities have roughly 020 points of lower wealth as compared to individuals from non-split
ethnicities in the same country; this translates into a standardized beta coeﬃcient of 007, which is half of
the beta coeﬃcient on the capital city indicator. So the impact of identifying with a split group is half of
residing in the capital city. In columns (4)-(6) we focus on enumeration areas close to the border, using as
a cutoﬀ the median distance (80 kilometers). In all specifications the coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning
index is negative and significant at 1% level and similar to the analogous estimates in the full sample. In
columns (7)-(12) years of schooling serves as the dependent variable. The estimates imply that -conditional
  36
    The coeﬃcients on distance to the capital and distance to the sea are negative and significant; the coeﬃcient on distance
to the border is positive and (marginally) significant. The dummy on the capital city indicator is also positive and significant.



                                                               32
on location and various individual characteristics- individuals from partitioned ethnicities have on average
04 more years of formal education. The beta coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index is around 0052,
implying an economic eﬀect moderately smaller to that of residing in capitals (the beta coeﬃcient on the
capital city dummy is 0076).

7.3    Ethnic Identity and Ethnic Homelands

So far, we have two main findings. First, political violence is more frequent in the homelands of split
ethnicities. Second, the scars of ethnic partitioning can be traced in the livelihoods of members of parti-
tioned groups. Weaving these two observations together, begets the question whether ethnic partitioning
depressed standards of living for everybody currently residing in split homelands (i.e., residents of split
homelands are worse oﬀ irrespective of their ethnic aﬃliation) or whether it is the individuals belonging to
split ethnicities that experience disproportionately lower standards of living irrespective of their place of
residence. The narrative in African studies and the EPR-based analysis suggests that it is the latter that
is going on. To shed light on this, we augment the baseline specification with a location-based indicator of
ethnic partitioning that takes on the value of one for individuals residing in the homeland of partitioned
ethnicities. Doing so allows us to disentangle the importance of ethnically identifying with a split group
from that of residing in the homeland of a partitioned ethnicity. Note that for individuals residing in their
ancestral homelands these two indexes (identity-based and location-based) coincide.37
       Table 9 reports the results. In column (1) the identity-based partitioning indicator enters negatively
and significantly, whereas the location-based index does not. The insignificance of the latter is driven by
the location controls; when we do not account for those both partitioning indicators enter with significantly
negative estimates. In column (2) we control for individual characteristics; the pattern remains unchanged.
In columns (3)-(4) we restrict estimation to areas close to the border. The coeﬃcient on the identity-based
partitioning index remains negative (−026); this suggests that even when we focus on the border and
control for numerous individual and location features, members of partitioned ethnicities have worse living
conditions as compared to those identifying with non-split groups. In columns (5) and (6) we introduce
an interaction term between the partitioned ethnic identity indicator and the partitioned ethnic location
indicator; this variable identifies individuals that reside in partitioned homelands and identify with split
groups. The interaction enters with an insignificant coeﬃcient suggesting that the negative impact of
partitioning is not diﬀerent for members of partitioned groups residing in split homelands. The pattern is
similar for schooling outcomes in columns (7)-(12). The identity-based measure of partitioning enters all
permutations with a significantly negative estimate, implying that individuals from partitioned ethnicities
have on average half a year less of schooling.
  37
     Out of 88 171 individuals, 25 631 (29%) self-identify with a split group and reside in split homelands; 36 694 (415%)
neither identify with a split group nor they reside in partitioned homelands; 13 256 (15%) reside in split homelands, but
identify with a non-split group; and 12 590 (145%) reside in non-split homelands but identify with split groups.




                                                             33
7.4   Sensitivity Checks and Further Evidence

In the Supplementary Appendix we further investigate the impact of ethnic partitioning on public goods.
First, we exploit within enumeration-area variation, so as to fully account for diﬀerences in location-specific,
time-invariant characteristics. While these specifications are quite restrictive (as the sample includes 7 898
villages/towns/cities), they reveal that members of split groups have systematically worse access to utilities
and are less educated than respondents from non-split groups residing in the same place.
      Second, to further account for unobserved diﬀerences between "movers" and "non-movers", we es-
timated the link between ethnic partitioning and economic performance separately for "non-movers" (re-
spondents currently residing within their group’s ancestral homeland) and "movers" (individuals living
outside their ethnicity’s historical homeland). And we further distinguished between "movers" residing in
non-partitioned ethnic homelands and "movers" in split homelands, other than their own ethnicity. The
pattern is fairly uniform. Respondents identifying with a split ethnicity register lower levels of wealth and
have fewer years of schooling irrespective of their location.
      Third, we examined the persistence of ethnic partitioning’s impact distinguishing between "old" and
"young" respondents. The negative impact of partitioning on individual outcomes does not diﬀer across
generations pointing to its ongoing importance.


8     Conclusion
We study the consequences of a neglected aspect of the colonization in Africa, the drawing of political
boundaries among European powers, which led to the partitioning of several ethnicities across African
states upon independence.
      In the first part of our paper we formally explore the nature of African political boundaries. Uti-
lizing information on the spatial distribution of ethnicities at the time of colonization, we associate ethnic
partitioning to various geographic, ecological, and natural resource measures and ethnic-specific proxies
of pre-colonial conflict and early development. With the exception of the size of the historical homeland,
there are no significant diﬀerences between partitioned and non-partitioned groups. Hence, our results
oﬀer support to the claim of the African historiography on the largely accidental drawing of the colonial
and, consequently, national borders, at least with respect to ethnic partitioning.
      Second, we examine the eﬀect of ethnic partitioning on civil conflict, as this has been conjectured to
be its major consequence. We exploit a new dataset that reports precisely geocoded information for 64 650
conflict events of various types over the period 1997 − 2013 for all African countries. Exploiting within-
country across-ethnic-homeland variation we uncover that political violence is prevalent in partitioned
homelands which experience deadly incidents over prolonged periods of violence.
      Third, we take advantage of the richness of the data to shed some light on the mechanisms at work.
We present evidence suggesting that neighboring countries use the homelands of partitioned groups to stage


                                                      34
military interventions. This suggests that ethnic partitioning is associated with a lower opportunity cost
of fighting, as neighboring countries often oﬀer military, political and economic support to their co-ethnics
on the other side of the border. We also find that ethnic partitioning is mostly associated with state-
driven conflict, where government troops (or state-backed militias) clash with rebels opposing the national
government. Ethnic partitioning is also linked to increased violence against the civilian population. In
contrast, there is no association between ethnic partitioning and conflict involving non-state actors, rioters
and protesters.
       Fourth, using data from the Ethnic Power Relations database that reports information on ethnic-
based discrimination from the national government and civil wars with an explicit ethnic angle for politically
relevant groups in 40 countries post independence, we examine in detail the ethnic partitioning - political
violence nexus. Partitioned ethnicities are significantly more likely to experience political discrimination
and are more likely to participate in ethnic-based civil wars. The impact of ethnic partitioning on conflict
is relatively stronger, as compared to its impact on one-sided political violence/discrimination and is
particularly salient in periods when split groups are excluded from the central government.
       Fifth, using micro-data from the Demographic and Health Surveys, covering more than 85 000
respondents in 20 African countries, we document that individuals identifying with partitioned groups
have fewer household assets, poorer access to public utilities, and lower education. This pattern is not
due to a generalized decline in standards of living of all households residing in split homelands; rather it
is driven by the poorer economic circumstances of members of split ethnicities irrespective of their actual
residence.
       Our work calls for future research examining the impact of ethnic partitioning on other aspects of
economic and institutional development and on the precise mechanisms via which the Scramble for Africa
has aﬀected long-run countrywide economic performance.38 And, since border artificiality and ethnic
partitioning are not an exclusive African phenomenon, subsequent works could study their eﬀect in other
world regions, such as the Middle East and the Caucasus.
  38
    For example, ethnic partitioning may oﬀer some economic benefit insomuch as ethnic networks facilitate cross-border
trade. As more bilateral border-specific trade data become available one may be able to quantify this dimension, see Aker,
Klein, O’Connell, and Yang (2010) for such evidence from the Niger—Nigeria border.




                                                           35
References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
  Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91(5), 1369—1401.

           (2002): “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World
  Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1231—1294.

           (2005): “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Handbook of Economic
  Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, pp. 109—139. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam, Nether-
  lands.

Acemoglu, D., T. Reed, and J. A. Robinson (2014): “Chiefs: Economic Development and Elite
  Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone,” Journal of Political Economy, 122(2), 319—368.

Aghion, P., J. V. Reenen, and L. Zingales (2013): “Innovation and Institutional Ownership,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 103(1), 277—304.

Aker, J. C., M. W. Klein, S. A. O’Connell, and M. Yang (2010): “Borders, Ethnicity and Trade,”
  Working Paper, NBER, No. 15960.

Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003): “Fraction-
  alization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 155—194.

Alesina, A., W. Easterly, and J. Matuszeski (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.

Allison, P. D., and R. P. Waterman (2002): “Fixed-Eﬀects Negative Binomial Regression Models,”
  Sociological Methodology, 32(1), 247—265.

Altonji, J., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
  Assessing the Eﬀectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151—184.

Amodio, F., and G. Chiovelli (2014): “Ethnicity, Migration and Conflict: Evidence from Contemporary
  South Africa,” mimeo, University of Bologna, Economics Department.

Asiwaju, A. (1985): “The Conceptual Framework,” in Partitioned Africans, pp. 1—18. St. Martin Press,
  New York.

Bates, R. H. (1981): States and Markets in Africa. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Berman, N., M. Couttenier, D. Rohner, and M. Thoenig (2014): “This Mine is Mine! How
  Minerals Fuel Conflicts in Africa,” working paper, Department of Economics, University of Lausanne.


                                                   36
Besley, T., and T. Persson (2011a): “The Logic of Political Violence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  126(3), 1411—1445.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2011b): Pillars of Prosperity. The Political Economics of Development
  Clusters. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Besley, T., and M. Reynal-Querol (2014): “The Legacy of Historical Conflicts. Evidence from Africa,”
  American Political Science Review, 108(2), 319—336.

Blattman, C., and E. Miguel (2010): “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(1), 3—57.

Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. V. Reenen (2013): “Identifying Technology Spillovers and
  Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81(4), 1347—1393.

Bosker, M., and J. de Ree (2014): “Ethnicity and the Spread of Civil War,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 108, 206—221.

Burgess, R., R. Jedwab, E. Miguel, A. Morjaria, and G. Padro-i-Miguel (2015): “The Value of
  Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya,” American Economic Review, 105(6), 1817—1851.

Cameron, A. C., and P. K. Trivedi (2013): Regression Analysis of Count Data Book, vol. Econometric
  Society Monograph No. 53. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2nd edition edn.

Cameron, C. A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2011): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way Clustering,”
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(2), 238—249.

Cederman, L.-E., A. Wimmer, and B. Min (2010): “Why do ethnic groups rebel? New data and
  analysis.,” World Politics, 62(1), 87—119.

Chandler, T. (1987): Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census. Edwin Mellon
  Press, Lewiston, NY.

Ciccone, A., and M. Jarocinski (2010): “Determinants of Economic Growth: Will Data Tell?,” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal Macroeconomics, 2(2), 222—246.

Collier, P. (2007): The Bottom Billion. Oxford Universiy Press, Oxfod, United Kingdom.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (2007): “Civil War,” in Handbook of Defense Economics, Volume 2,
  Defense in a Globalized World,, ed. by T. Sandler, and K. Hartley, pp. 711—740. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
  Netherlands.

Collier, P., and N. Sambanis (2005): Understanding Civil War. Volume 1: Africa. World Bank,
  Washington, DC.


                                                   37
Conley, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Econometrics,
  92(1), 1—45.

Depetris-Chauvin, E. (2014): “State History and Contemporary Conflict: Evidence from Sub-Saharan
  Africa,” mimeo, Brown University, Department of Economics.

Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín, and R. Wacziarg (2012): “The Political Economy of Ethnolinguistic
  Cleavages,” Journal of Development Economics, 97(2), 322—338.

Djankov, S., and M. Reynal-Querol (2010): “The Causes of Civil Wars,” mimeo UPF.

Dowden, R. (2008): Africa: Altered States, Ordinary Miracles. Portobello Books Ltd, London, UK.

Easterly, W., and R. Levine (1997): “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203—1250.

         (2015): “The European Origins of Economic Development,” revised draft of NBER Working
  Paper No. 18162.

Eck, K. (2012): “In Data We Trust? A Comparison of UCDP GED and ACLED Conflict Events,”
  Cooperation and Conflict, 47(1), 124—141.

Englebert, P. (2009): Africa, Unity, Sovereignty and Sorrow. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc., Boulder,
  Colorado.

Englebert, P., S. Tarango, and M. Carter (2002): “Dismemberment and Suﬀocation: A Contribu-
  tion to the Debate on African Boundaries,” Comparative Political Studies, 35(10), 1093—1118.

Esteban, J., L. Mayoral, and D. Ray (2012): “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,” American
  Economic Review, 102(4), 1310—1342.

Esteban, J., and D. Ray (2011): “A Model of Ethnic Conflict,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 9(3), 496—521.

Ethnologue (2005): Languages of the World, SIL International; Fifteenth edition.

Evans, M. (2004): “Senegal: Mouvement des Forces Democratiques de la Casamance (MFDC),” Chatman
  House Briefing Paper, Africa Programme AFP BP 04/02.

Fearon, J. D., and D. D. Laitin (2003): “Ethnicity, Insurgency and Civil War,” American Political
  Science Review, 97, 75—90.

        (2011): “Sons of the Soil, Migrants, and Civil War,” World Development, 39(2), 199—211.

        (2012): “How Persistent Is Armed Conflict?,” mimeo, Stanford University.

                                                  38
Fenske, J. (2013): “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?,” Economic Journal, 123(573),
  1363—1390.

           (2014): “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-colonial Africa,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 12(3), 612—640.

Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A., and P. Fritjetrs (2004): “How Important is Methodology for the Estimates
  of the Determinants of Happiness?,” Economic Journal, 114(2), 641—659.

Fisman, R., and E. Miguel (2007): “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from Diplo-
  matic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6), 1020—1048.

Franck, R., and I. Rainer (2012): “Does the Leader’s Ethnicity Matter? Ethnic Favoritism, Education
  and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa,” American Political Science Review, 106(2), 294—325.

Francois, P., I. Rainer, and F. Trebbi (2015): “How Is Power Shared In Africa?,” Econometrica,
  83(2), 465—503.

Fuchs-Schundeln, N., and T. A. Hassan (2015): “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics,” in Hand-
  book of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and H. Uhlig, vol. 2.

Gennaioli, N., and I. Rainer (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality in Africa,”
  in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and K. Konrad. MIT Press.

           (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 12(3), 185—234.

Greene, W. H. (2005): Econometric Analysis. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, fourth edition edn.

Guimaraes, P. (2008): “The Fixed Eﬀects Negative Binomial Model Revisited,” Economic Letters, 99(1),
  63—66.

Harari, M., and E. La Ferrara (2014): “Conflict, Climate and Cells: A Disaggregated Analysis,”
  mimeo MIT and Bocconi University.

Hausman, J., B. H. Hall, and Z. Griliches (1984): “Econometric Models for Count Data with an
  Application to the Patents-RD Relationship,” Econometrica, 52(4), 909—938.

Hegre, H., and N. Sambanis (2006): “Sensitivity Analysis of Empirical Results on Civil War Onset,”
  Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50(4), 508—535.

Herbst, J. (2000): States and Power in Africa. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.




                                                    39
Hodler, R., and P. A. Raschky (2014): “Regional Favoratism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(2), 995—1033.

Horowitz, D. L. (1985): Ethnic Groups in Conflict. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los
  Angeles, California.

Huber, J. D., and L. Mayoral (2014): “Inequality, Ethnicity and Civil Conflict,” Working Paper,
  Department of Political Science, Columbia University.

Huillery, E. (2009): “History Matters: The Long Term Impact of Colonial Public Investments in French
  West Africa,” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics, 1(2), 176—215.

Humphreys, M., and H. A. Mohamed (2005): “Senegal and Mali: A Comparative Study of Rebellions
  in West Africa,” in Understanding Civil War: Evidence and Analysis Vol 1 Africa, ed. by P. Collier, and
  N. Sambanis. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA.

Jedwab, R., and A. Moradi (2015): “The Permanent Eﬀects of Transportation Revolutions in Poor
  Countries: Evidence from Africa,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Luca, G. D., R. Hodler, P. A. Raschky, and M. Valsecchi (2015): “Ethnic Favoritism: An Axiom
  of Politics?,” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 5209.

MercyCorps (2011): “Uganda Conflict and Market Assessment - Karamoja,” Report.

Meredith, M. (2005): The State of Africa: A History of the Continent since Independence. The Free
  Press, London, United Kingdom.

Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary
  African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.

         (2014): “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 129(1), 151—213.

Montalvo, J.-G., and M. Reynal-Querol (2005): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil
  Wars,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 796—816.

Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and their Culture History. McGraw-Hill.

        (1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. University of Pittsburgh Press, PA.

Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long Term Eﬀects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123(1), 139—176.




                                                   40
        (2014): “Historical Development,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2, ed. by P. Aghion,
  and S. Durlauf, vol. 2, chap. 7, pp. 347—402. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Nunn, N., and D. Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20—36.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
  American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.

Oster, E. (2015): “Unobservable Selection and Coeﬃcient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” mimeo,
  Brown University, Department of Economics.

Petter, G. N., P. Wallensteen, M. Eriksson, M. Sollenberg, and H. Strand (2002): “Armed
  Conflict 1946-2001: A New Datase,” Journal of Peace Research, 39(5), 615—637.

Posner, D. N. (2005): Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa. Cambridge University Press, New York,
  NY.

Raleigh, C., A. Linke, and C. Dowd (2014): “Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset (ACLED)
  Codebook Version 3,” Working Paper, Centre for the Study of Civil War, International Peace Research
  Institute, Oslo (PRIO).

Ross, M. L. (2012): The Oil Curse: How Petroleum Wealth Shapes the Development of Nations. Princeton
  University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Sundberg, R., M. Lindgren, and A. Padskocimaite (2010): “UCDP GED Codebook version 1.0-
  2011,” Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University.

Sundberg, R., and E. Melander (2013): “Introducing the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset,”
  Journal of Peace Research, 50(4), 523—532.

Thomson, A. (2010): An Introduction to African Politics. Routledge, London and Nyew York.

Tomas, J. (2006): “The Traditional Authorities Cross the National Border: Opposing Views on the Role
  of the Religious Leaders of the Jola Huluf and Ajamaat of the Lower Casamance (1886-1909),” Africana
  Studia, 9(1), 73—97.

Touval, S. (1967): “The Organization of African Unity and African Borders,” International Organization,
  21(1), 102—127.

Vaughan, S. (2003): “Ethnicity and Power in Ethiopia,” Ph.D. thesis, The University of Edingurgh.

Wagane, F. (2006): “The Casamance Separatism : From Independence Claim to Resource Logic,” Thesis.
  Naval Postgraduate School.

                                                  41
Wantchekon, L., M. Klasnja, and N. Novta (2015): “Education and Human Capital Externalities:
  Evidence from Colonial Benin,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2).

Wesseling, H. L. (1996): Divide and Rule: The Partition of Africa, 1880-1914. Praeger, Amsterdam,
  Netherlands.

Wilkenfeld, J. K. B. J., D. Brancati, J. Fearon, T. Gurr, D. Laitin, A. Pate, and S. Saideman
  (2014): “A-MAR (All-Minorities at Risk): Addressing the Selection Bias Issue,” mimeo.

Wimmer, A., L.-E. Cederman, and B. Min (2009): “Ethnic Politics and Armed Conflict. A Configu-
  rational Analysis of a New Global Dataset,” American Sociological Review, 74(2), 316—337.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press, Cam-
  bridge, MA.




                                                  42
                                   Table 1 - Border (Ethnic Partitioning) Artificiality
                     Panel A: Geography, Ecology, Natural Resources and Ethnic Partitioning

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)

Log Land Area                     0.0556***      0.0529***      0.0618***      0.0554***      0.0534***      0.0528***      0.0640***
                                   (0.0153)       (0.0159)       (0.0175)       (0.0186)       (0.0150)       (0.0156)       (0.0172)

Lake Indicator                                     0.0961*         0.0963       0.0965*         0.0910        0.0933*         0.0900
                                                   (0.0565)       (0.0645)      (0.0567)       (0.0554)       (0.0557)       (0.0624)

River Indicator                                    -0.0053        -0.0164       -0.0092        -0.0064        -0.0057        -0.0174
                                                   (0.0337)       (0.0324)      (0.0325)       (0.0344)       (0.0346)       (0.0347)

Elevation                                                         -0.0411                                                    -0.0673
                                                                  (0.0709)                                                   (0.0726)

Suitability for Agriculture                                        0.1239                                                     0.1591
                                                                  (0.0974)                                                   (0.1078)

Malaria Stability Index                                                           0.0195                                     -0.0415
                                                                                 (0.0982)                                    (0.1097)

Distance to the Coast                                                             0.0000                                     -0.0001
                                                                                 (0.0001)                                    (0.0001)

Diamond Mine Indicator                                                                          0.0289                        0.022
                                                                                               (0.0647)                      (0.0647)

Oil Indicator                                                                                  -0.0774                      -0.1066*
                                                                                               (0.0545)                      (0.0625)

Nearby Groups in the Same Family                                                                              -0.0727        -0.0662
                                                                                                              (0.0579)       (0.0622)

Adjusted R-square                    0.050          0.055          0.059          0.056          0.058         0.057          0.065

Region Fixed Effects                  Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                          825            825            825            825            825           825            825

Table 1 - Panel A reports linear probability model (LPM) estimates associating ethnic partitioning (SPLIT) with geographical, ecological
and natural resource variables. In all specifications the dependent variable is an indicator that equals one when at least 10% of the
historical ethnic homeland (as portrayed in Murdock’s (1959) Ethnolinguistic map) falls to more than one contemporary country (using
the 2000 Digital Chart of the World). All specifications include a set of (five) region fixed effects (constants not reported). The Data
Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The Supplementary Appendix reports summary statistics for all variables.
Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for double clustering at the country-dimension and the ethno-linguistic family dimension.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                     Table 1 - Border (Ethnic Partitioning) Artificiality
                          Panel B: Historical (Pre-colonial) Features and Ethnic Partitioning

                                        (1)            (3)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)

Log Land Area                       0.0551***      0.0540***       0.0527***      0.0527***      0.0485***       0.0529***      0.0524***
                                     (0.0158)       (0.0153)        (0.0155)       (0.0160)       (0.0170)        (0.0174)       (0.0158)

Lake Indicator                       0.0984*          0.0915        0.0956*        0.0942*          0.0878         0.0962        0.0967*
                                     (0.0555)        (0.0589)       (0.0558)        (0.0559)       (0.0582)       (0.0590)       (0.0561)

River Indicator                      -0.0049        -0.0097         -0.0058        -0.0077         -0.0067        -0.0054          -0.006
                                     (0.0337)       (0.0351)        (0.0348)       (0.0347)        (0.0337)       (0.0337)        (0.0331)

Pre-colonial Conflict Indicator      -0.0663
                                     (0.0733)

Distance to Pre-colonial Conflict                    -0.0444
                                                     (0.0839)

Slave Trades Indicator                                               0.0045
                                                                    (0.0322)

Log Number of Slaves                                                                0.0063
 (normalized by land area)                                                         (0.0080)

Pre-colonial Kingdom Indicator                                                                      0.0466
                                                                                                   (0.0469)

Distance to Pre-colonial Kingdom                                                                                   0.0009
                                                                                                                  (0.1235)

Major City in 1400AD                                                                                                               0.0233
 Double-clustered s.e.                                                                                                            (0.0652)

Adjusted R-square                     0.056           0.056          0.055           0.056          0.057          0.055           0.055

Region Fixed Effects                   Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                           825             825            825             825            825            825             825

Table 1 - Panel B reports linear probability model (LPM) estimates associating ethnic partitioning (SPLIT) with historical variables
capturing pre-colonial conflict, kingdoms, and slavery (in Panel B). In all specifications the dependent variable is an indicator that equals
one when at least 10% of the historical ethnic homeland (as portrayed in Murdock’s (1959) Ethnolinguistic map) falls to more than one
contemporary country (using the 2000 Digital Chart of the World). All specifications include a set of (five) region fixed effects
(constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The Supplementary Appendix reports
summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for double clustering at the country-dimension and the
ethno-linguistic family dimension. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                  Table 2: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict.
                                                    Baseline Country Fixed-Effects Estimates

                                        All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                      Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                                                                     Excl.       Excl.                                                 Excl.     Excl.
                                    All Observations                                                   All Observations
                                                                    Outliers    Capitals                                              Outliers Capitals
                           (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)     (10)       (11)       (12)

                                                                    Panel A. Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.4513*** 0.3329** 0.4495*** 0.4626*** 0.4494*** 0.4565***         0.9247*** 0.8050*** 0.6014*** 0.5906***0.5906*** 0.5806***
                         (0.1611) (0.1851) (0.1254) (0.1201) (0.1172) (0.1236)              (0.1704) (0.2372) (0.2226) (0.2176) (0.2176) (0.2146)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)    0.0481     0.3910    0.4619*    0.4920*     0.4834*    0.4256*      0.0879     0.5679     0.4328     0.4514   0.4514   0.3928
                        (0.2789)   (0.3430)   (0.2626)   (0.2628)    (0.2686)   (0.2760)    (0.5748)   (0.4733)   (0.3818)   (0.3565) (0.3565) (0.3640)

Log Likelihood          -4506.794 -4280.172 -4119.95 -4108.723 -3993.148 -3781.286         -1697.469 -1561.61 -1517.999 -1510.73 -1510.73 -1445.62
R-square                  0.203     0.528     0.645    0.633     0.168     0.182             0.148     0.343    0.546     0.574    0.574    0.544

                                                              Panel B. Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.0562** 0.0660*** 0.0783*** 0.0819*** 0.0839*** 0.0789***         0.0874**    0.0835*     0.0821 0.0903** 0.0903** 0.0893*
                         (0.0241) (0.0238) (0.0258) (0.0266) (0.0266) (0.0266)              (0.0399)   (0.0484)   (0.0523) (0.0457) (0.0457) (0.0461)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.0571 0.1146*** 0.1284*** 0.1443*** 0.1487*** 0.1468***         0.1787*** 0.2246*** 0.2297*** 0.2444***0.2444*** 0.2347***
                         (0.0486) (0.0394) (0.0397) (0.0408) (0.0402) (0.0408)              (0.0594) (0.0604) (0.0631) (0.0562) (0.0562) (0.0575)

adjusted R-square         0.304     0.430      0.44       0.445       0.446      0.446       0.315      0.463      0.475      0.489    0.489    0.486

Simple Controls           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes
Location Controls          No        No        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         No         Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes
Geographic Controls        No        No         No        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         No         No         Yes      Yes      Yes
Country Fixed Effects      No       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes
Observations              1212      1212       1212       1212        1199       1165         579        579        579        579      579      568
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in Panel B, associating civil conflict with
ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the total number of civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the
period 1997-2013. The dependent variable in Panel B is an dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced conflict and zero
otherwise over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than
one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country.
The specifications in columns (2)-(6) and (8)-(12) include country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close
to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). The specifications in
columns (5) and (11) exclude country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. The specifications in columns (6) and (12) exclude country-ethnic
homelands where capital cities fall. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of
location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that
takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls
includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major
city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                             Table 3: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict Intensity. Baseline Country Fixed-Effects Estimates

                                                 All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                                    Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                                              Deadly                                           Duration                        Deadly                                Duration
                              Deadly         Incidents       Total      Duration                Deadly             Deadly     Incidents   Total      Duration         Deadly
                             Incidents       Indicator    Casualties All Incidents             Incidents          Incidents   Indicator Casualties All Incidents     Incidents
                              NB-ML            LPM           NB-ML        Poisson - ML Poisson - ML               NB-ML           LPM         NB-ML        Poisson - ML Poisson - ML
                               (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)                    (6)             (7)         (8)              (9)         (10)
SPLIT (Partitioning)         0.3356**        0.0599**       0.4843***       0.2015***          0.1658**           0.4651**       0.0820* 0.8489***           0.2784**         0.4350***
 Double-clustered s.e.       (0.1357)        (0.0287)        (0.1651)        (0.0622)          (0.0740)           (0.2037)       (0.0428) (0.3787)           (0.1216)          (0.1521)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)         0.3948        0.1461***         0.1161         0.2478**          0.3648**            0.2745      0.2378*** 0.3573              0.3731**          0.4674*
 Double-clustered s.e.       (0.2465)        (0.0463)        (0.3121)        (0.1174)          (0.1629)           (0.3110)      (0.0611) (0.5155)            (0.1804)          (0.2415)
Log Likelihood               -2910.906          __          -4516.44         -2759.21          -2232.74           -1028.82         __         -1657.27       -1057.16           -805.15
adjusted R-square               __             0.411           __               __                __                 __           0.449          __             __                __
Simple Controls                Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
Location Controls              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
Geographic Controls            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
Country Fixed Effects          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
Observations                   1212            1212            1199            1212               1212               579           579           575            579               579
The table reports estimates associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. In columns (1) and (6) the dependent variable is the total number
of deadly civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the sample period (1997-2013). These models are estimated with the negative binomial ML model. In columns
(2) and (7) the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one deadly conflict incident over the
period 1997-2013 and zero otherwise. These columns give linear probability model estimates. In columns (3) and (8) the dependent variable is the total number of fatalities at each
country-ethnic homeland over 1997-2013. These models are estimated with the negative binomial ML model. For the estimation we exclude country-ethnic homelands where the
dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. In columns (4) and (9) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has experienced conflict over
the period 1997-2013. These columns give Poisson ML estimates. In columns (5) and (10) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has
experienced deadly conflict (at least one casualty) over the period 1997-2013. These columns give Poisson ML estimates. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned
ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned
ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-
off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not
reported) and a rich set of controls. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of
location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes
on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic
controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with
major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the
ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                  Table 4: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict Aspects

                                                                                               Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to
                                        All Ethnicity-Country Homelands
                                                                                                         the National Border
                                                     Civilian           Riots &                                Civilian      Riots &
                                     Battles         Violence           Protests                 Battles      Violence       Protests
                                      (1)               (2)               (3)                      (4)            (5)          (6)

                                                             Panel A: Negative Binomial ML Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)               0.4428***         0.4328***           0.0747                 0.5238**       0.4980***         0.0453
 Double-clustered s.e.              (0.1489)          (0.1229)          (0.1526)                (0.2818)        (0.1949)        (0.2402)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)                0.4846            0.3816            0.4119                  0.4372          -0.0188        0.9385*
 Double-clustered s.e.              (0.3060)          (0.3523)          (0.2574)                (0.3765)        (0.3662)        (0.4926)

Log Likelihood                     -2918.506         -2876.564         -2203.732               -1068.327       -1000.611        -648.381

                                                               Panel B: Linear Probability Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)                0.0912**           0.0517            0.0193                 0.0902*          0.0647          0.0066
 Double-clustered s.e.              (0.0375)          (0.0320)          (0.0305)                (0.0462)        (0.0447)        (0.0540)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)                0.0631          0.1749***           0.0773                0.1724***       0.1839***         0.0745
 Double-clustered s.e.              (0.0442)          (0.0577)          (0.0533)                (0.0615)        (0.0705)        (0.0775)
Adjusted R-squared                    0.465            0.422              0.439                   0.457           0.435           0.417

Country Fixed Effects                 Yes               Yes               Yes                      Yes             Yes             Yes
Simple Controls                       Yes               Yes               Yes                      Yes             Yes             Yes
Location Controls                     Yes               Yes               Yes                      Yes             Yes             Yes
Geographic Controls                   Yes               Yes               Yes                      Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                          1212              1212              1212                     579             579             579

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM)
estimates in Panel B, associating the main categories of civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level.
Columns (1) and (4) focus on battles. Columns (2) and (5) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (3) and (6) focus
on riots and protests. In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of battles (in columns (1) and (4)), violent events against the
civilian population (in columns (2) and (5)) and riots and protests events (in columns (3) and (6)). In Panel B the dependent variable is
an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one battle (in columns (1) and (4)), at least
one violent event against the civilian population (in columns (2) and (5)) and at least one event of riots and protests (in columns (3) and
(6)) over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at
least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of
adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on
country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country
homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set
of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an
indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the
respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the
homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic
controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil
field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                          Table 5: Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict Actors


                                      All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                       Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                                                                                        National Border
                              Government Rebels &            Nearby        Other         Government       Rebels &      Nearby         Other
                                Forces   Militias            External     External         Forces         Militias      External      External
                                    (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)

                                                             Panel A. Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)            0.5247***     0.4908*** 1.1280*** 0.244                   0.8198***       0.6083*** 1.1310*** 0.8889*
 Double-clustered s.e.           (0.1394)      (0.1381) (0.2577) (0.2534)                  (0.2212)        (0.2434) (0.2242) (0.5275)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)             0.496          0.3258       0.1629       -0.519           0.2893          0.0667       -0.0037       -1.1611
 Double-clustered s.e.           (0.3108)       (0.3089)     (0.4327)     (0.4765)         (0.3840)        (0.3620)     (0.3405)      (0.9901)

Log Likelihood                  -3213.30       -3538.28      -1088.25      -571.59         -1127.39        -1278.77      -418.72      -170.35

                                                         Panel B. Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)            0.1089***      0.0663** 0.0658**            0.0065        0.1240***        0.0861* 0.0693**            0.0349
 Double-clustered s.e.           (0.0281)       (0.0327) (0.0325)          (0.0228)        (0.0426)        (0.0497) (0.0342)          (0.0298)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)           0.1300**       0.1059**       0.0737        -0.009        0.1905***       0.1671*** 0.0074            -0.0625
 Double-clustered s.e.           (0.0530)       (0.0482)     (0.0466)      (0.0292)        (0.0625)        (0.0619) (0.0487)          (0.0415)

adjusted R-square                 0.453          0.472         0.345        0.378            0.467           0.485        0.384        0.425
Observations                      1212           1212          1212         1212              579             579          579          579

Simple Controls                    Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
Location Controls                  Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
Geographic Controls                Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
Country Fixed Effects              Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes

The table reports Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in
Panel B, associating civil conflict by actor with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. Columns (1) and (5) focus on
conflict where government forces participate. Columns (2) and (6) focus on conflict where rebels and militias participate. Columns (3) and
(7) focus on military interventions of adjacent (nearby) African countries Columns (4) and (8) focus on foreign interventions by peace-
keeping forces (UN, African Union, etc.). In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of events of each category across country-
ethnic homelands over the period 1997-2013. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic
homelands that have experienced at least one event from each type of civil conflict over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). SPLIT
is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one
contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent
ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (5)-(8) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the
median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include
country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the
log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid
of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the
value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by
the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                        Table 6: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict Types. UCDP GED

                                       All Ethnic Homelands                     Ethnic Homelands close to the Border
                              All Events      Indicator       Duration        All Events      Indicator     Duration
                               NB-ML            LPM           NB-ML            NB-ML           LPM           NB-ML
                                (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)           (6)

                                                Panel A: State (Government Forces) Civil Conflict

SPLIT (Partitioning)          0.4978**        0.0487*         0.3390**        0.8053***       0.0799**      0.5469**
                              (0.2411)        (0.0294)        (0.1422)         (0.2335)       (0.0393)      (0.2389)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)         1.1577***       0.0902*         0.6868**          0.4340         0.0424        0.255
                               (0.4761)       (0.0518)        (0.2964)         (0.5468)       (0.0534)      (0.3744)

Log Likelihood                -1453.054          __         -1046.922          -528.002         __          -383.392
adjusted R-square                __             0.471          __                 __           0.441           __

                                             Panel B: One-Sided Violence against Civilian Population

SPLIT (Partitioning)            0.3468         0.0269         0.2750*           0.3288         0.0331        0.2925
                               (0.2416)       (0.0292)        (0.1474)         (0.2615)       (0.0404)      (0.2237)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)           0.4708        0.0829*         0.4935**          0.0901         0.0161        0.1659
                               (0.4549)       (0.0481)        (0.2277)         (0.6886)       (0.0626)      (0.3416)

Log Likelihood                -1499.837          __         -1099.667          -556.790         __          -396.804
adjusted R-square                __             0.404          __                 __           0.434           __

                                                          Panel C: Non-State Civil Conflict

SPLIT (Partitioning)            -0.2087        -0.0459          0.026           -0.4122        -0.0351       -0.1797
                               (0.4062)       (0.0317)        (0.3374)         (0.5178)       (0.0283)      (0.4917)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)           -0.8703        -0.0344         -0.5089          -0.6593        -0.0268       -0.6964
                               (0.7193)       (0.0302)        (0.4423)         (0.8728)       (0.0415)      (0.7086)

Log Likelihood                 -841.675          __           -644.791         -243.970          __         -199.677
adjusted R-square                 __            0.320            __               __             __            __

Country Fixed Effects           Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
Simple Controls                 Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
Location Controls               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls             Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                    1212            1212           1212              579            579            579
The table reports estimates associating three types of civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level using
data from the UCDP GED 1.5 project. Panel A gives estimates focusing on state conflict (where government forces, troops, and militias
participate). Panel B gives estimates focusing on one-sided violence, mostly against the civilian population. Panel C gives estimates
focusing on conflict between (at least) two non-state actors (where the government is not involved). The dependent variable in columns
(1) and (4) is the total number of civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1989-2010. These models are
estimated with the negative binomial (NB) maximum likelihood (ML) model. The dependent variable in columns (2) and (5) is a dummy
variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced each conflict type over the period 1989-2010
(and zero otherwise). The dependent variable in columns (3) and (6) is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has
experienced each type of conflict over the period 1989-2010. These models are estimated with the negative binomial maximum likelihood
model. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling
into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total
number of adjacent ethnic homelands.
The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cutoff the median distance
from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed
effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of
each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value
of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the
sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-
clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                    Table 7: Ethnic Partitioning and Political Violence (Discrimination and Ethnic Wars)

                                           Ethnic War                                       Ethnic Discrimination                               Ordered Political Violence
                            (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)              (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)      (12)

SPLIT (Partitioning) 0.1155** 0.1402*** 0.1068*** 0.1101***                    0.1030*** 0.0778*** 0.0715*** 0.0718**                 0.6175** 0.5802** 0.7805*** 0.8856***
                     (0.0509) (0.0381) (0.0388) (0.0390)                        (0.0342) (0.0276) (0.0276) (0.0282)                   (0.2543) (0.2379) (0.3017) (0.3138)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                                            0.2570**                                                 0.0169                    1.1716                   2.0160**
                                                                  (0.1155)                                               (0.0764)                  (0.6807)                   (0.9168)

Adjusted R-square          0.019        0.423        0.474         0.487          0.018        0.475         0.521        0.521          __           __           __
Log Likelihood               __           __           __            __             __           __            __           __        -422.612     -417.453      -170.503     -166.053
Observations                593          593          593           593            593          593           593          593          593          593           405          405

Country Fixed Effects       No          Yes           Yes           Yes            No           Yes           Yes          Yes           No           No           Yes          Yes
Simple Controls             No          No            Yes           Yes            No           No            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Location Controls           No          No            Yes           Yes            No           No            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Geographic Controls         No          No            No            Yes            No           No            No           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
The table reports linear probability model estimates (in columns (1)-(8)) and ordered logit estimates (in columns (9)-(12)), associating ethnic-based political violence with ethnic
partitioning. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced a major or minor civil war with an explicit
ethnic dimension over the period 1960-2010. The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced
discrimination from the central government for at least one year over the period 1960-2010. The dependent variable in columns (9)-(12) is an ordered index of political violence.
The trichotomous index of political violence equals two if the ethnic group is engaged in a major civil war (two-sided conflict); the index equals one when the group is subject to
political discrimination from the national government but not in civil war (one-sided violence); the index equals zero when the ethnicity is neither discriminated from the national
government nor involved in civil war (the construction of the ordered index of political violence follows Besley and Persson (2011). Data on ethnic wars and ethnic-based political
discrimination from the national government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)).
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL
–that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns
(2)-(4) and (6)-(8) include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(12) include log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers (simple controls); distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from
the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas
that are by the sea coast (location controls); and an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field
indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400 (geographic controls). Columns (9) and (10) report ordered logit estimates, replacing the country fixed-effects with
regional constants. Columns (11)-(12) report fixed-effects ordered logit estimates employing the approach of Ferrer and Fritjers (2004). For specifications (1)-(10) the table reports
in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. For specifications (11) and (12) the table gives standard errors clustered at
the country level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                           Table 8: The Long-Run Effects of Ethnic Partitioning on Individual Well-Being and Education. DHS Data
                                                                     Baseline Estimates

                                                     DHS Composite Wealth Index                                                                       Education
                              All Observations (Individuals)            Observations close to the Border             All Observations (Individuals)            Observations close to the Border
                                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)          (10)           (11)          (12)

Partitioning - Identity -0.3853*** -0.2369** -0.2069** -0.2818*** -0.2557*** -0.2454*** -0.9907** -0.6594**                                     -0.4897*       -0.5301*      -0.4701*      -0.4089*
 Double-clustered s.e.    (0.1129)  (0.0972) (0.0905)   (0.1018) (0.0810) (0.0789)       (0.4045) (0.3045)                                      (0.2520)       (0.3086)      (0.2658)      (0.2444)

Non-Indigenous               0.1936**      0.1873** 0.1890***            0.1359*      0.1792**      0.1828**         0.3116         0.2922        0.3163        0.1273        0.2028        0.2056
 Double-clustered s.e.        (0.0887)      (0.0744) (0.0721)            (0.0783)      (0.0767)      (0.0750)       (0.2695)       (0.2485)      (0.2328)      (0.2043)      (0.1829)      (0.1693)

Adjusted R-squared             0.028         0.145         0.171          0.053         0.134         0.162          0.176          0.227         0.281         0.164         0.198         0.244
Observations                   88171         88171         88171          44090         44090         44090          88043          88043         88043         44030         44030         44030

Country Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Location Controls               No             Yes          Yes            No            Yes            Yes            No            Yes           Yes            No            Yes           Yes
Individual Controls             No             No           Yes            No            No             Yes            No            No            Yes            No            No            Yes

The table reports OLS estimates, associating the DHS composite wealth index (in columns (1)-(6)) and years of education (in columns (7)-(12)) with ethnic partitioning. The ethnic
partitioning index (Partitioning-Identity) takes on the value of one for individuals that identify with a partitioned ethnicity and zero otherwise. The composite wealth index is calculated by
the DHS team in each country via a principal component method using easy-to-collect data on a household's ownership of selected assets (e.g., televisions and bicycles), materials used for
housing construction and public good access (e.g., type of water access, electrification, and sanitation). The ethnic partitioning index takes on the value of one for individuals that identify
with a partitioned ethnicity. The non-indigenous indicator takes on the value of one for individuals residing outside their ethnicity’s ancestral homeland and takes on the value of zero for
individuals residing in their ethnicity’s ancestral homeland (“movers”). All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). The set of location controls in
columns (2), (3), (5), (6), (8), (9), (11), and (12) includes the distance of each enumeration area to the capital city, the distance to the coast, the distance to the national border and an
indicator that takes on the value of one for enumeration areas close to the capital city (distance to the capital less than the 25th percentile). The set of individual controls in columns (3), (6),
(9), and (12) includes a vector of year-of-birth fixed effects, a vector of 6 marital-status fixed effects, and a vector of 7 religion fixed effects. The specifications in columns (4)-(6) and (10)-
(12) focus on individuals residing close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance to the border; 80 kilometers). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions
and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the ethnicity and the ethnic homeland dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                            Table 9: The Long-Run Effects of Ethnic Partitioning on Individual Well-Being and Education. DHS Data
                                                               Channels; Location and Identity

                                                        Composite Wealth Index                                                                     Education
                                All Observations         Border Observations             All Observations            All Observations         Border Observations             All Observations
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)           (11)          (12)

Partitioning - Identity      -0.2469** -0.2150** -0.2733*** -0.2612*** -0.2818** -0.2519** -0.7277** -0.5513** -0.5504**                                     -0.4812*      -0.9405** -0.7710**
 Double-clustered s.e.        (0.1012) (0.0933)   (0.0832)   (0.0809)   (0.1388) (0.1255) (0.3190) (0.2646) (0.2724)                                         (0.2510)       (0.4496) (0.3634)

Partitioning - Location         0.0413       0.033          0.0873         0.0777        0.0072      -0.0031        0.2801        0.252        0.3993*       0.3574*         0.072         0.037
 Double-clustered s.e.         (0.0751)     (0.0760)       (0.0838)       (0.0826)      (0.0980)     (0.1008)      (0.1988)      (0.1858)      (0.2185)      (0.1958)       (0.2458)      (0.2379)

Non-Indigenous                0.1885** 0.1900***          0.1845**       0.1874**      0.2058** 0.2083**            0.3006        0.3237        0.227         0.2268         0.4062        0.4326
 Double-clustered s.e.         (0.0740) (0.0717)           (0.0760)       (0.0743)      (0.0888) (0.0845)          (0.2454)      (0.2300)      (0.1773)      (0.1638)       (0.2970)      (0.2701)

Partitioned Location & Identity                                                         0.0708       0.0750                                                                 0.4323        0.4464
 Double-clustered s.e.                                                                  (0.1400)     (0.1350)                                                               (0.4113)      (0.3625)

Adjusted R-squared              0.145        0.171          0.135          0.162         0.145        0.171         0.227         0.282         0.199         0.245          0.227         0.282
Observations                    88171        88171          44090          44090         88171        88171         88043         88043         44030         44030          88043         88043

Country Fixed Effects            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Location Controls                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Individual Controls              No            Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes           No           Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes

The table reports OLS estimates associating a composite wealth index (in columns (1)-(6)) and years of education (in columns (7)-(12)) with ethnic partitioning. The ethnic partitioning
identity index (Partitioning-Identity) takes on the value of one for individuals that identify with a partitioned group. The location-based ethnic partitioning index (Partitioning-Location) takes
on the value of one for individuals that currently reside in ethnic homelands that have been partitioned by the national border and zero otherwise. The composite wealth index is calculated by
the DHS team in each country via a principal component method using easy-to-collect data on a household's ownership of selected assets (e.g., televisions and bicycles), materials used for
housing construction and public good access (e.g., type of water access, electrification, and sanitation). All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported).
The set of location characteristics controlled for in all columns include the distance of each enumeration area to the capital city, the distance to the sea, the distance to the national border and
an indicator that takes on the value of one for enumeration areas close to the capital city (distance to the capital less than the 25th percentile). The set of individual controls in even-numbered
columns includes a vector of year-of-birth fixed effects, a vector of 6 marital-status fixed effects, and a vector of 7 religion fixed effects. The specifications in columns (3)-(4) and (9)-(10)
focus on individuals residing close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance to the border; 80 kilometers).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the ethnic identity and the ethnic
homeland dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                   On-line Supplementary Appendix
                                      (not for publication)

       The Long-Run Eﬀects of the Scramble for Africa∗

                                      Stelios Michalopoulos
                                Brown University, CEPR and NBER
                                       Elias Papaioannou
                            London Business School, CEPR and NBER


                                             October 23, 2015



                                                  Abstract
            The Supplementary Appendix is structured into eight sections. Section 1 gives descrip-
        tive evidence, summary statistics and presents the key patterns of the spatial distribution
        of all conflict types across Africa. Section 2 reports additional to the main text results
        showing that ethnic partitioning is not systematically related to various ethnic-specific pre-
        colonial economic, social, and political traits using data from Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas
        (1967). This section also reports "balancedness tests" showing that within countries there
        are no systematic diﬀerences between split and non-split ethnic homelands across numer-
        ous geographic, ecological, natural resources and location characteristics. Section 3 reports
        numerous sensitivity checks on the impact of ethnic partitioning on various aspects of civil
        conflict (intensity, likelihood, duration, and fatalities). Section 4 explores potential hetero-
        geneous eﬀects of ethnic partitioning on conflict with respect to both ethnic and country
        characteristics. Section 5 reports robustness checks on the link between partitioning, ethnic-
        based discrimination from the central government and participation in ethnic wars using
        data from the Ethnic Power Relations Database. Section 6 reports further evidence on the
        negative impact of identifying with a partitioned ethnicity using individual-level data from
        the Demographic and Health Surveys. Section 7 presents a case-study illustrating the eﬀect
        of ethnic partitioning on conflict in Central-Eastern Africa, the most conflict-prone region
        in Africa. Section 8 reports an out-of-sample counterfactual analysis that approximates the
        impact of partitioning the Somalis in Eastern Africa.




   ∗
     We thank 4 anonymous referees for proposing many of the useful sensitivity checks and additional results.
We also thank Sebastian Hohmann and Fabrizio Dell’ Acqua for excellent research assistance. All errors are our
sole responsibility.


                                                       0
1     Descriptives
This Section reports summary statistics of the main variables employed in the empirical analysis
and discusses the main data patterns.

1.1     Summary Statistics

Appendix Table  reports the partitioned ethnicities (as coded by Murdock (1959) and identi-
fied by our method) and the percentage of the homeland of each group falling into more than
one country.
        Appendix Table 1 gives summary statistics for all variables at the ethnic homeland level,
which is the unit of analysis in the section examining the correlates of ethnic partitioning
(Section 3 of the main text). Panel  looks at all homelands (825 observations) whereas in
Panel  we focus on the 413 groups whose centroid is close to the national borders (border
distance less than the median, 102 ).
        Appendix Table 2 reports summary statistics for all variables at the country-ethnic home-
land level, which is the unit of analysis in Sections 4−5; where we examine the impact of ethnic
partitioning on civil conflict. Panel  gives summary statistics for the full sample (1 212 ob-
servations) and Panel  reports statistics for the border sample, using as a cutoﬀ the median
distance to the national border (606 observations).

1.2     Data Patterns
1.2.1    ACLED

Appendix Tables 3 − 6 give details on the main conflict data (ACLED). We focus on precisely
geocoded incidents of political violence. There are 8 conflict categories. (1) Battles without
change of control; (2) Battles where rebel groups gain control of the location; (3) Battles where
the government regains control of a location; (4) Headquarter or base establishments, where
rebel groups establish (via violent or non-violent means) their base; (5) Non-violent conflict
events where rebel groups, militias or government forces engage in non-violent actions that are,
however, within the context of an ongoing civil conflict and dispute (e.g., recruitment drives,
incursions or rallies); (6) Riots and protests; (7) Violence again civilians, where armed groups
attack civilians; (8) Non-Violent transfer of control. For our analysis we merge all battles
(categories (1)-(3)); in many specifications we drop non-violent events by main conflict actors
and in some other specifications we also exclude riots and protests.
        Appendix Table 3 gives the number and share of all and deadly conflict events by year.
On average there are around 2 500 − 3 000 events per year over the period 1997 − 2010.
Approximately 900 of these yearly events resulted in fatalities (30%). Conflict events increase

                                                1
considerably in 2011 (5 261) and especially in 2012 (8 753) and in 2013 (12 565). Below we
report estimates dropping 2011, 2012, and 2013 to ensure that our estimates are not driven by
events during these 3 years.
       Appendix Table 4 reports the number (and share) of all and deadly events for each of
the 8 ACLED categories. The sample includes 23 381 battles, mostly involving government
troops, militias and rebel groups and 20 409 events of violence against the civilian population.
These two categories are by far the most deadly (on average 43% of these events have resulted
in at least one casualty). ACLED also includes 16 147 events associated with riots and protests
which in the overwhelming majority (935%) are not deadly. ACLED also reports 4 727 non-
violent events (such as base and headquarter establishments) conducted by a conflict actor.
Less than 1% of these events result in fatalities.
       Appendix Table 5 reports the distribution of conflict events by the interaction of conflict
actors. Panel  tabulates the data for all events, while Panel  tabulates the data for deadly
events only. Close to 10 000 events involve fighting between government troops and rebels that
have an explicit agenda to counter state violence. If one adds conflict between government
troops and (ethnic and political) militias, we have 16 138 events. Approximately 40% of these
events result in fatalities. Attacks against civilians by government forces and rebels are also
numerous (and quite deadly). There are 4 312 and 4 222 civilian attacks by government forces
and rebels, respectively. The data further show that militias mostly target civilians, as ACLED
reports 11 415 such events (40% of those result in at least one death).1
       Appendix Table 6 reports conflict events by country with information on the type and the
actors involved. Somalia and the Democratic Republic of Congo are by far the most conflict-
prone regions in Africa; in both countries we observe pervasive violence against civilians and
incessant battles between government forces and rebel groups. Nigeria, Uganda, Burundi,
Sudan, Angola, and Ethiopia are also conflict prone. Zimbabwe, South Africa, Egypt and
Algeria look quite violent when examining total ACLED events; yet this is mainly driven by
riots and protests. Burkina Faso, Gambia, Benin, Djibouti, Lesotho, Western Sahara, and
Equatorial Guinea are the least conflict prone countries (less than 100 events of any type).
       Figure 1 reports the spatial distribution of conflict events by main actor; Figures 2 − 
portray events associated with each conflict actor separately.
   1
    So, violence against civilians and riots/protests can be calculated in two diﬀerent ways, one simply by looking
at the main conflict categories (that also includes battles and non-violent events associated with a conflict actor)
and also by looking at the actors involved (that include rebels, government troops, etc.). While there are some
minor discrepancies between these two classifications, this does not aﬀect the results (correlation around 099).
Below we report estimates using both the main-category classification (e.g., Appendix Tables 13 and 16) and
the "actor-based" classification (e.g., Appendix Tables 14 and 17).




                                                         2
                          Actors
                              African Boundaries
                              Government Forces
                              Rebel Forces
                              Political Militias
                              Ethnic Militias
                              Rioters



                                                                             Ü
                              Protesters
                              Civilians
                              External Forces
                                                          Figure 1




Actors Involved                            Actors Involved                   Actors Involved
 in Violence                                in Violence                       in Violence
    African Boundaries                          African Boundaries               African Boundaries
    Government                                  Rebels                           Militias


                              Ü                                          Ü                                  Ü
                 Figure 2a                                 Figure 2b                        Figure 2c




                                            Actors Involved
                                             in Violence
Actors Involved                                    African Boundaries        Actors Involved
 in Violence                                                                  in Violence
                                                   Riots and Protests


                              Ü                                          Ü                                  Ü
     African Boundaries                                                           African Boundaries
     Civilians                                                                    Neighboring Governments



                 Figure 2d                                   Figure 2e                        Figure 2f

                                                                  3
          Figures 3 and 3 plot the number of fatal events and fatal battles across the 1 212
country-ethnic homelands. Conflict intensity, as reflected in the number of deaths, is high
in Eastern Congo at the border with Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda, in Somalia, Sudan and
Angola.




 Fatal Violent Events in                                Fatal Violent Events in

  Ethnic Homelands 97-13                                 Ethnic Homelands 97-13
      African Boundaries                                     African Boundaries
 ACLED: Fatal Violent Events                            ACLED: Battles
      0                                                      0
      1                                                      1
      2-3                                                    2-3




                                           Ü                                                   Ü
      4-7                                                    4-7
      8 - 15                                                 8 - 17
      16 - 35                                                18 - 43
      36 - 2299                                              44 - 3376

                               Figure 3a                                          Figure 3b

1.2.2       UCDP

Figure 4 plots the spatial distribution of all conflict events in the UCDP GED 15 database
(Sundberg, Lindgren, and Padskocimaite (2010), Sundberg and Melander (2013)). This data-
base focuses on deadly events that are associated with a major or minor civil war, as classified
by the widely-used PRIO Armed Conflict Database (ACD); this database distinguishes be-
tween a minor and a major civil war when the conflict results in more than 25 fatalities in a
given year. An event is defined as “the incidence of the use of armed force by an organized
actor against another organized actor, or against civilians, resulting in at least 1 direct death in
either the best, low or high estimate categories at a specific location and for a specific temporal
duration.”
          The database covers the period 1989 − 2010. Events can be of three types; 88% are daily
events, 9% are classified as summary events, and 3% are classified as continuous. We keep
all three types of conflicts, though we have experimented dropping summary and continuous
events finding similar results. As with ACLED we drop imprecisely georeferenced incidents
which amount to 18% of the sample.

                                                 4
      UCDP consists of three main types of conflict, each focusing on a diﬀerent aspect of
warfare:
      (1) state conflict where government troops and state-backed militias fight either against
rebel groups or other anti-government forces (7 512 events). UCDP defines these incidents as
"contested incompatibility that concerns government and/or territory where the use of armed
force between two parties, of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least
25 battle-related deaths in one calendar year ”.
      (2) one-sided violence against civilians perpetrated either by state forces, rebels or militias
(5 219 events). UCDP defines one-sided violence as "use of armed force by the government of
a state or by a formally organized group against civilians which results in at least 25 deaths in
a year ".
      (3) non-state conflict where two (or more) rebel groups or militias fight against each
other, without a government’s participation (3 645 events). UCDP defines this type of conflict
as "conflict between two organized armed groups, neither of which is the government of a state,
which results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year."
      Figures 5 − 5 plot the events associated with each (mutually exclusive) type of conflict.
Algeria and Somalia have experienced the most state-related conflict events, followed by An-
gola, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, and Burundi. The Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone,
South Africa and Sudan are the countries where one-sided violence against civilians takes the
maximum values. South Africa is by far the country with the most non-state conflicts (2 125
events) accounting for roughly 60% of all such events in the UCDP. This reflects the intense
fighting of ANC and other antiapartheid movements before and during the democratic transi-
tion in the early/mid 1990s. Somalia is the second-runner with 505 non-state conflict events,
while in the other countries UCDP records less than 200 such events.
      Appendix Table 6 gives the number of state conflict, one-sided violence and non-state
conflict events by country.




                                                   5
                              Type of Violent Events
                               UCDP 1989-2010
                                   African Boundaries
                              Type of Violence




                                                                                  Ü
                                   State Violence
                                   Non-State Violence
                                   One-Sided Violence


                                                              Figure 4




                                                                                  Non-State Violent
 State Violent Events                                                             Events UCDP
 UCDP 1989-2010                                One-Sided Violence                 1989-2010
                                               UCDP 1989-2010
      African Boundaries
                                                                                       African Boundaries
 Type of Violence                                   African Boundaries
                                                                                  Type of Violence
      State Violence                           Type of Violence
                                                                                       Non-State Violence



                                   Ü                                          Ü                                  Ü
                                                    One-Sided Violence




                       Figure 5a                                  Figure 5b                          Figure 5c

1.2.3         ACLED and UCDP

Appendix Table 7 gives the correlation matrix of the various conflict measures. The correlation
between battles and violence against civilians in ACLED is high (064), but far from perfect.
The correlogram further shows that riots and protests are distinct from battles and violence
against civilians, as the correlation is low (013 and 030 respectively). Comparing ACLED to
UCDP GED reveals a strong correlation between UCDP’s state-based conflict and ACLED’s

                                                                         6
battles (072); this is illustrated in Figures 6 − 6 below. There is a much weaker association
between state-based conflict and civilian violence (047) and riots/protests (019). Non-state-
based conflict is uncorrelated with UCDP state conflict (009) as well as ACLED-based battles
(015) and civilian violence (013).




 Fatal Violent Events in                              State Violence Across
                                                      Ethnic Homelands
    Ethnic Homelands 97-13                            UCDP 1989-2010
                                                           African Boundaries
       African Boundaries
                                                      State Violence: Number of Events
 ACLED: Battles
                                                           0
       0
                                                           1
       1
                                                           2-3
       2-3
                                                           4-6




                                        Ü                                                    Ü
       4-7
                                                           7 - 10
       8 - 17
                                                           11 - 23
       18 - 43
                                                           24 - 1144
       44 - 3376


                            Figure 6a                                            Figure 6b

2      Border Artificiality (w.r.t Ethnic Partitioning)
In this section we provide further evidence on border artificiality with respect to ethnic parti-
tioning. First, we report cross-sectional specifications linking ethnic partitioning to pre-colonial
features. Second, we report "balancedness tests" that examine whether within countries split
and non-split homelands diﬀer systematically across various geographic, ecological, location,
and natural resource characteristics.

2.1        Pre-colonial Ethnic Traits

Similar to Section 3 of the main text, we estimate simple cross-sectional specifications associ-
ating the binary ethnic partitioning index to numerous ethnic-specific variables from Murdock
(1967) Ethnographic Atlas that provides information on pre-colonial political, economic, and
societal features. While Murdock’s (1967) coding does not cover all groups, examining the role
of various ethnic-specific pre-colonial features on partitioning sheds light on the absence of such
considerations among Europeans while drawing the colonial borders in the late 19th century.



                                                 7
       Appendix Tables 8 reports linear probability model (LPM) estimates across ethnic home-
lands with information on pre-colonial traits. As in the main text, below the coeﬃcient esti-
mates we report double-clustered standard errors at the ethnic family and the country level
using the method of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011). We always include the log of ethnic
homeland’s surface area and indicators for the presence of lakes and rivers, as Table 1 in the
main text shows that larger homelands were more likely to be split and that there is some
(weak) association between partitioning and the presence of water bodies. We also include five
regional constants to account for the diﬀerent timing of colonization across Africa. The results
are similar if we omit these variables.
       In columns (1), (2), and (3) we examine the role of pre-colonial economic organization
using a measure capturing the presence of complex and densely populated local communities, an
index quantifying the importance of agriculture for subsistence, and a measure of pastoralism
(based on the share of animal husbandry for subsistence), respectively. As Michalopoulos,
Putterman, and Weil (2015) show these measures correlate with contemporary proxies of human
capital and individual-level well-being, hence it is interesting to examine whether they correlate
with ethnic partitioning. All three proxies of pre-colonial economic structure enter with small
and statistically insignificant estimates.
       In columns (4) and (5) we examine whether there is a link between ethnic partitioning and
pre-colonial institutions using a dummy variable that identifies societies where local leaders were
elected and an indicator that equals one for societies with some inheritance rule for property,
respectively.2 Again there is no systematic link between ethnic partitioning and these ethnic-
specific institutional features.
       In column (6) we link ethnic partitioning to the binary index of political centralization
of Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) that equals zero when Murdock (1967) classifies an ethnicity
as "stateless" or "a petty chiefdom" (e.g., Xam or the Tiv) and 1 when the ethnicity is part
of a "large paramount chiefdom" or a " state" (e.g., Ganda and Zulu). Gennaioli and Rainer
(2007) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) show that pre-colonial political centraliza-
tion correlates with contemporary regional development. Hence, it is worthwhile to examine
the association between political centralization and ethnic partitioning. The coeﬃcient on the
political centralization is statistically and economically insignificant.
       In column (7) we examine the association between ethnic partitioning and a class strat-
ification index that ranges from zero, for societies without any class distinctions, to four, for
groups with significant class and wealth distinctions. There is no systematic association be-
tween partitioning and this proxy of within-group inequality -that may also reflect the degree
   2
    Giuliano and Nunn (2013) show that societies that used to elect local chiefs via elections have today more
favorable attitudes towards democracy.


                                                      8
of pre-colonial economic and institutional development.
      In column (8) we examine the role of family institutions, as captured by a polygyny
indicator. This is a useful check as groups practising polygyny diﬀer considerably from those
that do not (see Fenske (2014a)). The association is weak and statistically insignificant.
      Overall the results in Appendix Table 8 reveal that ethnic partitioning does not correlate
systematically with various proxies of pre-colonial ethnic-specific features. Across all specifica-
tions, the implied economic eﬀect (as reflected in the increase in 2 vis-a-vis the model with
region constants and log land area and the water indicators) is negligible. The same applies
when we use goodness-of-fit measures of non-linear limited dependent variable models (logit
and probit). And while Murdock’s variables do contain noise (and thus attenuation is a con-
cern), measurement error cannot fully explain the lack of significance, as several recent works
document robust associations between societal traits in Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas and
contemporary outcomes, such as regional development, public goods provision, fertility, etc.
(e.g., Fenske (2014b), Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2013), among many others).

2.2   Balancedness Tests

The identifying assumption for the causal interpretation of our estimates linking ethnic parti-
tioning to conflict and discrimination is not that all African borders were drawn in an arbitrary
manner (something that is definitely not the case, as in some instances colonial powers did take
into account local politics and geography). Inference requires that partitioned homelands do
not diﬀer with respect to factors that may independently aﬀect contemporary conflict within
countries. While this assumption cannot be directly tested, we can examine whether split and
non-split homelands diﬀer across various observable characteristics, as this indirectly sheds light
on whether there may be diﬀerences in unobservable features (see for example, Wantchekon,
Klasnja, and Novta (2015) and Dell (2012), among many others).
      In Appendix Table 9 we report country-fixed-eﬀects (LS) specifications associating ge-
ographic, ecological, natural resource, and location features to ethnic partitioning. The unit
of observation is an ethnicity-country region which is our benchmark unit of analysis linking
partitioning to conflict in the main body of the paper (Sections 4 − 5). So, these specifica-
tions are test of means once we net out the impact of country-specific factors. Following the
structure of our empirical framework, Panel  reports estimates in the full sample (1 212 ob-
servations), while Panel  focuses on the border sample using as a cutoﬀ the median distance
to the national border from the centroid of each region (606 observations). Panel  shows that
split and non-split country-ethnic homelands are comparable with respect to their land area,


                                                9
water bodies, elevation, land quality for agriculture, malaria suitability, and natural resources.
In columns (1)-(12)   enters with a small and statistically indistinguishable from zero
coeﬃcient. At the same time, the marginal (within) 2 that reflects the explanatory power of
ethnic partitioning once we net out the impact of country fixed eﬀects, is zero. Unsurprisingly,
the only diﬀerences between split and non-split groups within countries are with regards to
distance to the border (column (13)) and distance to the capital (column (14)).
      Yet, in Panel  we show that in the border sample these diﬀerences are neutralized with
partitioned and non-split groups scoring comparable values in the respective distance terms.
The coeﬃcient on   in (13) and (14) is small and statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Column (1) shows that across border groups partitioned ones are larger in size compared
to non-split groups (echoing the finding in Table 1 and Appendix Table 8). Moreover, although
the variable indicating the presence of rivers enters marginally significant the implied eﬀect
is tiny; the coeﬃcient is 00864 while the mean value of the dependent variable is 046 and
the marginal (within) 2 is 05%. Across all other specifications, the economic impact of
ethnic partitioning -as implied by the marginal-within 2 and the comparison of the coeﬃcient
estimate with the mean value of the dependent variable- on these observable characteristics is
negligible; the marginal 2 is less than 0005 in all specifications in columns (2)-(14).


3     Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict: Further Evidence and
      Sensitivity Analysis
3.1   Preliminary Evidence across Ethnic Homelands

Appendix Table 10 reports test of means (and medians) for the main civil conflict variables
across ethnic homelands. For each variable we report summary statistics for partitioned and
non-split groups and the corresponding test-of-means and medians equality. Panel  focuses on
all 825 homelands, while Panel  reports statistics for ethnic regions close to the national border
(using the median distance from the centroid of a group; 102 kilometers). Standard errors in
the test of means are adjusted for correlation across countries (using a homeland’s centroid)
and across ethnic families using the multi-way clustering method of Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2011).


      All Civil Conflict Incidents (ACLED) 83% of all ethnic areas have experienced
at least one conflict event (including riots and protests) over the period 1997 − 2013. 878%
of partitioned ethnicities experienced conflict, while the likelihood of a civil conflict incidence
for non-partitioned ethnicities is 63 percentage points lower (815%). When we focus on
groups close to the border, the diﬀerence is starker; 725% of non-partitioned ethnic homelands


                                                10
experienced conflict, while 873% of split groups suﬀered from some type of conflict. This 15
percentage points diﬀerence is statistically significant at standard confidence levels. Partitioned
groups have also experienced more violent events with an average of 65 incidents, while the
average for non-split groups is 476. This diﬀerence is not statistically significant, because
there are some extreme observations both in the sample of partitioned and non-split ethnicities
(see Appendix Table 2). Yet the median diﬀerence in column (3) is highly significant; the
median number of events for partitioned groups is 13 while for non-split groups is just 3. To
account for outliers in columns (4) and (5) we exclude ethnic homelands where capitals fall
and in columns (6) and (7) homelands where the number of conflict events exceeds the 99
percentile. The mean diﬀerences for split and non-split ethnicities (17 and 22 respectively)
become statistically significant. There are also large diﬀerences between partitioned and non-
split ethnicities with respect to the median value of conflict events (13 compared to 3). The
diﬀerences in conflict intensity between partitioned and non-split ethnic groups are also sizable
when we focus on areas close to the border (Panel ). While the average (median) number of
all civil conflict incidents for partitioned ethnicities is 66 (12), for non-split ones the average
(median) is 323 (1). These simple mean and median tabulations across ethnic homelands (825
ethnicities) clearly illustrate the negative repercussions of ethnic partitioning on contemporary
African development.


      Battles between government troops, rebels, and militias (ACLED) On av-
erage 725% of split-by-the-national-border ethnic homelands have experienced at least one
battle between government forces, rebels, and militias. When we focus on border groups the
likelihood is similar (72%). The corresponding likelihood for non-split groups, however, in the
full sample is 65% and in the border sample 55%. These diﬀerences (of 75 and 175 percentage
points) are statistically significant at standard confidence levels. The same pattern emerges
when we examine the association between ethnic partitioning and the intensity of battles be-
tween government troops, militias and rebels. On average partitioned ethnic homelands have
experienced ten more battles as compared to non-split groups (30 versus 20); and while due to
outliers this diﬀerence is not statistically significant, once we exclude the top 1% of the conflict
distribution or regions where capitals fall, the diﬀerence becomes significant. Likewise, the
median value of battles for non-split ethnic groups close to the national border is zero, while
the corresponding median value for partitioned ethnic homelands is 3.


      Violence against Civilians (ACLED) The summary statistics of violence against
civilians reveal considerable and statistically significant diﬀerences between partitioned and
non-split groups. The likelihood that a partitioned homeland has experienced at least one

                                                11
violent event against the civilian population is 078, while the corresponding probability for
non-split ethnic homelands is 068. The diﬀerence is larger (015) when we focus on ethnic
homelands close to the national border. The intensity of civilian violence is also linked to
ethnic partitioning. On average, partitioned ethnic homelands close to the border experience
24 violent incidents against the civilian population, while the average for non-split ethnicities
is 11. The median value of violence against civilians across partitioned ethnic homelands is
three times the median value across non-split groups (3 versus 1 or 0).


      Riots and Protests (ACLED) In contrast to battles and violence against the civilian
population, the test of means and medians for riots and protests do not reveal significant
diﬀerences between partitioned and non-split homelands. While the likelihood of riots and
protests is higher for partitioned groups, the number of riots and protests is higher for non-split
groups. And when we exclude homelands where capitals fall or outliers, the mean and median
diﬀerences are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. This is hardly surprising as
riots and protests mostly take place in capitals and do not usually reflect ethnic-based political
violence.


      State Conflict (UCDP) The tests of means reveal sizable diﬀerences on both the
likelihood and intensity of state-based conflict (as recorded by the UCDP-GED database).
The likelihood of state conflict (over 1989 − 2010) in split homelands is 446%, while in non-
split homelands the likelihood is 15 percentage points lower, 299%. Again the diﬀerence is
larger (close to 24 percentage points) when we focus on border areas, illustrating that ethnic
partitioning matters crucially for two-sided conflict between national government forces and
rebels. Mean diﬀerences in the intensity of state conflict are also large, especially when we
drop outliers and observations in the capital and even more so when we focus on border areas.
In the border sample and when we exclude capitals or outliers we observe on average 24 events
in non-split homelands and 65 events in partitioned homelands.


      One-Sided Violence (UCDP) The likelihood of one-sided violence (according to
the UCDP that focuses on deadly incidents associated with major and minor civil wars) in the
homelands of partitioned ethnic homelands is 048 (in both the full and the border sample).
The corresponding likelihood for non-split homelands is 033 and 0245 for the full and the
border sample, respectively. The intensity of violence against the civilian population is also
significantly higher in partitioned as compared to non-split homelands. On average, we observe
105 and 11 events in the homelands of partitioned groups in the full and border sample. In
contrast there are 47 events in the sample of non-split groups (in both the full and the border


                                                12
samples).


        Non-State Conflict (UCDP) The tests of means with non-state conflict indicate
that there are no major diﬀerences between partitioned and non-split ethnic homelands with
respect to conflict where government is neither directly nor indirectly involved. The diﬀerences
in the likelihood of non-state conflict between split and non-split ethnicities are very small.
And conflict intensity, as captured by the number of events, is somewhat higher in non-split
ethnic areas; yet even this pattern is driven by outliers. When we drop the top 1% of the
distribution, the average number of non-state civil conflict events is around 11 − 13 for both
split and non-split ethnicities.

3.2     Sensitivity Analysis in the Ethnicity-Country Sample

We have performed a comprehensive set of sensitivity checks to assess the robustness of our
results linking ethnic partitioning to conflict. In particular:

3.2.1    Excluding 2011 − 2013


First, we examined the stability of the estimates excluding the period 2011 − 2013, when
ACLED’s coverage increased considerably (see Appendix Table 3). During the period 1997 −
2010, there are on average 2 720 events per year. The median value is 2 756 events and the
range is 1 952 (in 2006) - 3 509 (in 2010). The total number of events reported increased
considerably in 2011 (5 261 events) and especially in 2012 (8 753 events) and 2013 (12 565
events). Since this increase may reflect both a change in reporting over the past years and/or
an increase in the true incidence of conflict we repeated estimation focusing only on the period
1997 − 2010.
        Appendix Table 11 reports unconditional negative binomial (NB) maximum likelihood
estimates with country-specific constants (in Panel ) and country-fixed-eﬀects linear proba-
bility model (LPM) estimates (in Panel ). [The table "mirrors" Table 2 in the main body of
the paper.] The ethnic partitioning index is always statistically significant (usually at the 1%
level). The coeﬃcient in the specifications with a rich set of controls in the full sample is 051
implying that conflict is approximately 65% higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities,
as compared to non-split homelands. The estimate in the border sample is comparable -though
somewhat larger (060).3 The LPM specifications suggest that there is an 8% -10% increased
   3
    The estimates in columns (10) and (11) are identical because all outliers (observations where the sum of
conflict incidents exceeds the 99 percentile) are not in the border sample. Moreover, the border sample is
somewhat smaller than 606 observations, because there is no variability in ethnic partitioning for some countries
when we zoom in on the border.


                                                       13
likelihood of conflict in the homelands of split (as compared to non-split) groups. These eﬀects
are similar -and if anything somewhat larger- to the baseline estimates over the entire sample
period (1997 − 2010). Please also note that the coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index
is quite stable across the various permutations (especially in the full sample). Moreover, the
coeﬃcient in the full sample with the rich set of controls and country fixed eﬀects (051, in
column (4)) is quite similar to the estimate of the more parsimonious specification (048, in
column (1)), where we simply control on log land area, log population around independence and
the presence of water bodies. Since the model fit increases considerably when we add country
constants and the location controls, this suggests that the significant link between civil conflict
and ethnic partitioning is unlikely to be driven by hard-to-observe omitted factors (Altonji,
Elder, and Taber (2005), Oster (2015)).
      Appendix Table 12 replicates our core analysis linking ethnic partitioning to conflict
intensity, as reflected in the number and incidence of deadly events, fatalities, and conflict
duration. [This table "mirrors" Table 3 in the main part of the paper]. There is a strong
link between ethnic partitioning and deadly conflict, as well as fatalities and conflict duration.
The linear probability estimates suggest that the likelihood of deadly conflict is 10 percentage
points higher for partitioned ethnic homelands. Moreover, on average conflict lasts 25% longer
in the homelands of partitioned groups.
      Appendix Table 13 associates battles between government troops and rebels/militias,
one-sided violence against civilians and riots and protests with ethnic partitioning. There is a
strong link between battles and ethnic partitioning both in the full sample (columns (1)-(2))
and when we restrict estimation to ethnic areas near the national border (in (7)-(8)). The
estimates in columns (3) and (4) show that violence against civilians occurs more often in the
homelands of partitioned ethnicities. The results are similar in the border sample, though
in the LPM the coeﬃcient on ethnic partitioning is marginally insignificant as the standard
error increases (-stat 16). Similarly to our results in the main text, ethnic partitioning is not
systematically linked to riots and protests.
      Appendix Table 14 repeats our analysis linking conflicts by actor to ethnic partitioning
focusing on the period 1997 − 2010 and it corroborates our key findings. [The table is similar
to Table 5 in the main part of the paper.] Both the negative binomial ML and the LPM spec-
ifications reveal large eﬀects of ethnic partitioning on conflict between government forces and
rebels/militias that oppose the state. Ethnic partitioning is also linked to a higher incidence
and intensity of violence against the civilian population, though quantitatively its impact is
smaller than the one on battles involving government forces. And, ethnic partitioning is un-
related to riots and protests. The specifications in columns (5) and (11) further show that


                                                14
military interventions from neighboring countries are way more common in the homelands of
split ethnicities; this finding, that is in line with the anecdotal evidence and the narrative of the
African historiography, reveals a key mechanism linking ethnic partitioning to conflict. Split
groups are often used by the governments of adjacent countries to destabilize their neighbors, at
the same time partitioned ethnicities may get assistance from their co-ethnics on the other side
of the border when they stage a rebellion against the national government or when they face
repression. In contrast, as specifications (6) and (12) show peace-keeping interventions and
non-African interventions (mostly by NATO and European powers) are unrelated to ethnic
partitioning.

3.2.2    Conditional Negative Binomial ML Estimates

Second, we estimated the baseline econometric specification with the conditional negative bino-
mial model of Hausman, Hall, and Griliches (1984) to control for country unobservables. This
technique accounts for unobserved country heterogeneity, by parametrizing the over-dispersion
parameter (to have a country-specific component). As such, this is not a "pure" fixed-eﬀects
approach (based on mean parametrization) and this is why it is not commonly used.
        Appendix Table 15 - Panel  gives the results. The conditional NB estimates show
that ethnic partitioning is systematically linked to civil conflict. The coeﬃcient is around 025
in the full sample and around 040 in the border sample, implying economically large eﬀects.
The spillover variable ( ) enters also with a significant estimate indicating that conflict is
higher in the homelands that adjoin partitioned ethnicities. In Appendix Table 16 - Panel  we
also report conditional NB estimates linking each type of conflict (battles, civilian violence, and
riots-protests) to ethnic partitioning. The results show a strong link between ethnic partitioning
and battles between government forces, rebels and militias and also show a significant impact
of ethnic partitioning on violence against civilians.

3.2.3    Accounting for Outliers. Poisson ML Estimates

Third, to account for outliers in the number of conflict events (see Appendix Table 2) and the
highly non-linear nature of the outcome variable, we estimated country-fixed-eﬀects Poisson
(ML) estimates dropping the top 5% of the dependent variable; when we do so, the Poisson
model assumption of mean and variance equality approximately holds.
        Appendix Table 15 - Panel  reports the estimates.   enters with a highly pos-
itive estimate, reassuring that our results are not driven by outliers. The Poisson estimates
(that exclude outliers) imply that partitioned ethnic groups experience an increase in civil con-
flict of approximately 45% (exp(038) − 1 = 046) as compared to non-split ethnicities.  


                                                 15
enters also with a positive coeﬃcient, which however is not always significant at standard con-
fidence levels. The results in Appendix Table 16 - Panel  further show that the link between
partitioning and battles (mostly between government troops, rebels and militias) and violence
against civilians is quite robust and not-driven by outliers. Appendix Table 17 reports country-
fixed-eﬀects Poisson ML estimates focusing on the number of events by conflict actors. The
results are similar to the NB estimates in the main part of the paper (Table 5). Ethnic parti-
tioning is systematically linked to conflict involving government troops or state-backed militias
(columns (1) and (7)) and rebels with an explicit agenda to counter the state via violent means
(columns (2) and (8)). There is also a significant link between ethnic partitioning and violence
against civilians (columns (4) and (10)). Perhaps more importantly the Poisson specifications
show that foreign interventions from nearby countries are more frequent in partitioned home-
lands (columns (5) and (11)). This suggests that partitioned ethnic groups are often used by
governments of neighboring countries to stage conflict on the other side of the border. In con-
trast, there is no link between ethnic partitioning and interventions from non-adjacent nations
(usually international peace-keeping missions) (columns (6) and (12)).

3.2.4   Not Accounting for Spillovers

Fourth, while the analysis reveals considerable spillovers of ethnic partitioning to nearby ethnic
regions (especially when focusing on the likelihood of conflict and on conflict duration), we also
estimated specifications without accounting for the share of nearby ethnic groups (in the same
country) that have been partitioned (  ). Appendix Table 18 reports the results.  
enters with a positive and significant coeﬃcient in all permutations; this applies both to conflict
intensity (in Panel ) and the likelihood of conflict (in Panel ). The LPM estimates imply
that the likelihood of conflict is 8 percentage points higher in the homelands of partitioned as
compared to non-split ethnicities.

3.2.5   Alternative Index of Ethnic Partitioning

Fifth, we repeated estimation with an alternative measure of ethnic partitioning using the 5%
land threshold to identify split groups. When we use this lower cutoﬀ we identify 266 partitioned
ethnicities, while the remaining 559 groups are classified as non-partitioned. Appendix Table 19
gives the results using as the dependent variable the number of main conflict events (in Panel )
and an indicator that switches to one when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced a main
conflict (excl. riots and protests) over the sample period (in Panel ). The ethnic partitioning
indicator enters all NB-ML specifications with a positive and highly significant coeﬃcient. The
linear probability model estimates are stable (0065 − 007) both in the full sample and in


                                                16
the border sample, implying that compared to non-split homelands, the likelihood of a main
conflict is approximately 65% higher in the ancestral homelands of split ethnicities.

3.2.6    Further Accounting for Overall Border Eﬀects

Sixth, to further isolate the impact of ethnic partitioning from an overall border eﬀect (which,
nevertheless, could still be driven by ethnic partitioning itself) we augment the specification
with higher-order polynomials in distance to the national border. Appendix Tables 20 and 21
report unconditional NB ML specifications with country-specific constants (in Panel ) and
country-fixed-eﬀects linear probability model (LPM) estimates (in Panel ) adding a third-
order and a fourth-order polynomial on distance from the centroid of each country-ethnic area
to the nearest border, respectively. The ethnic partitioning index enters with a highly significant
coeﬃcient both in the NB-ML and the LPM specifications in the full sample of country-ethnic
homelands (in column (1)). The estimate retains significance when we restrict estimation to
the border sample in column (5).   also enters with a positive (and in many specifications
significant) coeﬃcient implying sizable spillovers of ethnic partitioning to nearby regions. The
LPM specifications imply an 8% − 9% increased likelihood of conflict in the homelands of
split ethnicities. And the probability of conflict further increases by 8 percentage points when
half of the neighboring ethnic homelands are partitioned (as compared to ethnic homelands
where none of the nearby groups is split). Consistent with our results in the main text, ethnic
partitioning has strong eﬀects on battles between government forces, rebels and militias and
violence against the civilian population. In contrast, there is no link between partitioning and
riots and protests.

3.2.7    Ethnic-Family-Fixed-Eﬀects Specifications

Seventh, to minimize concerns that our estimates are driven by unobservable features -related
perhaps to ethnic social and political features or hard-to-measure geographic factors (such as
presence of palm trees or other agricultural endowments that were important during coloniza-
tion) we estimated specifications adding on top of the country constants ethnic-family fixed
eﬀects. These models are very restrictive, as we have 96 ethnic families; yet they further account
for local conditions and broad cultural, institutional, and other hard-to-observe ethnic-family-
specific factors. Examples of ethnic families include the Bedouin Arabs, the Tuareg, and the
Southwestern Bantu.
        Appendix Table 22 reports NB ML specifications with the number of conflict events
on the LHS (in columns (1) and (4)), linear probability model (LPM) estimates with the
binary index of conflict as the dependent variable (in columns (2) and (5)), and Poisson ML


                                                17
specifications with the duration of conflict (in years) as the dependent variable. The NB-ML
estimate on the ethnic partitioning index is highly significant, reassuring that the baseline
results are not driven by some hard-to-account-for ethnic family factor. The LPM estimates
suggest that, even when we solely examine within-country, within-ethnic-family variation, civil
conflict is significantly more likely to occur in border areas where partitioned ethnicities reside.
The Poisson-fixed-eﬀects specifications further show that ethnic partitioning is associated with
prolonged warfare. Moreover, the coeﬃcient on   is positive (and in the LPM significant
at the 1% level), implying considerable spillovers.
        Perhaps more importantly, the coeﬃcient on ethnic partitioning remains stable across
these restrictive specifications. The NB estimates in the country-fixed-eﬀects specifications
are 034 and 046 with the simple and the rich set of controls, respectively (see Table 2).
While standard errors increase, adding the ethnic family fixed eﬀects yields a comparable
estimate, 036. The same applies to the LPM specifications. The coeﬃcient estimates on
  in the specifications with only country fixed eﬀects range from 0066 − 0089 similar
to the specification that adds the 96 ethnic family constants, 0066. This implies that it is
unlikely that unobservable features -correlated with both partitioning and conflict- can explain
the strong negative association (see Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005)).

3.2.8    Regional Eﬀects

Eighth, we dropped iteratively ethnic homelands from each of the five main African regions
so as to investigate whether the results are driven by a particular part of the continent. The
regional classification follows Nunn (2008). Appendix Table 23 reports NB-ML (in Panel )
and LPM estimates (in Panel ). In (1)-(2) we exclude North Africa to account for the
fact that Europeans had contacts with the northern part of the continent since the ancient
times. In (3)-(4) we drop Southern African countries, as in this region Europeans established
sizable colonial communities. In columns (5)-(6) we drop Western African countries, as some
of contemporary African borders in this region correspond to internal administrative borders
of the Federation of the French West Africa. In (7)-(8) and (9)-(10) we exclude ethnic areas
in East Africa and Central Africa, respectively. This allows us to examine the robustness of
our results to influential observations, as the most deadly and prolonged conflicts have taken
place in Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan, Rwanda, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Moreover,
since most large pre-colonial African states were in Ethiopia and other parts of Eastern Africa
(Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014)), we further account for the role of pre-colonial conflict and
political development that tends to have long-lasting eﬀects. The results show that the strong
positive eﬀect of ethnic partitioning on civil conflict is not driven by a particular region (though


                                                18
the link at the intensive margin appears stronger for split groups in Central African countries).

3.2.9    Spatial Models

Ninth, we estimated spatial models to account formally for spatial spillovers and for factors
in nearby ethnic regions.4 Appendix Table 24 reports spatial lag specifications (estimated by
maximum-likelihood). Since spatial lag models are somewhat sensitive to the specification
details, we report estimates using two diﬀerent types of (inverse) weighting matrices (linear in
distance and quadratic in distance) and three diﬀerent models: (i ) simple spatial autoregressive
model that accounts for conflict in nearby regions; (ii) Durbin’s model that accounts for the
impact of the various controls of neighboring homelands; and (iii) the generalized spatial model
that allows both for a spatial autoregressive term and spillovers of all controls. In Panel  the
dependent variable is an indicator that switches to one for country-ethnic homelands that have
experienced a main conflict incident over the sample period and zero otherwise. In Panel  the
dependent variable is the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of main conflict events.
Accounting for spatial spillovers in conflict as well as the eﬀect of the independent variables in
the homelands of neighboring groups (in the Durbin and Generalized Spatial models) has little
eﬀect on the coeﬃcient of partitioning that retains its economic and statistical significance. In
line with our baseline estimates, the LPM estimates reveal that the probability of conflict is
7% − 9% higher in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities.

3.2.10     Modelling Spillovers Along Ethnic Family and Country Lines

Tenth, in Appendix Table 25 we further explore the impact of spatial spillovers running spec-
ifications linking conflict to ethnic partitioning conditioning on the total number of conflicts
in the same country (netting out conflict of each homeland) and conditioning on total conflict
within each ethnolinguistic family (netting out conflict in each homeland). The cross-sectional
estimates (with regional constants only) reveal that conflict is higher when an ethnic homeland
falls in a conflict-prone country and when there is a lot of conflict across groups in the same
family. These results are quite interesting as they show that conflict and violence against civil-
ians spread both along country and ethnic family lines. Yet, this has little impact on the ethnic
partitioning index that retains its economic and statistical significance.

3.2.11     Accounting for Pre-colonial Conflict and Political Centralization

Eleventh, we estimated specifications linking contemporary conflict to ethnic partitioning con-
trolling for the historical legacy of violence. Appendix Table 26 reports the results. Following
   4
    Harari and La Ferrara (2014) conduct a thorough exploration of the link between weather shocks and conflict
across Africa using similar state-of-the-art spatial econometric empirical models.


                                                      19
Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014), in columns (1) and (4) we augment the empirical specifi-
cation with the distance of the centroid of each ethnic homeland to the center of the closest
pre-colonial conflict. Given the lack of association between pre-colonial conflict and ethnic par-
titioning (see Table 1), it should not come as a surprise that the estimate on the partitioning
index retains its economic and statistical significance across all permutations. In columns (2)
and (5) we control for the impact of conflict during the slave trades augmenting the specifi-
cation with the estimates of Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) on the number
of slaves at the ethnicity level. The coeﬃcient on the partitioning index remains intact sug-
gesting that the latter does not capture conflict during the pre-colonial period. Since many
wars before colonization took place in the territories of large centralized kingdoms, in columns
(3) and (6) we include in the specification a dummy variable that takes on the value of one
if an ethnic homeland was part of a large pre-colonial kingdom (using data from Besley and
Reynal-Querol (2014)). Conditioning on pre-colonial kingdoms and empires is also useful as
we account for any long-lasting impact of political centralization (Gennaioli and Rainer (2006,
2007) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013)). The coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning
index remains positive and highly significant.

3.2.12     Accounting for Regional Income Diﬀerences

Twelfth, given the significant cross-country negative association between conflict and economic
development (see Collier and Hoeﬄer (2007) and Blattman and Miguel (2010) for reviews and
Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) for a seminal contribution on identification), we ex-
amined whether ethnic partitioning aﬀects civil conflict, conditional on income or whether the
partitioning-conflict nexus operates via income. In Appendix Table 27 we report specifications
associating all conflict events, battles between government forces and militias/rebels, violence
against civilians, and riots and protests with ethnic partitioning, conditioning on the log of
per capita GDP at the ethnic homeland level using data from the -Econ project (Chen and
Nordhaus (2011)). While in some specifications income enters with a significant negative coef-
ficient, this has no eﬀect on the estimate on the   indicator that retains its significance.5
The coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index is almost identical to the analogous estimates
in Tables 2 − 3. Moreover, ethnic partitioning itself is not systematically linked to regional
income (results not shown).6 This set of results, therefore, suggests that the eﬀect of ethnic
   5
     In these specifications we lose one observation (Tajakant in Mauritania), as the G-Econ project does not
report local GDP estimates.
   6
     We also estimated specifications proxying regional income with satellite images on light density at night (as
in Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014)) finding similar results. Ethnic partitioning is negatively associated
with luminosity at the country-ethnic homeland level, though the correlation is insignificant in most (though
not all) specifications.



                                                       20
partitioning on conflict does not operate through an overall decline in economic performance
of partitioned areas. Appendix Table 28 reports linear probability model estimates examining
the incidence of conflict by actor and ethnic partitioning. Ethnic partitioning is associated with
a much higher likelihood of civil conflict involving government troops and rebels. Moreover,
foreign interventions from neighboring countries’ troops is much more likely in the homelands
of split, as compared to non-split, ethnicities.

3.2.13   Measurement Error in the Conflict Data

Finally, to account for error-in-variables in the ACLED and UCDP, we defined a trichotomous
and a binary conflict measure combining the two datasets. We defined an ordered variable
ranging from 0 − 2 that takes on the value of two when both databases record conflict in a
given ethnic area, a value of one when country-ethnic areas experience conflict based on only
one of the two databases, and a value of zero when both datasets indicate the absence of conflict.
We also defined a binary index which equals zero when either of the two (or both) databases
indicate that no conflict has occurred and the value of one when an ethnic area has experienced
some conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP. We exclude 2011, 2012, and 2013
as UCDP stops in 2010 and focus on main conflict incidents, excluding riots and protests, that
are covered only by ACLED.
      Appendix Table 29 reports the results. The ethnic partitioning index enters the speci-
fications in the full sample with the trichotomous conflict measure with a positive and highly
significant coeﬃcient; the estimate (0125) implies that the likelihood to observe conflict in both
databases in a split country-ethnic area is approximately 25% higher as compared to non-split
homelands. The coeﬃcient is similar when we restrict estimation to border groups (013 −014)
though standard errors increase rendering the estimate insignificant (-stats 15 − 16). The
linear probability model estimates imply that the likelihood of conflict reported in both civil
conflict datasets is 65% − 9% higher for partitioned ethnic homelands. This estimate is quite
similar when we solely rely on ACLED (Table 2) or UCDP (Table 6).
      Likewise, we defined binary and trichotomous indicators combining ACLED’s info of
conflict involving government forces with UCDP state-based conflict; and we also defined bi-
nary and trichotomous indicators of civilian violence combining the ACLED’s and UCDP’s
corresponding categories. Appendix Table 30 gives the results. In line with the evidence in the
main part of the paper, the link between ethnic partitioning and civil conflict where govern-
ment forces and state-backed militias are involved is strong. The LPM coeﬃcient on  
in columns (2) and (4) suggest that state-driven conflict between government troops and rebels
is 11% more likely in the historic homeland of partitioned ethnicity. There is also a somewhat


                                                   21
weaker (though still significant) association between violence against the civilian population
and ethnic partitioning. Yet, as in the main part of the paper, this eﬀect is quantitatively
smaller as compared to ethnic partitioning’s impact on two-sided violence.


4     Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict. Heterogeneous Ef-
      fects
Our results suggest that ethnic partitioning has a strong eﬀect on civil conflict, on average.
Yet it may be the case that ethnic partitioning is especially harmful in certain environments.
Based on previous works on African development and the historical narrative of the influence
of the Scramble for Africa on conflict, in Appendix Tables 31 and 32 we explore potential
heterogeneous eﬀects of ethnic partitioning. Searching for heterogeneity is also helpful as it
sheds light on how and under which circumstances ethnic partitioning spurs conflict.

4.1   Heterogeneity w.r.t. Group Characteristics

In Appendix Table 31 we examine whether specific ethnicity-country characteristics mitigate
or accentuate the adverse eﬀect of ethnic partitioning on conflict. Panel  reports negative
binomial maximum likelihood estimates (NB) with country-specific constants, whereas in Panel
 we focus on the extensive margin of conflict estimating linear probability models (LPM)
with country fixed eﬀects. In each specification we allow the coeﬃcient on the binary ethnic
partitioning index to vary depending on the underlying characteristic.
      In column (1) we explore whether the relationship between partitioning and conflict
depends on whether a split region is surrounded by a high or a low share of split groups. These
models can be thought as examining possible interactive eﬀects between the ethnic partitioning
index (  ) and the spillovers measure ( ). The coeﬃcients are similar in the two sets
of split groups. This applies both to the NB and the LPM specifications. So, the adverse
impact of partitioning on local conflict is not systematically influenced by the frequency of
adjacent split groups. We further searched for potential interactive eﬀects between ethnic
partitioning and partitioning in nearby ethnic regions augmenting the baseline specification
(equation (1) in the main paper) with an interaction between   and  . The results
(not shown) reveal that the interaction term of the ethnic partitioning dummy with the share
of adjacent split homelands (  ∗ ) enters with a small and quite unstable coeﬃcient;
this implies that the main spillover index (SPIL) adequately captures the spatial externalities
of partitioning.
      In column (2) we examine whether relatively large partitioned ethnic groups have man-
aged to escape the negative repercussions of partitioning. In this regard we allow the impact


                                              22
of ethnic partitioning to diﬀer for country-ethnic groups that are above and below the median
population share in the respective country. The coeﬃcient on   is positive and highly
significant for both sets of split ethnicities.
      In column (3) we investigate whether the partitioning-civil conflict link is aﬀected by the
(population) size of the group’s partition on the other side of the border. These specifications
ask whether conflict is more frequent in partitioned regions whose brethren on the other side
of the border is relatively large or small in the neighboring country. In case of more than two
partitions we use the population share of the largest neighboring partition. This test is related
to the argument of Esteban and Ray (2008, 2011) that large within-ethnic group disparities
in income and political power increase the likelihood of civil war (Huber and Mayoral (2014)
present supportive cross-country evidence). The results show that the partitioning - conflict
nexus is independent of the relative size of the co-ethnics in neighboring countries.
      In column (4) we explore whether the impact of partitioning is mediated by the size of
ethnically similar groups in the same country. In this regard we allow the ethnic partitioning
index to diﬀer for ethnicities belonging to an ethnic family that consists of many (few) groups
in the same country. Ethnic partitioning is systematically linked to conflict for both sets of
groups.
      In column (5) we address a similar question. We investigate the role of ethnic similarity in
the immediate neighborhood of each partitioned group, allowing   to diﬀer for ethnicities
where most of adjacent groups are from the same ethnolinguistic family and those split groups
where most neighbors come from diﬀerent ethnic families. The NB estimates reveal that split
groups surrounded by a large share of ethnically similar entities experience on average more
conflict. This pattern may look puzzling at first-glance, as one may expect more heterogeneous
neighbors to intensify the impact of partitioning on conflict. Nevertheless, this finding is in
line with Spolaore and Wacziarg (2015) who show in a cross-country setting that genetically
similar populations are more prone to go to war with each other (even when one conditions
on distance, ties, and other similarities). Yet the LPM estimates in Panel  do not reveal any
diﬀerences on the impact of ethnic partitioning with respect to the share of ethnically similar
neighboring groups.
      In column (6) we examine whether being split by a squiggly or a straight-line-like border
aﬀects the relationship between partitioning and conflict. Following Alesina, Easterly, and Ma-
tuszeski (2011) we construct the fractal dimension of each border segment using the box-count
method that identifies straight versus squiggly borders. The intuition behind this measure
is that straight-line-like borders are more likely to be arbitrary compared to squiggly ones.
We allowed the impact of   to diﬀer for (two-way) partitioned groups that are split by


                                                  23
relatively straight borders (fractal measure below the median) and by more wavy boundaries
(fractal measure above the median). The NB estimates show that ethnic partitioning is system-
atically linked to civil conflict irrespective of the shape of the boundary. The LPM estimates
weakly indicate that ethnic partitioning is more detrimental for groups split by low-fractal
boundaries. Yet the coeﬃcients are not statistically diﬀerent from each other. Moreover, rea-
sonable permutations (dropping outliers, estimating Poisson ML models, etc.) do not yield
major diﬀerences on the coeﬃcient of   for the two sets of partitioned groups.
      In column (7) we allow the coeﬃcient on ethnic partitioning to diﬀer for groups split
across national borders separating colonial powers (e.g., Niger-Nigeria border that separated
the French and the British colonies) or separating countries that were ruled by the same colo-
nial power (e.g., Niger and Mali that were part of French West Africa). Roughly 65% − 70%
of split groups is Africa are intersected by borders that were separating colonial powers. The
remaining 30% − 35% of partitioned groups are split by political boundaries that were internal
administrative borders (such as those of French West Africa). The NB estimates in (Panel )
suggest that there is a diﬀerential pattern between these two broad sets of groups. Ethnici-
ties split between colonial powers are significantly more likely to engage in conflict compared
to groups that came to be split within the borders of a given colonizer. Nevertheless, this
diﬀerential pattern disappears when we look at the probability of conflict (in Panel ).
      In column (8) we examine whether being split in two countries or more countries aﬀects
the ethnic-partitioning-conflict nexus. In our sample, 69% of partitioned groups belong to
2 contemporary states with the remaining 31% being split between three, four, five and six
countries. Ethnic partitioning is associated with more conflict incidents and a higher likelihood
of conflict in both sets of split groups.
      Overall the results in Appendix Table 31 do not reveal much heterogeneity with re-
spect to group characteristics related to their size, the ethnic similarity of their neighbors, the
straightness of borders or the degree of partitioning.

4.2   Heterogeneity w.r.t. Country Characteristics

The Scramble for Africa has led to the creation of some very large and heterogeneous states.
Moreover, the border design resulted in Africa having the most landlocked countries across all
continents. In Appendix Table 32 we examine whether these aspects of the Scramble for Africa
interact with ethnic partitioning. Specifically, we explore how various country-level aspects
related to diversity, location and size modify the role of partitioning. Panel  reports negative
binomial maximum likelihood estimates looking at conflict events, whereas Panel  gives linear
probability model estimates focusing on the extensive margin of conflict.


                                                24
       In columns (1)-(3) we investigate whether the impact of ethnic partitioning diﬀers with
respect to the degree of ethnic, linguistic or religious fractionalization; we do so by allowing
the coeﬃcient on ethnic partitioning to diﬀer for countries scoring above and below the median
of the widely-used measures of ethnic, linguistic, and religious fractionalization of Alesina,
Devleeschauwer, Easterly, Kurlat, and Wacziarg (2003). While the NB estimates in Panel
 show that the coeﬃcient on   is somewhat larger for more heterogeneous countries,
the LPM specifications (that are less sensitive to outliers) do not reveal any diﬀerences. This
applies to all three measures of fractionalization. So, overall the estimates suggest that the
impact of ethnic partitioning is quite homogeneous and does not depend on the degree of
fractionalization.7
       In column (4) we examine whether ethnic partitioning has a diﬀerential impact on conflict
for landlocked countries (e.g., Chad, Burkina Faso, Rwanda, Mali, the Central African Repub-
lic). As Collier (2007) notices, the peculiar design of African colonial borders and the division
of the continent among colonizers, resulted in African having the highest share of landlocked
countries across continents. The NB and the LPM results suggest that ethnic partitioning is
particularly deleterious for ethnicities in landlocked countries. This result is interesting, as it
shows that two key aspects of the Scramble for Africa, ethnic partitioning and creating many
landlocked countries, interact crucially.
       In column (5) we allow the impact of the ethnic partitioning (  ) to diﬀer between
large and small countries (using as a cutoﬀ the cross-country median of land area). The NB-
ML specifications reveal that the impact of ethnic partitioning is more pronounced in large
countries, such as Zaire, Sudan, and Angola, as compared to smaller one. Yet the LPM
estimates on   are similar for large and small countries.


5     EPR-based Analysis. Further Evidence and Sensitivity Checks
5.1    Descriptive Evidence

Appendix Table 33-Panel  tabulates ethnic partitioning with EPR’s [Ethnic Power Relations
database, Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009)] classification on whether a group has engaged
in a civil war with an explicit ethnic angle or suﬀered from political discrimination from the
national government over the period 1960 − 2010. EPR reports data on an ethnicity’s degree
of participation in the central government (the group is classified either as junior, or senior, or
   7
     We also experiment with the various ethnolinguistic fragmentation measures of Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín, and
Wacziarg (2012) finding similar results (of not much heterogeneity). The results are similar when we group
countries based on the degree of cultural fractionalization (using data from Fearon (2003)), ethnic and religious
polarization (using the index of Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005)), or ethnic inequality (using data from
Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2015)).



                                                       25
dominant partner, or as having monopoly power) and its exclusion from national power (that
is further decomposed into being either discriminated against, or powerless, or autonomous).
The data cover 196 politically relevant ethnicities from 40 African countries. Using a multitude
sources, we linked EPR groups to Murdock’s map ethnicities. Our concordance assigned EPR’s
196 groups to 593 ethnicities in Murdock (1959) 234 groups (395%) are partitioned, while 359
(605%) are classified as non-split. We expect this concordance to be of great usefulness beyond
the current paper.
      Appendix Table 33-Panel  tabulates the trichotomous index of political violence for
partitioned and non-split ethnic groups. The construction of the ordered index of political
violence follows Besley and Persson (2011) who propose studying jointly one-sided violence
(repression) and two-sided conflict (civil war). The trichotomous index of political violence
equals two if the ethnic group has been involved in an ethnic civil war; equals one when the
group is subject to political discrimination from the government but not engaged in civil war;
and zero when the ethnicity is neither discriminated nor involved in a civil war.
      The descriptives reveal some interesting patterns. First, the likelihood of civil wars is
significantly higher for partitioned ethnicities. Second, the likelihood of facing discrimination
from the national government is also higher for split groups. Third, in Africa during the
post-colonial period, political violence results in most instances in major wars, rather than
repression. Fourth, the likelihood of ethnicities experiencing political discrimination from the
central government without leading to (or being an outcome of) a civil war, is 94% for split
groups and 67% for non-split groups. This implies that relatively speaking ethnic partitioning
matters more for two-sided rather than one-sided violence.

5.2   Exclusion from the Central Government and Ethnic Wars

Split groups are more often discriminated by the national government and more likely to engage
in ethnic wars. Nevertheless, as discussed in the main body of the paper these groups do
also participate sometimes in the various government coalitions resulting empirically in an
insignificant relationship between partitioning and the probability of a group having ever been
a junior, senior, or dominant partner in the central government. This nuanced political status
of split groups suggests that the vicious cycle of discrimination and conflict in which they are
often embroiled, comes into play primarily when excluded from the governing coalition. In
supplementary Appendix Table 34 we show this to be the case both in the cross-section and
in the time series of the EPR.
      Starting from the cross-section we split the sample into two groupings [see columns
(1) and (2)]. The first cluster includes the 331 ethnicities that have been excluded from the


                                               26
central government at some point during the 1960 − 2010 period (56% of the sample) whereas
the remaining 262 are groups that have always participated in some capacity in the central
government (44% of the sample). Note that exclusion from the central government does not
necessarily translate into being discriminated against by the latter. In fact, among the 331
groups that at some point were excluded only 110 were also discriminated with the vast majority
being classified as powerless by the EPR (and a small fraction of those excluded, 14%, having
some regional autonomy). Among the 262 groups that have always been included in a governing
alliance partitioned groups are no more likely to have participated in an ethnic war compared
to non-partitioned ones (the probability of ethnic war in this sample is 7%). The estimated
coeﬃcient in column (2) is very small (roughly 1%) and highly statistically insignificant. On
the contrary, among the 331 groups that have been excluded at some point split ethnicities
have a 17% higher probability of having participated in an ethnic war (the conflict incidence
is 37% in this sample).
      In columns 3 − 8 we further examined the impact of ethnic partitioning on the vicious
cycle of discrimination and conflict that seems to characterize African politics exploiting the
yearly variation of a group’s political status. Specifically, we estimated year-country-ethnicity
regressions with country fixed eﬀects and yearly dummies corresponding to the period 1960 −
2010 associating the onset of ethnic wars in year  with ethnic partitioning separately for
ethnicities that have been excluded from the central government in any of the past three (or
five) years and those that have been included in the national power-sharing coalition during
the same period. [Cederman, Wimmer, and Min (2010) show that exclusion from political
power is a strong predictor of ethnic-based civil wars.] The estimates imply that in periods
during which groups are excluded the likelihood of ethnic war onset is roughly 055% higher
for partitioned as compared to non-split groups. The magnitudes are large as the likelihood
of yearly war onset across the 593 groups during the post-independence period is 073%. In
contrast, the diﬀerence in the likelihood of civil war between split and non-split ethnicities
when they are both part of the central government is much smaller (018%). We verified
this pattern by pooling all year-country-group observations between 1960 − 2010 in the 40
African countries and interacted the ethnic partitioning index with an indicator that takes the
value of one when a group is excluded from the central government in any of the past three
years in column (5) (we use a 5-year window in column 8). The interaction terms between
exclusion from the national government and ethnic partitioning enter with positive and highly
significant estimates (roughly 050%), implying that the likelihood of civil war onset increases
considerably for partitioned ethnicities when they are left out of the governing coalitions. In
these specifications, the direct impact of political exclusion is also significantly positive (around


                                                 27
090%), while the direct impact of ethnic partitioning is positive but small and insignificant
(around 004%). Appendix Table 34 replicates the specifications of Appendix Table 34
using the 5% land threshold for classifying split groups finding similar results.
       These findings reveal that the link between partitioning and political violence established
in Table 7 of the main text is magnified in presence of non-cohesive political institutions man-
ifested in the exclusion of groups from central power. The rationale for why split groups react
disproportionately is straightforward. Partitioned ethnicities have a lower opportunity cost of
conflict aﬀorded by the presence of co-ethnics on the other side of the border, hence are more
likely to react violently against their exclusion from the governing coalitions. In equilibrium
the government is also discriminating against partitioned groups but both instances of political
violence have the same common origin that of non-inclusive political institutions.

5.3      Alternative Estimation Techniques of the Ordered Index of Political
         Violence

In the main body of the text when we link the ordered (0 1 2) index of political violence to
ethnic partitioning we use the fixed-eﬀects logit estimation of Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Fritjetrs
(2004). This is a three-piece estimation method which involves the following steps. First, we
estimated the mean value of the trichotomous index for each country. Second, we defined an
indicator that takes on the value of one for ethnicities of the ordered index above the country
mean (estimated in step 1) and zero otherwise. Third, we ran a conditional logit model with
maximum likelihood with this binary index (defined in step 2) as the dependent variable. We
also run multinomial logit specifications that allow estimating separately the impact of ethnic
partitioning (and the other controls) on repression and ethnic wars. In line with the results
in Table 7, columns (9)-(12)), the coeﬃcient on   in the civil war model is large (105)
and highly significant, while in the repression model the coeﬃcient is smaller (036) and not
statistically significant.
       In Appendix Table 35 we report alternative non-linear and linear estimates discussed
below.


       LS Estimation Columns (1)-(4) report OLS specifications. While OLS is not well-
suited when the dependent variable is trichotomous and non-linearities are present, it allows
accommodating for country-fixed eﬀects that account for national-level institutions and politics,
the identity of colonial power, ethnolinguistic fragmentation, etc. (see Nunn and Wantchekon
(2011) for a similar approach in estimating linear models via OLS in presence of an ordering
dependent variable). The coeﬃcient on the ethnic partitioning index is positive and highly sig-
nificant in all permutations; in line with the baseline estimates (in Table 7) ethnic partitioning

                                                28
increases the likelihood and intensity of political violence.


      Ordered Probit ML Estimation Yet non-linear models are more appropriate when
the dependent variable is ordered taking just three values. In columns (5)-(8) we thus report
ordered probit specifications, estimated with maximum likelihood. To circumvent the "inci-
dental parameter" problem arising from the non-linearity of the model and the inclusion of
country constants, we replace the country fixed eﬀects with regional constants.   en-
ters all specifications with a highly significant coeﬃcient further stressing the strong impact of
ethnic partitioning on political violence. As probit coeﬃcients are not easily interpretable we
obtained the predictions of the maximum likelihood estimation for split and non-split ethnic-
ities for each of the three outcomes: peace (neither political discrimination nor ethnic wars),
repression (group being only subject to political discrimination from the central government),
and civil war (ethnicity participating in an ethnic-based war). Figure 7 plots the estimated
probabilities of the specification in column (7). Ethnic partitioning matters crucially for ethnic-
based civil war; the estimated probabilities for civil war for split and non-split ethnicities are
315% and 194%. The non-linear model also yields a higher likelihood of repression for split,
as compared to non-split groups (905% versus 707%, respectively). Yet the diﬀerence is small
(195%).

                   0.8
                   0.7                            Partitioned Ethnicities (N=234)

                   0.6                            Non-Split Ethnicities (N=359)

                   0.5
                   0.4
                   0.3
                   0.2
                   0.1
                     0
                              Peace            Repression            Civil War
                                             Figure 7
      So, in line with the ordered logit ML estimates in Table 7 (columns (9)-(12)) and the
simple linear probability estimates (in columns (1)-(8) of Table 7 and Appendix Tables 36 − 37
below) linking ethnic partitioning separately to ethnic wars and political discrimination from
the national government, these specifications further show that partitioning is mostly associated
with major ethnic-based civil wars, as compared to one-sided violence (where the ethnicity
is subject to discrimination from the national government, without being involved in ethnic


                                                29
conflict).

5.4    Alternative Index of Ethnic Partitioning

In Appendix Table 36 we report within-country linear probability model estimates associating
participation in ethnic civil wars (in (1)-(4)) and political discrimination from the national gov-
ernment (in (5)-(8)) at the ethnicity-country level to ethnic partitioning using the 5% threshold
of a group’s homeland to identify split groups. In line with the baseline estimates (in columns
(1)-(8) of Table 7) the binary ethnic partitioning index enters with a positive and highly signif-
icant coeﬃcient. The LPM coeﬃcient in column (4) that besides country fixed eﬀects includes
a rich set of controls suggests that the probability to engage in an ethnic war is 12 percent-
age points higher for split groups. Interestingly, this estimate is quite similar to the baseline
estimates linking ethnic partitioning to state-based conflict (in UCDP) and conflict where the
government troops participate (in ACLED), see Tables 5 and 6 in the main text. The analogous
estimate for discrimination in column (8) suggests that the likelihood of being discriminated
from the national government is approximately 85 percentage points higher for partitioned
ethnicities.

5.5    Regional Eﬀects

Similar to our analysis linking partitioning to conflict, we examined whether a particular region
drives the association between ethnic partitioning, discrimination, and ethnic wars dropping
iteratively homelands from each African region. In Appendix Tables 37 and 38 we use the base-
line ethnic partitioning index and the alternative partitioning index based on the 5% cutoﬀ,
respectively. The results show that ethnic partitioning is associated with an increased likeli-
hood of political discrimination from the national government of approximately 6% − 7%. The
estimates further show that ethnic partitioning is strongly related to a group’s engagement in
ethnic-based civil wars across all African regions. The coeﬃcients suggest that the likelihood
of ethnic wars is 10% − 12% higher for split ethnicities. Across all 5 samples (with both the
benchmark and the alternative ethnic partitioning index) the coeﬃcient in the civil-war speci-
fications is larger than the analogous of political discrimination. This accords with the ordered
logit estimates in Table 7 (and Appendix Table 35) revealing that the impact of partitioning
on two-sided violence is quantitatively larger than its impact on one-sided violence.




                                                30
6     DHS-Based Analysis: Further Evidence and Sensitivity Checks
6.1   Descriptives

Appendix Table 39 - Panel  presents descriptives on the Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHS) sample. In total we have information on 88 171 individuals from twenty Sub-Saharan
African countries. The countries and interview years are: Benin in 2001, Burkina Faso in 2010,
Central African Republic in 1994, Ethiopia in 2011, Ghana in 2008, Guinea in 2005, Kenya
in 2008, Mali in 2006, Mozambique in 2011, Malawi in 2010, Namibia in 2000, Niger in 1998,
Senegal in 2010, Sierra Leone in 2008, Togo in 1998, Uganda in 2011, the Democratic Republic
of Congo in 2007, and Zambia in 2007. 25 631 respondents reside in partitioned homelands
and self-identify with split groups (29%). 36 694 individuals reside outside the homelands of
split groups and do not self-identify with partitioned ethnicities (416%). 13 256 respondents
reside in partitioned ethnic homelands but do not identify with partitioned groups (15%), while
12 590 identify with split ethnicities, while residing in non-partitioned ethnic homelands (143).
Appendix Table 39 - Panel  gives summary statistics for the main variables employed in the
empirical analysis. Appendix Figure 8 gives the spatial distribution of respondents.




                                                                                                                                                                              !                             !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                               !   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!

                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                    !                  ! !! !                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                   !!          !
                                                                                                                                                   !                   !                            !!
                                                                                                                                                              !!!!!             ! !
                                       !!!!! !! !
                                                ! !!
                                                 ! !!!                                                                                             !      !!! !                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !        !
                                  !                    !                                                                                                    !! !                                       !
                                !
                                !!
                                !          !
                                                        !!
                                                         !!! !                                                                                           ! !! !                        !          !! !                           !       ! !
                                !!                         !!
                                                            !                                                                                    ! ! ! ! !!                   !                  !
                                    !                       !                                                                                                                                                   !
                                    !
                                    !!!!! !                  !!!
                                                               !!
                                                                !!                                                                                      !!                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                      !
                                !!! ! !!!                        !!
                                                                  !!                               !! !   !! !                             !            !  !                      !                                  !                          !       ! !
                              ! !!!!        !   !        !         !!!                             !!                        !                                       !      !                                 !                 !                            ! !!                               !! !
                            !
                             !!
                                                    !                                     !!                 !          ! !                             ! !! !!!                                                                           !                     !!!
                            !
                            ! !!! !!!   !
                                        !     !                                   ! !                  ! !                             !                      !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                !!                             ! !                                  !              !                    !             !       !
                      !
                      !!
                      !!
                      !
                        !
                        !
                          !
                          !!!!!
                        !!!      !!!!   !
                                        !                               !!          !                                            !              !    ! ! !!!     !
                                                                                                                                                                 !! !
                                                                                                                                                                 !                             !! ! ! !                  !                                 ! !!!! ! !        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !       !               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!                 !
                      !  !! !   ! ! !!!!  ! !                                      !! !                    !      !                    !        !
                                                                                                                                                !!       ! !!!!!            !!!! ! !            ! ! !! !             !! !!                !               ! ! !!!! !!                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !  ! !
                           !!!!!!! !
                                   !!  ! !!      !!                   !!
                                                                                                    ! !!   !                          !! ! ! !              !!!!!!!!!                        !!                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!!!!    !!!!!!
                               !   ! !     !! !                                            !                       !                                                               ! ! ! ! !!! ! !                                         ! !! ! ! !          !!! ! !                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                       !
                               !
                             !!! !!! !!!
                                      !  !!
                                         ! ! !! !!!! !
                                                           !!                              !          !                               !      ! !!!! !
                                                                                                                                             !                   !        !! !! !               ! ! !! ! ! !                    ! !!!           !!            !!!!     !           ! !!!!!! !!       !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!!!   !!!!!
                                !! !!!!
                                       !!
                                        !! !!! !! !!! !             !                                                      !                         !       ! ! ! ! !!!!! !          !               !!      !        !        !      !!        !        !!        ! !! !  !                      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !! ! ! !     ! ! !
                                       !   !                                                                                          !                                             !    !    !                               !                  !                                     ! !
                                   !   !
                                       !!! !
                                  !! ! ! ! ! !
                                                          !!
                                                           !
                                                            !                 !                                         !
                                                                                                                      !! !!          !  !! !! !  !            !         !!
                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                          !     ! !           !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !       ! ! ! !!               !      !          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !!  !!! !!  !! !!!          !          !! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !       ! ! !!!   ! !!
                                                                                                        !                    !! !!!! !
                                                                                                                                                 !!! !            ! !   ! !  !!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                               ! ! !! !! !                ! ! !! !! !!                       !!         !! !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                         ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !         ! !!
                                          !!     !         !!                   !              !!           !        !!
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                       ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! !!! !! ! !!!!                      !!  !! !     !!! ! !! !   ! !!                   ! ! !!     ! !! !           !! !                        ! !!!   ! ! !         !         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !          !
                                                                             !                           !!                                                               !! !                                                                                            !!                       !
                                          !!! ! !
                                                      !
                                                      !!!                               !                             !
                                                                                                                                 !       !           !!! !! ! !!!!!!            !!!!!!!! !!!! !!!          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !             ! !! !      ! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! !                             !! ! !    !! !               !!         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !                ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                              !!! !!!!! !       ! !!
                                           !!!!! !    !!                  ! !! !                   !                  !
                                                                                                                      !!        !! ! !    ! ! !!                      ! !!!!         !! !   ! ! !!                                    ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!      !        ! !! ! !                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !              ! !!                       ! !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                         ! !! !!                  !
                                   !!!!!!! !       ! !                                                       !        !
                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                       ! ! !       !    !             ! !! ! !                    !!! !!!!!                                                                                !! ! ! !                 ! ! !! !!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !             !! !  !
                                   !        !
                                            !                     !! !
                                                              !! !!       !!! !                                       !
                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                       !         ! ! ! !!! !    ! !           !!       ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                       !  ! !!          ! !!!!       !! !          ! ! !              !            !! !! !                                                                         !               ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                !!!!! ! !!!                 !        ! !                                      !
                                                                                                                     ! !!!                  !!! ! ! !!! ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!!                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! ! !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!      !! ! ! !         ! !!   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !         ! !         ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !!           ! !
                               !!                            !                                        !
                                                                                                                         ! ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!!!!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                    !  !!          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !  ! ! !              !                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !!!                                                   !        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !    ! !
                                                                                    !                              ! !                          ! ! ! ! !!!       ! !!!    ! ! !!!     !    !!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                              !     !!!! ! ! ! ! !                                                                  !! ! !!   !!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!          ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !         !          !
                                                                    !!  !! !                         ! ! !! !! ! !
                                                                                                                               !!            ! ! ! !! ! ! ! !!                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                               !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!       !              !!              !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !                       !! ! !             !        ! !!!                 !! ! ! !            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                    !          !!     ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !!  !! ! !! !!
                                                           !     !         !
                                                                       !! !!   !  !
                                                                                                                    !!   !          !  !
                                                                                                                                     ! ! ! ! !!    ! !            !
                                                                                                                                                        ! !!!! ! !!! !! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!       !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !      !        !  !              !! !        ! !!! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !! ! !!          !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                          ! !! !!!!       !! !!           !! !          ! !                 !! !   !! ! !!!          !!! !       ! ! ! ! !!                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !                  !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !!! !              !               !            !       !! !! !! !           !         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !         !! !!
                                                                       !!!                                                                !!!                       !! ! !!                      ! !! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !          ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                               !      !      ! !! !             !
                                                       !! ! ! !!!!         !! ! !!!
                                                                        !!!!!!                             ! ! !               !!! !
                                                                                                                                       !!!! !         !!!!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                  ! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                         !!! !           !!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                    ! !! !                     !      ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                          !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !          !              !! !
                                                                   !!!!!!
                                                                   !                                      !! !          ! !! !                 ! !                                         !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                              !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! !   !  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!                  !       !                            !                   !                   !             !! !          !     ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                    !!! ! ! !!            !!! !!
                                                                          !              !! !                        !      !      !        !!!!
                                                                                                                                             !   !      !!!! ! !     !
                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                       !!!               !!   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                              !   !! !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !           !                     !            !                                                  !!!               ! !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !!  !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !            !!
                                                 !!
                                                  ! !
                                                   ! !!!
                                                                  !     !!!!!! ! !      !     !         !!
                                                                                                        !        !                       !
                                                                                                                                        ! !! !     !                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                     !!!                !          !!        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!! !!!                       !                                             !!       !                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !! !!       ! !                                                                                                                                                                                               !!         !!    ! ! !!!                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                         ! ! !!!! !      ! ! !! !!                       !!                         !      ! ! ! !! !   ! !! ! !  !!                   !                ! !! !                                                                                   !!         !        ! !                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                            !!!  !        !
                                                   !! ! !!! !                !! !
                                                                              !                             !!                 !                                   !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !! ! !                         ! !! !    !!! ! ! ! !                                  !            !!                !!! !                  !!                !          ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !! !         !      ! !      ! !!!       !
                                                        !!
                                                                   !                !                      !
                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                      !!                          ! ! !        !! !  !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                          !                   !! !            !! ! ! !!                  !                          !! ! !                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!          !! !!!!! ! !!!!!                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!! ! ! !!                   !        ! ! !!
                                                          !       !!!
                                                                    !
                                                                     !          ! ! !!                                                                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                        !            !! ! !                   !               !  !!!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !           !! ! !                !!!! !!   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !          !!!                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !            !            !             !             !! !
                                                                       !                ! ! !      !         !     !                                              !                      !                 !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !  !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!        !              !                                         !!  !  !      !          !            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !     !        !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                            !!!!!                  !                                                   !       !                         !                    !  !          !       !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!                 !               !                      !           !! ! ! !!                         ! !!! ! !         !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !           ! !! !! ! !!
                                                           !
                                                           !
                                                           !!              !!! !!! ! ! ! !                                 !               ! !                                          ! !   ! !! ! ! !!                     ! !   !                                 !                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! ! !             ! !                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !     !    !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!! !
                                                           !
                                                              !! ! ! !!! !                                                                                                                                      ! !   !!           !!                               ! ! ! !!       ! !! !! !! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                  !                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                            ! !               ! ! !!! ! !!!                                                                      !                              !     !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                !!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                    !!!  !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                   !!
                                                                    !!! !!!!! !! ! !         !                    !!                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!            ! !!                                         !!  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!                                  !! !
                                                                  !!
                                                                   !
                                                                    !
                                                                    !!
                                                                    !  !! !!   !!        ! !!!!!!
                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                       !                                                              !                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!! ! !! ! ! !                            ! ! !!         !                        !! ! ! !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !         !     !
                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !
                                                                 !!! !! !
                                                                       !!!!
                                                                         ! !!
                                                                               !
                                                                                ! !! !  ! !
                                                                                          !                       !!                     !                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!                                                       !                !!!        !              ! ! ! !      !         ! !           !                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                               !       !!      !!!
                                                                 !! !
                                                                      !
                                                                       ! !!   ! !!!! !!!
                                                                                       !! !
                                                                                          !!!!!!  !!!      !!         !       !        !            !                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !          !! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                 !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !        !             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! !  !! ! ! ! ! !                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!!!        !    !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!!
                                                                !!
                                                                 !!
                                                                  !!! !!              !!  !!!    !! !!!! !!
                                                                                                 !           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                       !!                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !! !
                                                                   !
                                                                   !
                                                                   !        !!!!!!      !!    !
                                                                                              !!!!!    ! ! !                                                                       ! ! ! ! ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !         !        !       !! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                           !                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                 !        !! ! ! ! !
                                                                 !! !!!!! !!  !! !  !! !!!!
                                                                                       !   !!!!
                                                                                            !!! ! ! !         !!!                 !
                                                                                                                                                !                      !          !                                ! !!! !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !   !!! !! !                !!                     !!           !             !                      !                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !                  ! !
                                                                       !!
                                                                      !! !   !!!!!!
                                                                                  !!!
                                                                                    !!!!
                                                                                       !!
                                                                                        !!!!!
                                                                                          !!
                                                                                          !                !! !                              !                       !
                                                                                                                                                                  !! !       !!!            !!             !! !  !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !       !!!           ! !      !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!          !! ! ! !                !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                           !!     !!
                                                                                 !!! !!!!! !  !                 !!        !!                    !
                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                 !                              ! !!                           !!!!! !           ! !               !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!!    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!! !     !              !! ! ! !                                                                !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! ! !!              ! !
                                                                         !!!! !!!
                                                                               !!!!!
                                                                               !              !! ! !               !
                                                                                                                   !                                                  !!!! !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!               ! ! ! ! !!                     ! !!! ! ! !                                !       !           !                  !!                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!                  !
                                                                             !!       !! ! ! ! !                  !                           !         !
                                                                                                                                                        !                              !                      !! !!!  ! ! ! !! !    ! ! !!      ! !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                        ! !              ! ! !!     !! ! !   !!!                     ! ! !    ! ! !                  !        !                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!                !!!!!! ! ! ! !
                                                                         ! !!!!    !!  !! !    !! !  !! !! !   !!! !        !
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                    !           !          !          !! !   !
                                                                                                                                                                        ! !! !                             ! !!! !    ! !! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!! !       ! ! ! !       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !! !! !       !! !            !                               !           ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                        !
                                                                                     !!          ! !!!!!   !! !!   !!                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! ! !!         !!!!!  ! !    !!!                   !   !                      !!                                                                          !                     !                                                                                                                                                                            !!! !           !! !!!
                                                                                   !! ! ! !  !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                              !! ! !!
                                                                                                                 !! !
                                                                                                               ! !!!!
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                    !! ! ! ! !              !           !!! !!! !!! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!!                 !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !!!!    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!  !! !!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !    !     !  !                 !         ! !  !!!!! ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !           ! !! !     !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !       ! !!!    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                         !   !
                                                                                             !                !                                                !                !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                    !     !!      !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                           !        !!   !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !    !! !!  !         !     !       ! !!      !!       !     ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                 !                             !                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! ! !! !     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                !
                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                       !
                                                                                              !! !! !!
                                                                                                     ! !         !! !         !     ! !                  !       !!!! ! !! !        !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                    !  ! !! !!       !! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !!       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!!!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! ! !       !! ! ! ! !!!!!!! !! ! !                      ! ! ! !!! !!   !! !!            ! !!          !!!                   !    !                        !                                                                                                                                                                                !!!
                                                                                            !     !!!
                                                                                                  !                                     ! ! !                      !
                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!     ! !       !!                          !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !! !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! ! !!! ! !! ! !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                         !              !!                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                 !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !!!!!
                                                                                                 !!! !!
                                                                                                        ! !        !                                        !                   !!            ! ! !!! !               !  !!! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                             !!           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !             ! !!     !!!                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !!
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                              !             ! ! !  !! !! !              !!                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !!     !!! !! !       !!   ! ! !!!      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                  !             !! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !  !! !!!!!   !       ! ! !!!    !!!!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                    !      !!         !               !
                                                                                                  !!!
                                                                                                        !! ! ! !       !
                                                                                                                      !!         !                                                         !!!!!  !! !!! !!!!!                                             ! !! !             ! !!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!!!! !                                    !      !                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !
                                                                                                      !                                    ! ! !! !                                  ! !!! !      !    !                                                                      !!!       !!                        ! !!       !                      ! !                              !      ! !!            !                                                                                                                                                             ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                         !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                      !! !         !! !!!!         !      !
                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! ! !!                 !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!        !                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!       !              ! !!!!      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !! !                                          ! !                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                          !!!          !
                                                                                                                       !                        !          !   ! ! ! !               ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !!!     !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !!!! !      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!                                     !!           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                        !                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                     ! !
                                                                                                         !!     !                  !                   ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                            !                                 !!                                                                           ! !      !!                         !!! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                          ! !! ! !!     !
                                                                                                                        !!  !                          !! !!
                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                            !!          !! !!! !!!!      !!!!!                                                                  !!      !!!!      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! ! !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !    !!                                   !                                      ! ! !           !
                                                                                                              !! ! !!!  !!!                                              !!        !! !! !                                                                        !!!!!! !! !! !!! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !!        !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                  ! !!         !!           !               !         !                                                      !       !
                                                                                                              !                                                                   !!!                                                                               !! !    ! !!!                       !!                                                                    !                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                 !! !  !!!!        !                                                                                                                                  ! !! !!!! !!!!!!       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!!                ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !                                                                                 !                                                                         !                       !
                                                                                                                    !!! !!
                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                         !!          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!!!!! ! !              !! ! ! ! !! ! !                                     !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                      ! !  !                                                                                                                                          !                                !!!!                !!                                              !     !                 !     !!
                                                                                                                          !!!                                                                                                                                                    !                     !              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !   !       !          ! !! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !  ! ! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!     ! !! !                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                 !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                         !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                             ! !!                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !         ! ! !           !                 !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                           !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!! !!!! !               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !           !                             !!          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!                         !                                                                                                                                                           !   ! !! !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !     !! ! !! !              !                                          ! !!                                                                                                                          !!!!!! !           !                                       !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! ! ! !!! !                                                                !                                                                                                                       !   !!!! !       ! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! ! !!      !        !                        !                                             !                                    !                                                                        !!          !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !!!                             !




                     Location of Respondents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                 !    !        !                                                                                                                                         !!        !!                                         !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!              !                                                             !                                                                                                                  ! !! !!       !! !! ! !         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                           !                                       !! !          !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! !!!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                   !                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !         !!! ! !!!! !                            ! !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                 !                        !!   !!!!!      ! !!        !!! ! !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   !           ! !                                                   !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !       !            !!         !                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!! !       ! !! !!  !!!!     !           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !               !                                                                                   !!! !! ! !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!!! !          !    ! !!!!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! ! !!!         ! !                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !            !!! !!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!  !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! !!! !          !                     !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !                         ! !!!! !!  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                           !      !!!! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                ! !!!!  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!!!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!                           !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !         ! !!!!! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !   !!! !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!    !      !! ! !           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !! !         !!!!                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!!! !! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                        !




                          in the DHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!             ! !!!!  !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!!   !!  ! !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!                                                                                                                                !!! !!         !!!!!!! !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!    ! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! ! ! !! !!        !               !   !!!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! ! !       !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                            !           !     !!                            !! ! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! ! ! ! ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                               !! ! !! !!!!  !                     !!! !!!!! !!!           !!!!   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!! !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !        !                                    !                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                         ! !  !!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                     !                !!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !!   !!        !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !!!      !                          !! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!  !!    ! !! !!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                            ! ! !!!  ! !                                   !!! !              ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !        !!! ! !                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !! !!                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                        !                                                                                             ! !!!                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                          !              !                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                   !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !                           !        !                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                   !                              !                                                                                  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                !          !                                                                 !    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                       !



                                                        Villages in the DHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                 !       !                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !        !                  !                                              !            !                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !                                                   !!                                                                                     !!              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                     !!!                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                                            !       ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !      !                                        !                    !!                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! ! ! !                                                                            !                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !           !!                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !!!       ! !! !                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                       !                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!   !                                     !




                                                        Boundaries of African Countries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           !         ! ! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                           !   !!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                            ! !                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                            !!!!        !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!                               ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                    !   !!!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                             !                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !   !        !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                   !!! !    !!  !!!! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !     ! !   !     !!! !!   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!       !             !!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !            ! !                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                         !             ! !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                               !                !       !       !! !!!!! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !        !!            !             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!!                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !                            ! !!!          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !!                               !   !!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                 ! ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!!                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                             !!!!!     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !              !                                !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !    !                          !                !!                 !  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                    !!         !                                     ! !!  !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !  !                                      !!!!!  ! !    !                        !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                        !!   !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !!!!!!     !           !                          !!! !! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !    ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                !! !!                     !       ! !    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                !              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !        ! !! !!!! !  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !                             !            ! !                 !!        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!!!!!!           !! !!                       ! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !       !            !               ! ! !!          !           ! !! !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!!! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                     ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                              !    !!!! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!   !!        !                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                   !!                          !!!!!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!     !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!!!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!            !                      !      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !       !               ! !!! !      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !!!!!                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                      !                 !! !! !!         !!   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !  !!!!!!!       !! !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!               ! !!!       !                !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!   !! !!!     !! !             !                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !                              !                  !                     !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !!    !!!!!!! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!                     !        ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !        !                    !                      !            !                    !!!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !!! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !      ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                      ! ! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!            !!                  !      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                               ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!! !               !               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !  !! !                        !!       !! !        ! !            !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !              !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! ! !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!    !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !! !!                                 !             !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !      !      !       !          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                !               !!                        !        !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !               ! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !       !!!          !! !!!        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!                                                      ! ! !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!    ! !                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !                                                                                 !!!               !!!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!   !             ! !             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !        !                                         !                   !             ! !  !!           !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!!         ! !!      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!  !! !                       !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !         !                                !                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !        ! ! ! !!                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !                                                                        !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                               !                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !              !!              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !      !                                           !                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !       !!    !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! ! !                  !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !   ! ! !!  !!!                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! !    !!!                                                                                     ! !!               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !       !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!                  !!                                                                          ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !   ! !                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !  !    !!!              !!  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !      ! !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!                                       ! ! ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !                                          !!   !!! !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                !!  !!! !                                                 ! ! !!                           !        !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !          !        !                                                                                                                                                                        !                                 !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!                !                                                                               !                                                                      !                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                            ! !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! ! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                                               !!                                                                                                                                                     ! !!   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! !            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                      !!                                                                                                                                            !                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                     !                                                                                                                                                      !! !      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !            !! !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! !             !                            !                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                        !                                                                                                                                      !!         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !       !!                                                                                                                                            !!        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                        !!! !                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !            !                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                 !           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!                               !                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !             !!           !!                                    !   !                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                       !                        !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                    !                                                                                                                                                          !          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                    !                !                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                !                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                             !                                                                                                                                                               !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                 !                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                         ! !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                    !                                                                                                                                    !        !                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                      !     !    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!! !            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!  !!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!  !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!  ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                             ! !! ! ! ! !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                     !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !                                                                                                                                                           !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!              !!       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          31
6.2   Enumeration-Area Fixed Eﬀects Estimates

We repeated estimation exploiting within DHS enumeration-area (village/town/city) variation.
Estimating enumeration-area-fixed-eﬀects specifications allows us to control for (observed and
unobserved) local factors at a very fine level; as such the ethnic partitioning indicator iso-
lates the impact of the respondent’s ethnic origin. Appendix Table 40 reports the within-
enumeration-area estimates. These extremely restrictive specifications -that include roughly
8 000 city/town constants- assess whether diﬀerences in wealth and education across ethnic
lines are related to ethnic partitioning among individuals residing in the same location. In
spite of the eﬃciency loss (as most of the variation in both the explanatory variables and the
ethnic partitioning index is absorbed by the village fixed eﬀects), the coeﬃcient on the ethnic
partitioning indicator is negative and significant except when we focus on years of schooling
among respondents close to the border. These estimates point out that even when we compare
respondents currently residing in the same village, those of a partitioned ethnic background
have lower access to utility services and are weakly less educated.

6.3   Looking at Movers and Non-Movers

The specifications in Table 9 of the paper leverage the presence of “movers” (i.e., members of
split groups residing outside their ancestral homelands) for identification. While in all specifi-
cations in Table 9 we control for whether an individual currently resides outside his ancestral
homeland, there may be unobserved or hard-to-account for diﬀerences between "movers" and
"non-movers". Moreover, one may wonder whether by changing one’s location the eﬀects of
ethnic partitioning can be mitigated. For example, is it the case that individuals from par-
titioned ethnicities fare better when they move away from their group’s ancestral homeland?
And does it matter if individuals move to a non-split ethnic area or to a diﬀerent from their
group’s partitioned homeland?
      To address these questions we repeated estimation in three distinct subsets of the DHS
data. The first comprises of respondents that reside inside the boundaries of their ethnicity’s
ancestral homeland (coined as “non-movers” or “indigenous”). The second and third subsets
focus on “movers”, i.e., individuals currently residing outside their ethnicity’s ancestral home-
land. The second subset consists of "movers" residing in non-split ethnic homelands. The third
focuses on "movers" residing in homelands of partitioned groups.
      Appendix Table 41 reports the results of the within-country analysis for the three diﬀer-
ent cuts of the DHS data.




                                               32
      Non-Movers First, in columns (1)-(2) and (7)-(8) we focus on "indigenous" ("non-
movers"), individuals that currently reside inside their group’s ancestral homeland. "Non-
movers" consist of 39% of the full sample, in total 34 179 respondents. Focusing on this
subset, we are no longer able to distinguish whether the impact of ethnic partitioning is a
location-specific attribute (as the georeferenced conflict data suggest) or whether partitioning
is associated with the ethnic identity of the respondent (as the analysis with the Ethnic Power
Relations Database point to). However, by looking at this sample we mitigate concerns that
our baseline estimates (in Table 9) are driven by some sort of selection into migration; this
is because we now focus squarely on individuals that live within the confines of their ethnic
historical enclaves. The estimates reveal that ethnic partitioning is associated with lower wealth
levels and fewer years of schooling. These estimates directly complement the findings linking
ethnic partitioning to civil conflict (with ACLED and UCDP), by showing that not only civil
wars and one-sided violence against civilians, but also public goods provision is lower in the
homelands of partitioned, as compared to non-split, ethnicities.


      Movers in Non-Partitioned Ethnic Homelands Second, in columns (3)-(4) and
(9)-(10) we examine the link between ethnic partitioning and well-being (public goods provi-
sion and education) focusing only on “movers” (i.e., individuals residing outside their ethnic
group’s ancestral homeland) residing in enumeration areas (villages/town/cities) falling within
the ethnic boundaries of non-split groups. These specifications are run on a sample of 30 606
individuals (347% of the total number of respondents in the DHS). These estimates do not
confound the impacts of residing in a split homeland and identifying with a split ethnicity
(something that is inadvertently the case when we focus on "non-movers" only). Moreover, by
restricting estimation to enumeration areas within the boundaries of non-split homelands we
shed light on whether individuals from partitioned ethnicities can mitigate the adverse con-
sequences of partitioning by relocating towards non-split ethnic territories (that as we have
shown are less prone to conflict). The coeﬃcients are all negative, indicating that this is not
the case. Respondents identifying with partitioned groups have worse living conditions and are
less educated, as compared to respondents, who self-identity with non-split groups.


      Movers in Partitioned Ethnic Homelands Third, in columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12)
we focus on "movers", residing in partitioned ethnic homelands. While this is the smallest (of
the three) subset, we still have 23 386 respondents (265% of DHS sample). The strong negative
association between ethnic partitioning (at the identity level) and public goods provision (as
reflected in the DHS composite wealth index) and schooling is also present when we focus on
individuals residing outside their group’s ancestral homeland (“movers”), but residing in the

                                               33
region of some other split-by-the-national border group. These results that account for selection
into location further show that ethnic partitioning is systematically linked to under-provision of
public goods and lower levels of schooling. A similar pattern obtains if we perform the analysis
among "movers" and split the enumeration areas into rural and urban ones.

      Summary Interestingly the point estimates on the binary ethnic partitioning index
(at the ethnic identification level) are quite stable across all three subsets ((i) "non-movers",
(ii) "movers" residing in non-split ethnic homelands, and (iii) "movers" residing in split ethnic
homelands). The coeﬃcient stability across all three data subsets reassures that our baseline
estimates do not capture heterogeneity (at least with respect to the relocation dimension) and
are less likely to reflect the impact of internal migration. The stability of the implied economic
magnitudes further suggests that the adverse legacy of ethnic partitioning cannot be readily
alleviated by moving out of one’s ancestral split homeland into other homelands (partitioned or
not-split) indicating the generalized negative impact of the Scramble for Africa for individuals
of partitioned groups.

6.4   Persistence

The results linking ethnic partitioning to conflict and education/public goods point out that
the Scramble for Africa has had sizable long-run eﬀects on economic development. Since the
mid/late 1990 African countries, nevertheless, have made considerable steps towards demo-
cratic institutions, while over the past decade growth has picked up across the continent. Hence,
it is important from a policy standpoint to assess whether the recent economic and political
modernization eﬀorts have been associated with convergence in economic conditions between
members of split and non-split groups. To shed light on this question we exploit the fact that
the DHS respondents report their year of birth and repeat estimation separately for "old" and
"young" cohorts. Appendix Table 42 reports the results. In odd-numbered columns we restrict
estimation to "old" respondents, while in even-numbered columns we restrict estimation to
"young" respondents; as the cutoﬀ year we use 1977 the median date of birth across respon-
dents (the pattern is similar when we use 1975, 1980, or 1985). The results suggest that the
negative eﬀect of ethnic partitioning is strong both across "old" and "young" cohorts. More-
over, the estimate on the ethnic partitioning index is similar across the two subsets, revealing
that the adverse eﬀects of partitioning are quite persistent.

6.5   Summary

Taken together the empirical regularities uncovered, point out that the consequences of the
Scramble for Africa, as manifested in the event of partitioning, are not circumscribed by the

                                               34
contours of a given ancestral ethnic homeland, but have significant repercussions for the mem-
bers of partitioned groups irrespective of their whereabouts.


7    Conflict in East-Central Africa: A Case Study
In this section we discuss in some detail conflict in East-Central Africa, one of the most conflict-
prone regions in the world, as it illustrates the link between ethnic partitioning, violence against
civilians and battles between government forces, rebels, and militias (see Figure 9).


      Tanzania Let us start from Tanzania, a country with little overall conflict; in the 69
ethnic regions of Tanzania ACLED records 250 main conflict incidents (excl. riots and protests).
Namely, 46 battles and 204 events of violence against civilians over the period 1997−2013. The
mean (median) conflict per ethnic homeland is 36 (0) and it mostly occurs at the border with
Rwanda and Burundi where the partitioned Rundi group resides. While in the Rundi homeland
only 13% of Tanzania’s total population lives (in both 1960 and in 2000), we observe 21 conflict
incidents (85%). How about conflict in Tanzanian regions, close to the Democratic Republic
of Congo (DRC), the country with the highest conflict intensity in Africa? There are zero and
two conflict events in the non-split homelands of the Bende and the Fipa, respectively, although
both groups reside along the border with DRC. How come? Both groups are non-split, as lake
Tanganyika serves as the natural border between the two countries.


      Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) Focusing now on DRC, there are 5 473
main conflict events (excl. riots and protests) across the 102 ethnic regions (mean = 526;
median = 8). In the homelands of the three partitioned Rwandan ethnicities (of the Interlacus-
trine Bantu - Ruanda family) we observe 1 239 incidents; this is more than 20% of all conflict in
DRC, a disproportionate fraction considering that the share of the country’s population resid-
ing in the homelands of the Bashi, the Konjo, and the Ruanda is just 6%; and in the adjacent
non-split, but ethnically similar Hunde we have 293 battles and 159 events of civilian violence.
So, despite the small share of DRC’s population living in the Hunde homeland (around 22%),
we observe close to 10% of all conflict in DRC. The UCDP data reveal a similar picture. In the
three Rwandan homelands we observe 19% of all state conflict and 34% of one-sided violence,
while in the nearby ethnic region of the Hunde 14% of all state conflict and 19% of all one-
sided violence events occurs. Moreover, in the homelands of the Rwandan tribes we observe
many foreign interventions from the government troops of Rwanda and Uganda. So, while the
origins of conflict in Eastern Congo are complex (involving also within-ethnic group conflict)
and by no means solely driven by partitioning, nevertheless, it involves ethnic militias (such


                                                35
as the FDLR) constantly moving across the border between Rwanda, Democratic Republic of
Congo and Uganda within partitioned groups to re-group, re-organize and re-arm.8 Moreover,
partitioned ethnic groups are used by governments in nearby countries (Uganda, Rwanda) to
intervene.
       In contrast, there is little conflict at the non-split Holoholo ethnic homeland on the
Western (Zairian) bank of the Tanganyika lake (in total 28 main events in ACLED and 14
events in UCDP), which seems to be driven by spillovers (as half of this group’s neighbors have
been split). In the adjacent to the Holoholo homeland in the South, in the Ta(a)bwa region
we observe 121 conflict events (22%) and 5% of all state-conflict in UCDP, while the share of
DRC’s population in this region is just 08%. This is not surprising since, although the Eastern
border of Congo with Tanzania is organic (Tanganyika lake), the Southern one with Zambia
follows a straight (latitudinal) line that splits the homeland of the Ta(a)bwa almost equally
between DRC and Zambia.

               Number of Battles across
                 Ethnic Homelands

              Tanzania, Kenya,
              Rwanda, Congo DRC

              ACLED: 1997-2013
                   National Boundaries
              Number of Battles
                   0
                   1-2
                   3-5
                   6 - 11
                   12 - 25
                   26 - 55
                   56 - 3376




                                                                                       Ü
                                                  Figure 9
   8
    The FDLR and other Hutu-based militias, which fled Rwanda after the 1994 genocide and sought shelter in
their homeland in Eastern Congo, had played a major role in the recent civil conflict in Congo. For example, in
early 2007 in just one event, FDLR groups raided two villages killing 17 civilians and wounding 19. In the next
day FDLR militias looted 18 houses in a nearby town. Also, in a single event in Fendula in Eastern Congo, (at
least) 30 civilians were burned alive and 50 wounded by Rwanda militias. Prunier (2009) provides a detailed
narrative of how the partitioning of the Rwandan tribes and the genocide in Rwanda spread to Congo.




                                                      36
      A Note It is important to keep in mind that the map we use for the historical loca-
tion of ethnicities was published by Murdock in 1959. According to the documentation, the
distribution of ethnic homelands corresponds to the late decades of 1800 and early decades
of 1900. Hence, one cannot entirely rule out the possibility that conflict-prone groups might
have crossed the borders after their delineation, but before Murdock’s map was drawn. Take
the Banyamulenge, for example. After the borders were decided in 1890 in Brussels, there
were indeed several migration flows of people of Rwandan origin towards the Kivus; mostly
Rwandese who came to the Congo to work in the mines in Katanga as well as those who fled to
DRC during the Rwandan Hutu revolution (1959 − 1962). However, it is important to keep in
mind that peoples’ movements often follow settlement patterns that predate the colonial era.
This is most likely the case for the Banyamulenge. According to the historian Alexis Kagame
and the famous French-American political scientist Rene Lemarchand the pre-colonial arrival
of Tutsis in the Kivus meets general agreement among historians but is "vehemently contested
by many Congolese intellectuals" (Lemarchand (2008)).


8     A Counterfactual: Somalia-Ethiopia Border
A comprehensive assessment of the consequences of the Scramble for Africa would be fea-
sible conjuring an alternative set of borders and comparing the consequences of the actual
arrangement with those of the counterfactual design. Coming up a credible counterfactual is
not straightforward. Nevertheless, in this Section we attempt such an analysis for the well-
studied case of the Somali which are partitioned across Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti,
and Kenya. We start by going over the historical account of the colonial boundaries in Eastern
Africa. Then we discuss our counterfactual approach and present the estimates. Finally, ex-
ploiting an ephemeral rearrangement of the colonial border between Ethiopia and the Italian
Somaliland before World War II we conclude by zooming in on the Ethiopia-Somalia border
and quantify the impact of the partitioning of the Somali clans, in the Ogaden region in Eastern
Ethiopia.

8.1   Historical Background

The case of the Somali is indicative of the devastating consequences of ethnic partitioning
in Africa. During the late phase of colonization, the Somali tribes were split among four
colonial powers: British East Africa-Kenya, Italian Somaliland, British Somaliland, and French
Somaliland, while Ethiopia also got a slice in the Eastern part of the country of traditional
Somali homelands in the Ogaden region. The five-edged star in the Somali flag represents this
five-way split along with the desire of Somalis to unite into a single state. While the British and


                                                37
Italian Somalilands merged in the 1960s to form current-day Somalia, Somali clans in Djibouti
(French Somaliland), in the Ogaden region in Ethiopia, and the North-Eastern province of
Kenya (Woqooyi Bari or Northern Frontier District), were not allowed to join despite their
expressed desire in doing so.
       As we will show qualitatively and quantitatively below a significant fraction of contem-
porary conflict in Eastern Africa may be traced to the dismemberment of the Somali.




                                         Figure 10: Somalia Flag
       Before presenting the results of our counterfactual exercise, it is useful to briefly discuss
the historical account of each of the current partitions of Somalis outside Somalia.
       First, regarding the Somali territories in Northern Kenya, in spite of British promises
(and an informal referendum where the locals voiced their strong support for joining Soma-
lia), these regions were ceded to Kenyan nationalists in the late 1950s. The Northern Frontier
District eventually became part of Kenya at its independence in 1963, as the Kenyatta govern-
ment was unwilling to let the province join Somalia. A devastating secessionist conflict ensued
(the so-called shifta war), where ethnic Somali militias -backed by the Somali government in
Mogadishu- fought against Kenyan forces. The resulting death toll of more than 5 000 people
(UCDP estimates) further alienated Somalis in Kenya, who have faced discrimination from
the central government since then. While the 1967 Memorandum of Understanding between
Somalia and Kenya established a cease-fire, the territorial dispute remained unresolved leading
to subsequent conflict and repression against the Somalis.9 In line with this the EPR database
classifies the Somalis as discriminated by the national government in Nairobi for almost all of
Kenya’s post-independence period.
       Second, the Somalis residing in Djibouti (French Somaliland) voted in a referendum in
    9
      The peak of the conflict was the so-called Wagalla massacre (10−2−1984), when according to some estimates
5 000 Somalis were executed by Kenyan soldiers.



                                                      38
1958 to join Somalia; yet, they were prevented from doing so, both because of voting irregu-
larities and because the Afar and the European population voted for the colony (at the time)
to remain with France. Since Somali clans (mostly Esa/Issa) constitute approximately half
of the country’s population, there has been only minor ethnic conflict, mostly with the Afar,
themselves a split group between Ethiopia, Eritrea and Djibouti.10 According to UCDP’s clas-
sification the country was under minor civil war in the early 1990s, which an estimate of 500
fatalities.
       Third, by far the most contentious issue for the Somalis became the fate of the Ogaden
region in Ethiopia. In spite of the area’s overwhelming Somali ethnic composition, Ogaden
was ceded by the British government to the Ethiopian king Menelik II in the turn of the 20th
century (see the 1925 border agreement in Figure 11). However, the Somalis never accepted
this and attempted repeatedly to secede from Ethiopia and join the Italian Somaliland. Dur-
ing the short-lived Italian Eastern African (1936 − 1941) and Mussolini’s victory over Ethiopia,
Ogaden’s administration came under the Somalia governorate (provincial government).11 [Mus-
solini self-proclaimed that he had liberated the Somalis]. This brief arrangement is illustrated
in the 1936 colonial boundaries of Figure 11. Yet after the Italian defeat, the region returned
to Ethiopia. Since locals faced discrimination from the Ethiopian government, once British
and Italian Somaliland merged to form the independent Somali Republic in 1960, irredentist
demands in the Ogaden region peaked; with rebel groups initially pushing for greater auton-
omy and subsequently for secession. Conflict quickly erupted. Yet in spite of Somali troops’
direct interference (in early 1964), the Ethiopian government defeated Somali rebels and troops.
The 1963 − 1964 war was followed by continuing discrimination against the Somali clans and
low-intensity conflict. The EPR classification indicates that Somali tribes in Ogaden have expe-
rienced political discrimination from the central government for the entire 1960 − 2010 period.
The discovery of oil and gas in 1972 and the fall of the Imperial Regime of Haile Selassie in 1974
led to a spike in clashes. The Somali government tried to gain from the regime change in Addis
  10
     The partitioning of the Afar has spurred conflict in the North-Eastern regions of Ethiopia. Following
land nationalization by the pro-Soviet communist Ethiopian Derg regime in 1975, Afar rebels (Afar Liberation
Movement (ALF)) declared an armed struggle against the new Ethiopian government attacking military bases.
UCDP event classification reports that the Ethiopian troops oﬀensive that attacked both rebels and the civilian
Afar population led to more than 1 000 deaths in 1975 − 1976. Low-intensity conflict and civilian violence
continued in the subsequent decades and peaked again in 1993, with Eritrean independence that further split
the Afar.
  11
     Africa Orientale Italiana was divided into 6 governorates, that were ruled with great autonomy. The Gov-
ernments of Amhara, Galla and Sidamo, Harar and Shoa constituted the Italian Empire of Ethiopia; these
areas correspond to contemporary Ethiopia with the key exception of the Ogaden. The Government of Somalia
included the Italian Somaliland to the Ogaden. And Italian Eritrea -which was also ceded to Ethiopia after
WWII- corresponds to contemporary Eritea (that seceded from Ethiopia to form an independent state in 1993).
Yet Italian Eritrea got also some Ethiopian provinces, as Mussolini wanted to weaken Ethiopia that has fought
against him during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War of 1935 − 36. Actually the clashes started in the Ogaden,
with Ethiopians and Italians quarreling over the exact position of the boundaries.


                                                      39
Ababa and Somali troops invaded Ethiopia in Ogaden in the summer of 1977. Yet Ethiopia
secured military assistance from the Soviet Union and Cuba and in a counterattack ousted So-
mali troops from Ogaden in 1978. According to UCDP estimates, the 1977 − 1978 Ogaden War
resulted into more than 4 000 casualties. Throughout the 1980 there was sporadic violence,
killings, and rebellions.
      Although an agreement in 1988 attenuated conflict, the peace agreement left open the
issue of the Ogaden region. UCDP description of the agreement is telling: "the April 1988
agreement is not coded as a peace agreement in UCDP data, since it does not deal with the root
issue - or incompatibility - of the conflict: the status of the Ogaden. Over the years Ethiopian
President Mengistu had staunchly refused to discuss what he called secondary questions unless
Somalia abandoned its claim to the Ogaden. However, the military pressure put on the army in
Northern Ethiopia in 1988 forced him to retreat on this, and he agreed to sign an accord that did
not solve the basic problem. Mengistu subsequently expressed the hope that "the border issue,
which is the main cause of contradiction and conflict between the two countries will be settled
legally so as to create, once and for all, a situation in which it will be possible to create all-
round cooperation." Strife continued, fueled both by local rebels (mostly the Ogaden National
Liberation Front) and by the rise of the Islamic Movement in Somalia AIAI (al-Itihad al-Islami:
Islamic Union) that was "aiming to spread political Islam and establish a pan-Somali, Salafist
emirate (UCDP)." According to the UCDP classification the Somali regions have been under
low-intensity civil war (defined as yearly fatalities exceeding 25 but being less than 1000) for
almost all years since 1993.




                       Figure 11: Italian Somaliland - Ethiopia Colonial Border


                                               40
8.2    Counterfactual

We performed a simple simulation and counterfactual to approximate the impact of the split
of Somali clans on conflict. Our out-of-sample counterfactual exercise proceeds as follows.
       First, working in the sample of 620 non-split country-ethnicity observations outside the
five Eastern African countries with sizable Somali communities (Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Er-
itrea, and Djibouti) we estimated a negative binomial (NB) ML model associating the number
of (deadly) events with the simple, location, geographic, and size controls. To minimize the
impact of outliers we estimated the NB-ML model excluding observations with conflict exceed-
ing the top 1% corresponding to more than 706 conflict incidents (though this has no major
impact on the analysis).
       Second, we obtained out-of-sample predictions of conflict intensity for all ethnic home-
lands, split and non-split, in the five Eastern African countries (103 country-ethnicity observa-
tions). In total there are 107 country-ethnic groups in the five Eastern African countries, but
to be consistent with the forecast model, we exclude those with more than 706 events (top 1%
of conflict incidents). These forecasts reflect only the impact of location, geography, and size
and do not capture the direct impact of ethnic partitioning.12
       Third, we compared the out-of-sample predictions with the actual number of (deadly)
incidents in these five Eastern African countries with large Somali communities.
       The forecast model predicts a total of 3 984 incidents (on average 3867 per homeland).
In practice we observe 5 986 incidents (on average 552 for each country-ethnic region). If we
exclude Eritrea that became independent in 1993 and where the partitioning of Somalis does
not seem to have played a major direct role, the forecast model predicts a total of 3 807 events
for 94 country-ethnic homelands (average 405), while in practice we observe 5 430 (average
578). The simple forecast model predicts conflict well in non-split homelands; the prediction
yields an average of 486 events per homeland (518 if we exclude Eritrea), while we observe
469 events (50 if we exclude Eritrea) in the 39 (35) non-split regions in the five (four) Eastern
African countries. In contrast, the forecast model underpredicts conflict in partitioned ethnic
areas; while we observe 2 685 events in split homelands in Eastern Africa (on average 6885
per homeland and 708 if we drop Eritrea), the forecast NB-ML model predicts 875 events
(on average 225 per country-ethnic region and 214 if we exclude Eritrea). These tabulations
imply that ethnic partitioning accounts for approximately 1 800 − 2 000 events in the Eastern
African countries; this is around a third of total conflict, an estimate quite close to the in-sample
estimates (reported in the paper).
  12
    Please note that since there are spillovers these forecasts do reflect to some extent spatial externalities.
To account for spillovers, we also estimated specifications excluding regions with adjacent split groups. The
estimates are similar though more noisy, as the sample drops considerably.


                                                      41
      A similar picture emerges when we look at deadly events. The NB-ML model predicts
approximately 1 685 deadly events (on average 163 per homeland), while we observe 2 243
(on average 218), and 2 179 (average 232) if we exclude Eritrea. So, ethnic partitioning may
account for 558 deadly events, approximately 25% of all deadly incidents in Eastern Africa.
      We also implemented a similar test looking at the likelihood of conflict (extensive margin).
To do so, we estimated a probit model (with maximum likelihood) associating the conflict
indicator with the rich set of geographic and location controls and regional constants for non-
split groups, excluding altogether observations from Ethiopia, Kenya, Eritrea, Djibouti, and
Somalia; we estimated probit rather than linear probability models to avoid having predicted
values outside the 0 − 1 interval. Moreover, since we omit the country constants the probit
model is preferable as it is not prone to the "incidental parameters" problem. We then obtained
out-of-sample predictions of the likelihood of conflict for all ethnic homelands, split and non-
split, and compared the predictions with the actual likelihood of conflict. The forecast model
predicts that the likelihood of conflict in the 103 homelands of Eastern Africa is around 63%
(and 58% when we look at deadly conflict). In reality we observe (deadly) conflict in 72% of
the 103 ethnic homelands. This simple comparison implies that ethnic partitioning increases
the likelihood of (deadly) conflict by approximately 9% (14%), quite similar to the in-sample
linear probability model estimates in the paper.

8.3   A Closer Look in the Ogaden Region

      Overview We now take a closer look in Ethiopia in an attempt to quantify the impact
of the border settlement between Great Britain, Italy and Ethiopia in the turn of the 20th
century that resulted in the partitioning of the Somali tribes residing in the Eastern (Ogaden)
province. The sizable share of Somali-tribe lands in Ethiopia was the outcome of many agree-
ments. First, with the 1903 border agreement between British Somaliland (in the North of
contemporary Somalia) and Ethiopia, the British rewarded the Ethiopian emperor, Menelik II,
with a sizable portion of Somali tribal lands for his support in the Anglo-Somali war. And while
the initial treaty included provisions for the region’s autonomy, the Ethiopians quickly claimed
sovereignty over the area. As the fighting between Somali tribes and the British continued
and colonizers wanted Ethiopian help, the colonial powers did not raise the issue. Second, the
1908 Convention between Italy and Ethiopia (that in turn clarified an unoﬃcial agreement of
1897) in its article 8 states that “all of the Ogaden, and all of the tribes towards the Ogaden,
shall remain dependent on Abyssinia (Ethiopia).” Third, subsequent treaties between Ethiopia,
Italy, and Great Britain and Ethiopia’s accession to the League of Nations ratified the initial
border design, which was demarcated in the thirties (1932 − 1934). Fourth, while during the


                                               42
Italian rule (1936−1941) the border moved westwards and Ogaden became part of the (Italian)
Somaliland, when WWII ended the territory was returned to Ethiopia.
         UCDP describes the conflict in the Ogaden region in Southern Ethiopia as follows: "The
independent Somali Republic was created in 1960 by the merger of only two of these entities
(British Somaliland and Italian Somaliland); something that did not satisfy the aspirations of
Somali nationalism. Subsequently, in August 1960 the government of the newly independent
state published a manifesto that called for the formation of a Greater Somalia, which would
include Djibouti, the Northern Frontier District of Kenya, and above all the Ogaden desert and
adjacent areas in south-eastern Ethiopia. The Somali population in Ethiopia had received little
from the Addis Ababa government since it came under its rule in the late 1880s. When Somalia
became independent and began spreading the idea of Somali nationalism, it found fertile soil in
the Ogaden region. Irredentist agitation and armed clashes soon commenced, and increased as
the Ethiopian government launched its first systematic attempt to collect taxes in the region."


         Descriptive Comparisons Murdock’s map delineates four Somali tribes that are split
by the Ethiopia-Somali border (which mostly follows a longitudinal line), the Ishaak, the Esa,
the Mijertein, and the Ogaden.13 According to the 1960 and the 2000 population estimates,
around 35% − 5% of Ethiopia’s population resides in these 4 low-population-density ethnic
areas. Yet while less than 5% of Ethiopia’s population resides in Ogaden, in those four ethnic
regions we observe a total of 262 events and 185 deadly events in ACLED over the period
1997 − 2013.14 These numbers correspond to 22% of all conflict events, 26% of main events
(excl. riots and protests) and 275% of deadly events in Ethiopia; in total there are 1 186
conflict incidents (1 004 if we exclude riots and protests that almost exclusively take place
in Addis Ababa) and 671 fatal incidents. The considerable impact of the partitioning of the
Somali clans in Ethiopia can also be seen by comparing duration and fatalities in the four
Somali ethnic regions with the rest of the country. Average (median) conflict duration in the
Somali ethnic regions is 875 (10) years, while the mean (median) duration in the other 44
ethnic regions in Ethiopia is 5 (35) years. Average (median) duration of deadly events in the
Somali ethnic regions is 75 (7), with deadly conflict in Ogaden lasting for 13 years, while in
the other ethnic regions in Ethiopia, mean (median) deadly conflict duration is about half, 4
(25). A similar patterns emerges when we use the UCDP datasets that focuses on conflict
incidents associated with civil wars. In the four Somali partitioned ethnic areas in Eastern
Ethiopia we observe 274 deadly state-driven events, most of them involving the Ogaden clans
(245 events). This represents close to half (43% if solely focus on Ogaden) of all state-conflict
 13
      The Mijertein and the Ogaden are partitioned at the 5% threshold.
 14
      In line with our results there are no riots and protests in these partitioned ethnic areas.


                                                         43
events in Ethiopia that has experienced a total of 566 deadly incidents.


      Counterfactual The impact of the partitioning of Somali clans in the Ogaden can
be further seen by comparing realized conflict with the out-of-sample forecast (that associates
conflict to the rich set of covariates in non-split ethnic regions outside Eastern Africa). The
forecast models predict in total 106 events and just 20 deadly events; so the simple comparison
between realized conflict in the four ethnic homelands of the Somalis in Ethiopia and predicted
conflict (based on population, land area, location, and geography) imply that partitioning has
had a major impact, accounting for more than half, approximately two-thirds of conflict in the
region. Thus the gap of realized with forecasted conflict (156 events) just in the Ogaden region
represents around 10% − 15% of the overall conflict in Ethiopia (that in total has experienced
1186 conflict events).

8.4   Summary

While the out-of-sample counterfactual is based on many assumptions (including that of no
spillovers), the results are quite similar to the in-sample estimates. Moreover, the simple simu-
lation allows approximating the impact of the design of specific borders that have contributed to
civil conflict by partitioning specific groups. In the case of the Ethiopia-Somali border, guided
by history, we can reasonably assume a counterfactual border design, where the predominantly
Somali-inhabited Ogaden was part of Somalia rather than Ethiopia (see Figure 11).




                                               44
9     Data Sources and Variable Definitions for the Supplementary
      Appendix Analysis
9.1   ACLED

Ethnic Partitioning Index (SPLIT): Indicator variable that equals 1 if at least 10% of the
historical homeland of an ethnic group is partitioned into diﬀerent countries. We also construct
and alternative partitioning index that equals 1 if at least 5% of the historical homeland of an
ethnic group is partitioned into diﬀerent countries. Source: Calculated intersecting Murdock’s
(1959) ethnic map of Africa with the Digital Chart of the World (DCW) shapefile. The latter
contains the polygons delineating the international boundaries in 2000. Appendix Table A
reports the 230 partitioned ethnicities.
      All Civil Conflict Incidents: Sum of all civil conflict incidents according to ACLED.
There are 8 event types. (1) Battles without change of control; (2) Battles where rebel groups
gain control of the location; (3) Battles where the government regains control of a location; (4)
Headquarter of base establishments, where rebel groups establish (via violent or non-violent
means) their base; (5) Non-violent conflict events where rebel groups, militias or government
forces proceed in non-violent actions (without active fighting) that are however within the
context of an ongoing civil conflict and dispute (e.g., recruitment drives, incursions or rallies);
(6) Riots and protests; (7) Violence again civilians, where armed groups (rebels, militias or
government forces) attack unarmed civilians; (8) Non-Violent transfer of control. In the cross-
sectional specifications we aggregate the data at the ethnic homeland level and in the within-
country specifications we aggregate the data at the country-ethnic homeland level. We focus
on conflict events classified as "high geo-precision quality." See Section 2 for details. We focus
in two samples. (i ) 1997 − 2013 (as in the paper). (ii) 1997 − 2000 since reporting increased
considerably after 2010. Source: ACLED.
      Conflict Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value of one if a country-ethnic
area has experienced at least one high-precision conflict incident (of any type and also when
we drop riots and protests). Source: ACLED 4.
      Deadly Civil Conflict Incidents: Sum of all high-precision civil conflict incidents
that have resulted in at least one fatality for each of a total of 1 212 country-ethnic homelands
(of any type and also when we drop riots and protests). Source: ACLED 4.
      Deadly Conflict Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value of one if a
country-ethnic area has experienced at least one high-precision deadly conflict incident (of
any type and also when we drop riots and protests). Source: ACLED 4.
      Duration Civil Conflict: Duration in years that a country-ethnic homeland has been
in conflict (using conflict events of any type and also when we drop riots and protests). Source:

                                                45
ACLED 4.
      Duration Deadly Civil Conflict. Duration in years that a country-ethnic homeland
has been in conflict that has resulted in at least one fatality (using all types of deadly conflict
events and also when we drop riots and protests). Source: ACLED 4.
      Total Fatalities: Number of fatalities for each of a total of 1 212 country-ethnic home-
lands using all types of conflict incidents and also dropping riots and protests), summed over
all years. Source: ACLED 4.
      Battles: Total number of battles between two violent armed groups at the ethnic home-
land (in each country for partitioned ethnicities). Battles include armed conflict where a control
of the contested location does not change and conflict events resulting in a territorial change
of control. We aggregate the data at the ethnic homeland level and at the country-ethnic
homeland level. See Section 2 for details. Source: ACLED 4.
      Violence against Civilians: Total number of violent events against civilians at the
ethnic homeland (in each country for partitioned ethnicities). Violence against civilians occurs
when any armed/violent group attacks unarmed civilians. Rebels, governments, militias, rioters
can all commit violence against civilians. We aggregate the data at the at the country-ethnic
homeland level. Source: ACLED 4.
      Riots and Protesters: Total number of events corresponding to riots and protests at
the ethnic homeland (in each country for partitioned ethnicities). We aggregate the data at
the at the country-ethnic homeland level. Source: ACLED 4.

9.2   UCDP

State-driven Conflict: Number of events associated with "use of armed force by two parties,
of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths
in one calendar year of a state or by a formally organized group against civilians which results
in at least 25 deaths in a year ". The data cover the period 1989 − 2010 and include "all
events corresponding to years where the actors and conflicts did not exceed 25 battle-related
deaths threshold required for inclusion in the aggregate datasets (i.e. includes inactive years)."
Source: UCDP GED 1.5.
      One-sided Violence: Number of events associated with "use of armed force by the
government of a state or by a formally organized group against civilians which results in at
least 25 deaths in a year ". The data cover the period 1989 − 2010 and include "all events
corresponding to years where the actors and conflicts did not exceed 25 battle-related deaths
threshold required for inclusion in the aggregate datasets (i.e. includes inactive years)." Source:
UCDP GED 1.5


                                                46
      Non-state-driven Conflict: Number of events associated with "use of armed force
between two organized armed groups, neither of which is the government of a state, which
results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year." The data cover the period 1989 − 2010
and include "all events corresponding to years where the actors and conflicts did not exceed
25 battle-related deaths threshold required for inclusion in the aggregate datasets (i.e. includes
inactive years)." Source: UCDP GED 1.5.
      Conflict Indicator: For each type of conflict (state-driven, one-sided violence, and
non-state-driven) we defined a conflict indicator (dummy) variable that equals one if a country-
ethnic area has experienced at least one (high geo-precision) conflict event over the period
1989 − 2010 and zero otherwise. Source: UCDP GED 1.5.
      Conflict Duration: For each type of conflict (state-driven, one-sided violence, and non-
state-driven) we defined variables measuring the number of years that a country-ethnic area
has experienced at least one (high geo-precision) conflict event over the period 1989 − 2010.
Source: UCDP GED 1.5.

9.3   DHS Data

Composite Wealth Index: The wealth index is a composite measure of almost all house-
hold assets and utility services including country-specific items. The wealth index is calculated
using easy-to-collect data on a household’s ownership of selected assets, such as televisions
and bicycles; materials used for housing construction; and types of water access and sanitation
facilities. Generated with a statistical procedure known as principal components analysis, the
wealth index places individual households on a continuous scale of relative wealth within a coun-
try. More details are available here: http://www.measuredhs.com/topics/Wealth-Index.cfm
and here: http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/CR6/CR6.pdf. Source: Demographic and
Health Surveys (http://www.measuredhs.com/).
      Education: Number of years of education. Range from 0 to 24 with a median of 6
years. Source: Demographic and Health Surveys. http://www.measuredhs.com/).
      Ethnic Partitioning - Identity: Indicator variable that equals 1 for individuals that
self-identify with a partitioned ethnic group. To construct this dummy variable we link the
ethnic aﬃliation from the DHS to the ethnic groups in Murdock’s map.
      Ethnic Partitioning - Location: Indicator variable that equals 1 if an individual
resides in an ethnic homeland that at least 10% of it is partitioned into diﬀerent countries.
      Mover (Non-Indigenous) Indicator: Dummy variable that identifies individuals
residing outside their ethnicity’s ancestral homeland.
      Marital Status: A vector of six variables capturing marital status. The categories are:


                                               47
Source: Demographic and Health Surveys. http://www.measuredhs.com/)
      Year-of-Birth Fixed Eﬀects: A vector of date-of-birth fixed eﬀects. The 61 dummies
correspond to yearly cohorts born between 1935 and 1996. Source: Demographic and Health
Surveys. http://www.measuredhs.com/)
      Religion: A vector of seven religion constants (fixed eﬀects). The 7 categories are:
Traditional, Islam, Catholic, Protestants, Other Christians, Other, None. Source: Demographic
and Health Surveys. http://www.measuredhs.com/)
      Distance to the Capital City: The geodesic distance from each enumeration area
(gps coordinates) to the capital city of the country it belongs to. Source: Calculated using the
Haversine formula.
      Distance to the Coast: The geodesic distance from each enumeration area (gps co-
ordinates) to the nearest coastline. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs,
Colorado, USA. Series name: Global Ministry Mapping System. Series issue: Version 3.0.
      Distance to the National Border: The geodesic distance from each enumeration area
(gps coordinates) to the nearest national border. Source: Calculated using ArcGis.
      Capital City Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value one for enumeration
areas close to the capital city (distance to the capital less than the 25th percentile which
corresponds to 130 kilometers).

9.4   EPR Data

Political Discrimination: Binary index that takes on the value of one when a politically
relevant ethnic group has been subject to political discrimination from the national govern-
ment for at least one year during the post-independence period and zero otherwise. An ethnic
group is classified as "politically relevant" if at least one political organization claims to repre-
sent it in national politics or if its members are subjected to state-led political discrimination.
Discrimination is defined as "political exclusion directly targeted at an ethnic community–
thus disregarding indirect discrimination based, for example, on educational disadvantage or
discrimination in the labour or credit market." "Group members are subjected to active, inten-
tional, and targeted discrimination, with the intent of excluding them from both regional and
national power. Such active discrimination can be either formal or informal." Source. Ethnic
Power Relations (EPR) vintage 3.01 database. Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009).
      Ethnic Wars: Binary index that takes on the value of one when a politically relevant
ethnic group has been engaged into two-sided civil war with explicit ethnonationalistic or
secessionist aims, for at least one year during the post-independence period. The coding of
conflict is based upon the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflicts Dataset, which defines internal conflict


                                                 48
"as any armed and organized confrontation between government troops and rebel organizations
or between army factions that reaches an annual battle death threshold of twenty-five. This
definition excludes one-sided conflicts, such as massacres and genocides, as well as communal
riots, pogroms, and other non-state conflicts." Source. Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) vintage
3.01 database. Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009)
      Political Violence: Ordered trichotomous (0 1 2) index of political violence for po-
litically relevant ethnic groups during the post-independence period. The index takes on the
value of two (civil war) when a politically relevant group has been engaged into two-sided
civil war with explicit ethnonationalistic or secessionist aims, for at least one year during the
post-independence period. The index takes on the value of one (repression) when a politically
relevant ethnic group has been subject to political discrimination from the national government
for at least one year during the post-independence period, but has not been engaged into an eth-
nic war. The index takes on the value of zero when a politically relevant group has neither been
subject to political discrimination from the national government nor has it been engaged into
a civil war with explicit ethnonationalistic or secessionist aims during the post-independence
period. " Source. Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) vintage 3.01 database. Wimmer, Cederman,
and Min (2009). The construction of the index follows Besley and Persson (2011).


10    Control Variables
Population at Independence: Log of population as recorded in the first post-independence
census (in the 1960s for most countries). Source: UNESCO (1987).
      Land Area: Log surface area of the historical homeland of each ethnic group in 1000
of sq. km. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
      Lake Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value one for (country) ethnic
homelands with a major lake and zero otherwise. Source: Constructed using the "Inland water
area features" dataset from Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
      River Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value one for (country) ethnic
homelands with a major river and zero otherwise. Source: Constructed using the "Inland water
area features" dataset from Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
      Elevation: Average value of elevation in kilometers. Source: National Oceanic and At-
mospheric Administration (NOAA) and U.S. National Geophysical Data Center, TerrainBase,
release 1.0 (CD-ROM), Boulder, Colorado.
      Land Suitability for Agriculture: Average value of land (soil) quality for cultivation.
The index is the product of two components reflecting the climatic and soil suitability for
cultivation. Source: Michalopoulos (2012); Original Source: Atlas of the Biosphere.


                                               49
      Malaria Stability Index: The index takes into account the prevalence and type of
mosquitoes indigenous to a region, their human biting rate, their daily survival rate, and their
incubation period. The index has been constructed for 05 degree by 05 degree grid-cells. We
use the average value for each ethnic homeland (and for each country-ethnic region). Source:
Kiszewski, Mellinger, Spielman, Malaney, Sachs, and Sachs (2004)
      Distance to the National Border: The geodesic distance of the centroid of the
historical homeland of each ethnic group (or each country-ethnic area) from the nearest national
border, measured in 1000 of km’s. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs,
Colorado, USA.
      Distance to the Capital: The geodesic distance of the centroid of the historical home-
land of each ethnic group (or each country-ethnic area) from the capital city, measured in 1000
of km’s. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
      Distance to the Sea: The geodesic distance of the centroid of the historical homeland
of each ethnic group (or each country-ethnic area) from the nearest coastline, measured in
1000 of km’s. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
      Capital City Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value one when a capital
city is located in an ethnic historical homeland (in a country for partitioned ethnicities) and
zero otherwise.
      Coastal Indicator: Dummy variable that takes on the value one for country-ethnic
homelands that are adjacent to the coast and zero otherwise (when the area is landlocked).
      Petroleum: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if an on-shore oil field and
gas deposit is in the historical homeland of an ethnic group and zero otherwise. Source: The
Petroleum Dataset v.1.1
      Diamond: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a diamond mine is in the
historical homeland of an ethnic group and zero otherwise. Source: Map of Diamond Resources.
Peace Research Institute of Oslo (PRIO).
      City in 1400: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a city with a population
larger than 20 000 in 1400 was in the historical homeland of an ethnic group (or each country-
ethnic area) and zero otherwise. Source: Chandler (1987)
      Regional Indicators: There are five regional indicator variables, North Africa, Western
Africa, Central Africa, Eastern Africa, and Southern Africa. Source: Nunn (2008).
      Income per capita: Log of per capita income in 2000 at the country-ethnic homeland
level. Source: G-Econ Database. available at: http://gecon.yale.edu/




                                               50
10.1    Pre-colonial Ethnic Features from Murdock (1967)

Complex Settlements: Indicator that equals one for ethnicities living in compact and rela-
tively permanent settlements (v30=7) or in complex settlements (v30=8), and zero otherwise
(indicating nomadic, semi-nomadic, and semi-sedentary). Source: Murdock (1967); variable
code v30.
       Dependence on Agriculture: 0 − 9 scale index reflecting the intensity of agriculture.
"It includes penetration of the soil, planting, tending the growing crops, and harvesting but
not subsequent food preparation". The index equals 0 when there 0% − 5% dependence; 1
when there is 6% − 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16% − 25% dependence; 3 when there is
26% − 35% dependence; 4 when there is 36% − 45% dependence; 5 when there is 46% − 55%
dependence; 6 when there is 56% − 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66% − 75% dependence;
8 when there is 76% − 85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86% − 100% dependence. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code v5.
       Animal Husbandry: 0 − 9 index reflecting dependence on pastoralist activities, animal
husbandry. The index equals 0 when there 0% − 5% dependence; 1 when there is 6% − 15%
dependence; 2 when there is 16% − 25% dependence; 3 when there is 26% − 35% dependence;
4 when there is 36% − 45% dependence; 5 when there is 46% − 55% dependence; 6 when there
is 56% − 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66% − 75% dependence; 8 when there is 76% − 85%
dependence; and 9 when there is 86% − 100% dependence. Source: Murdock (1967); variable
code v4.
       Local Elections: Indicator that equals 1 when succession to the oﬃce of the local head-
man is conducted via "election or other formal consensus, nonhereditary" and zero otherwise.
Source: Murdock (1967); variable code v72.
       Inheritance Rule for Property: Indicator that equals 1 when some form of inher-
itance rule of real property (land) is present; the binary indicator equals zero when there is
"absence of individual property rights". Source: Murdock (1967); variable code v74.
       Political Centralization: The binary index is constructed using Murdock’s (1967)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community 0 − 4 index that indicates the number of
jurisdictional levels (political complexity) in each society above the local level. The political
centralization index takes the value 0 if the Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community
variable equals 0 or 1 (when the society is classified as either stateless or forming a small chief-
dom). The index takes on the value 1 if the Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community
variable equals 2, 3, and 4 (when the society is classified as being part of large paramount chief-
dom or a large state). This aggregation follows Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007). Source:
Murdock (1967).


                                                51
       Class Stratification: Binary class stratification variable. A zero score indicates "ab-
sence of significant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual repute
achieved through skill, valor, piety, or wisdom." A score of 1 indicates either "the presence of
wealth distinctions, based on possession or distribution of property, which however have not
crystallized into distinct and hereditary social classes" or "elite stratification in which an elite
class derives its superior status from control over scarce resources, particularly land, and is
thereby diﬀerentiated from a propertyless proletariat or serf class" or "dual stratification into
a hereditary aristocracy and a lower class of ordinary commoners or freemen, where tradition-
ally ascribed noble status is at least as decisive as control over scarce resources or "complex
stratification into social classes correlated in large measure with extensive diﬀerentiation of
occupational statuses." Source: Murdock (1967); variable code v67.
       Polygyny: Indicator that equals one when polygyny is practised and zero otherwise.
The indicator equals one when the original variable indicates that polygyny is common or when
large extended families are present (and zero otherwise). Source: Murdock (1967); variable code
v8.

10.2    Country-level Variables Used in Heterogeneous Eﬀects Section

Land Area: Log of country’s surface/land area. Source: Nunn and Puga (2012).
       Ethnic, Linguistic and Religious Fractionalization: Index of ethnic, linguistic and
religious heterogeneity. Each index reflects the probability that two randomly selected individ-
uals belong to diﬀerent ethnic, linguistic or religious groups. Source: Alesina, Devleeschauwer,
Easterly, Kurlat, and Wacziarg (2003).
       Landlocked: Indicator for countries without access to the sea coast. These countries
are: Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic
of Congo, Lesotho, Mali, Malawi, Niger, Rwanda, Swaziland, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Source: Global Development Network Growth Database.




                                                52
References
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003):
  “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 155—194.

Alesina, A., W. Easterly, and J. Matuszeski (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women
  and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 169—530.

Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2015): “Ethnic Inequality,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Altonji, J., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
  Variables: Assessing the Eﬀectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy,
  113(1), 151—184.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2011): “The Logic of Political Violence,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 126(3), 1411—1445.

Besley, T., and M. Reynal-Querol (2014): “The Legacy of Historical Conflicts. Evidence
  from Africa,” American Political Science Review, 108(2), 319—336.

Blattman, C., and E. Miguel (2010): “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(1),
  3—57.

Cameron, C. A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2011): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way
  Clustering,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(2), 238—249.

Cederman, L.-E., A. Wimmer, and B. Min (2010): “Why do ethnic groups rebel? New
  data and analysis.,” World Politics, 62(1), 87—119.

Chandler, T. (1987): Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census. Edwin
  Mellon Press, Lewiston, NY.

Chen, X., and W. D. Nordhaus (2011): “Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic
  Statistics,” Proceeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(21), 8589—8594.

Collier, P. (2007): The Bottom Billion. Oxford Universiy Press, Oxfod, United Kingdom.




                                             53
Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (2007): “Civil War,” in Handbook of Defense Economics,
  Volume 2, Defense in a Globalized World,, ed. by T. Sandler, and K. Hartley, pp. 711—740.
  Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Dell, M. (2012): “Path Dependence in Development: Evidence from the Mexican Revolution,”
  mimeo, Harvard University, Department of Economics.

Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín, and R. Wacziarg (2012): “The Political Economy of
  Ethnolinguistic Cleavages,” Journal of Development Economics, 97(2), 322—338.

Esteban, J., and D. Ray (2008): “On the Salience of Ethnic Conflict,” American Economic
  Review, 98(6), 2185—2202.

        (2011): “A Model of Ethnic Conflict,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
  9(3), 496—521.

Fearon, J. D. (2003): “Ethnic Structure and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of
  Economic Growth, 8, 195—222.

Fenske, J. (2014a): “African polygamy: Past and present,” working paper, Oxford University.

        (2014b): “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-colonial Africa,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 12(3), 612—640.

Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A., and P. Fritjetrs (2004): “How Important is Methodology for
  the Estimates of the Determinants of Happiness?,” Economic Journal, 114(2), 641—659.

Gennaioli, N., and I. Rainer (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality
  in Africa,” in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and
  K. Konrad. MIT Press.

         (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of
  Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.

Giuliano, P., and N. Nunn (2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to
  the Nation State,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 86—92.

Harari, M., and E. La Ferrara (2014): “Conflict, Climate and Cells: A Disaggregated
  Analysis,” mimeo MIT and Bocconi University.

Hausman, J., B. H. Hall, and Z. Griliches (1984): “Econometric Models for Count Data
  with an Application to the Patents-RD Relationship,” Econometrica, 52(4), 909—938.


                                            54
Huber, J. D., and L. Mayoral (2014): “Inequality, Ethnicity and Civil Conflict,” Working
  Paper, Department of Political Science, Columbia University.

Kiszewski, A., A. Mellinger, A. Spielman, P. Malaney, S. E. Sachs, and J. Sachs
  (2004): “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American Journal of
  Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5), 486—498.

Lemarchand, R. (2008): The Dynamics of Violence in Central Africa (National and Ethnic
  Conflict in the 21st Century). University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA.

Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
  Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.

Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and
  Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.

         (2014): “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(1), 151—213.

Michalopoulos, S., L. Putterman, and D. N. Weil (2015): “The Influence of Ancestral
  Lifeways on Individual Economic Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa,” mimeo, Brown Univer-
  sity, Department of Economics.

Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004): “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict:
  An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 725—753.

Montalvo, J.-G., and M. Reynal-Querol (2005): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict,
  and Civil Wars,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 796—816.

Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and their Culture History. McGraw-Hill.

        (1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. University of Pittsburgh Press, PA.

Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long Term Eﬀects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123(1), 139—176.

Nunn, N., and D. Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20—36.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
  Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.



                                             55
Oster, E. (2015): “Unobservable Selection and Coeﬃcient Stability: Theory and Evidence,”
  mimeo, Brown University, Department of Economics.

Prunier, G. (2009): Africa’s World War. Congo, the Rwandan Genocide, and the Making of
  a Continental Catastrophe. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Spolaore, E., and R. Wacziarg (2015): “War and Relatedness,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, fortcoming.

Sundberg, R., M. Lindgren, and A. Padskocimaite (2010): “UCDP GED Codebook
  version 1.0-2011,” Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University.

Sundberg, R., and E. Melander (2013): “Introducing the UCDP Georeferenced Event
  Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 50(4), 523—532.

Wantchekon, L., M. Klasnja, and N. Novta (2015): “Education and Human Capital
  Externalities: Evidence from Colonial Benin,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2).

Wimmer, A., L.-E. Cederman, and B. Min (2009): “Ethnic Politics and Armed Conflict.
  A Configurational Analysis of a New Global Dataset,” American Sociological Review, 74(2),
  316—337.




                                            56
                 Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics at the Ethnic Homeland Level

                                                        Obs.   mean    st. dev.   median   min        max

                                                                   Panel A: All Ethnic Homelands

Population around Independence                          825 329,432 1,070,569 118,424       58     25,800,000
Land Area                                               825 34.213    59.204 14.500        0.235     604.903
Lake Indicator                                          825  0.135     0.341   0.000       0.000      1.000
River Indicator                                         825  0.552     0.498   1.000       0.000      1.000
Mean Elevation                                          825  0.621     0.436   0.490       0.000      2.170
Land Suitability for Agriculture                        825  0.411     0.240   0.418       0.001      0.979
Malaria Stability Index                                 825  0.752     0.360   0.976       0.000      1.000
Distance to the Sea Coast                               825  598.2     431.9   556.3        0.2      1,721.3
Diamond Mine Indicator                                  825  0.125     0.331   0.000       0.000      1.000
Oil Indicator                                           825  0.126     0.399   0.000       0.000      4.000
Precolonial Conflict Indicator                          825  0.048     0.215   0.000       0.000      1.000
Distance to Precolonial Conflict                        825  0.403     0.344   0.314       0.000      2.241
Slave Trades Indicator                                  825  0.361     0.481   0.000       0.000      1.000
Slave Trade Impact                                      825 13,428.4 143,720.1  0.0         0.0    3,838,953.0
Precolonial Kingdom-Empire Indicator                    825  0.377     0.485   0.000       0.000      1.000
Distance to Precolonial Kingdom-Empire                  825  0.173     0.226   0.073       0.000      1.236
Major City in 1400 Indicator                            825  0.038     0.190   0.000       0.000      1.000
Number of Distinct Ethnic Families of Adjacent Groups   825  2.804     1.266   3.000       1.000      11.000
Share of Adjacent Groups in the Same Ethnic Family      825  0.454     0.294   0.429       0.000      1.000

                                                           Panel B: Homelands close to the National Border

Population around Independence                          413 248,522 504,731 100,027         141     7,019,231
Land Area                                               413 26.881    50.342 11.616        0.235     565.597
Lake Indicator                                          413  0.162     0.369   0.000       0.000      1.000
River Indicator                                         413  0.545     0.499   1.000       0.000      1.000
Mean Elevation                                          413  0.608     0.425   0.475       0.000      1.813
Land Suitability for Agriculture                        413  0.430     0.220   0.452       0.001      0.970
Malaria Stability Index                                 413  0.805     0.310   0.987       0.000      1.000
Distance to the Sea Coast                               413  575.3     401.8   566.3        0.2      1,721.3
Diamond Mine Indicator                                  413  0.126     0.332   0.000       0.000      1.000
Oil Indicator                                           413  0.099     0.403   0.000       0.000      4.000
Precolonial Conflict Indicator                          413  0.031     0.175   0.000       0.000      1.000
Distance to Precolonial Conflict                        413  0.376     0.308   0.277       0.000      1.966
Slave Trades Indicator                                  413  0.378     0.485   0.000       0.000      1.000
Slave Trade Impact                                      413 18,790.1 197,525.3  0.0         0.0    3,838,953.0
Precolonial Kingdom-Empire Indicator                    413  0.412     0.493   0.000       0.000      1.000
Distance to Precolonial Kingdom-Empire                  413  0.153     0.209   0.040       0.000      0.880
Major City in 1400 Indicator                            413  0.017     0.129   0.000       0.000      1.000
Number of Distinct Ethnic Families of Adjacent Groups   413  2.862     1.290   3.000       1.000      11.000
Share of Adjacent Groups in the Same Ethnic Family      413  0.450     0.295   0.429       0.000      1.000
The table gives summary statistics for the main variables across African ethnic homelands; this is the unit of analysis in Section 3
that examines the correlates of ethnic partitioning. Panel A reports summary statistics across all ethnic homelands (N=825). Panel
B gives summary statistics across ethnic homelands that are close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance
from the centroid of each ethnic homeland to the national border; 102 kilometers). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable
definitions and data sources.
                              Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics
                   ACLED. Conflict Variables at the Country-Ethnic Homeland Level

                                             Obs.   mean     st. dev.   median   min         p99    max


                                                             Panel A: All Ethnic Homelands

All Conflict Events                          1212   53.25    238.78       4       0          102    5423
All Conflicts Indicator                      1212    0.73      0.44       1       0            1      1
Duration All Conflicts                       1212    4.47      5.01       3       0           13     17
All Fatalities                               1212   317.60   3306.86      3       0          435   107554
Fatal Conflict Events                        1212   15.99     88.51       1       0           28    2299
Fatal Confict Indicator                      1212    0.61      0.49       1       0            1      1
Duration Deadly Events                       1212    2.70      3.82       1       0            8     17
Main Conflict Events                         1212   39.62    202.71       3       0          74     5268
Main Conflict Indicator                      1212    0.69      0.46       1       0            1      1
Duration Main Conflicts                      1212    3.87      4.63       2       0           11     17
Battles                                      1212   19.24    115.39       1       0          37     3376
Battles Indicator                            1212    0.56      0.50       1       0            1      1
Violence against the Civilians               1212   16.81     92.81       1       0           30    2221
Violence against the Civilians Indicator     1212    0.60      0.49       1       0            1      1
Riots and Protests                           1212   13.31     84.06       0       0           19    2360
Riots and Protests Indicator                 1212    0.46      0.50       0       0            1      1

Government Forces Events                     1212   22.22    110.16       2       0          42     2857
Government Forces Indicator                  1212    0.63      0.48       1       0           1       1
Rebels and Militias Events                   1212   34.81    186.60       3       0          63     4957
Rebels and Militias Indicator                1212    0.66      0.47       1       0           1       1
Riots and Protests                           1212   13.59     86.36       0       0          19     2440
Riots and Protests Indicator                 1212    0.46      0.50       0       0           1       1
Violence against the Civilians               1212   17.07     94.11       1       0          31     2266
Violence against the Civilians Indicator     1212    0.60      0.49       1       0           1       1
Interventions (nearby countries) Events      1212    3.21     20.98       0       0           5      583
Interventions (nearby countries) Indicator   1212   0.26      0.44        0       0           1       1
Outside External Interventions Events        1212    1.64      7.75       0       0           3      127
Outside External Interventions Indicator     1212    0.22      0.42       0       0           1       1
                             Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics (cont.)
                     ACLED. Conflict Variables at the Country-Ethnic Homeland Level

                                                     Obs.    mean       st. dev.   median       min         p99        max


                                                             Panel B: Homelands close to the National Border

All Conflict Events                                  606     23.78      123.71         2          0         385        2701
All Conflicts Indicator                              606      0.62        0.49         1          0           1          1
Duration All Conflicts                               606      3.15        4.31         1          0          17         17
Fatal Conflict Events                                606      8.37       66.23         0          0         127        1558
Fatal Confict Indicator                              606      0.50        0.50         0          0           1          1


Duration Deadly Events                               606      1.77        3.02         0          0          15         17
Main Conflict Events                                 606     20.48      119.45         1          0         296        2654
Main Conflict Indicator                              606      0.57        0.50         1          0           1          1
Duration Main Conflicts                              606      2.69        3.94         1          0          17         17
Battles                                              606      9.91       61.59         0          0         140        1375
Battles Indicator                                    606      0.44        0.50         0          0           1          1
Violence against the Civilians                       606      8.74       54.30         0          0         118        1196
Violence against the Civilians Indicator             606      0.48        0.50         0          0           1          1
Riots and Protests                                   606      3.22       12.05         0          0          65         134
Riots and Protests Indicator                         606      0.33        0.47         0          0           1          1

Government Forces Events                             606     10.25       59.73         1          0         139        1347
Government Forces Indicator                          606      0.50        0.50         1          0           1          1
Rebels and Militias Events                           606     17.95      116.10         1          0         319        2630
Rebels and Militias Indicator                        606      0.53        0.50         1          0           1          1
Riots and Protests                                   606      3.31       12.36         0          0          65         139
Riots and Protests Indicator                         606      0.33        0.47         0          0           1          1
Violence against the Civilians                       606      8.81       54.40         0          0         120        1196
Violence against the Civilians Indicator             606      0.48        0.50         0          0           1           1
Interventions (nearby countries) Events              606     1.93        8.81          0          0         39          115
Interventions (nearby countries) Indicator           606     0.21        0.41          0          0          1           1
Outside External Interventions Events                606      1.33        6.35         0          0          25          92
Outside External Interventions Indicator             606      0.19        0.39         0          0           1           1

The table reports summary statistics for the main conflict variables from the ACLED employed in the empirical analysis (in
Section 4-5). Panel A reports summary statistics across all country-ethnic homelands (1212 observations). Panel B reports
summary statistics for country-ethnicity homelands close to the national border using as a cut-off the median distance from the
centroid of each ethnic homeland to the national border (61.3 km, 606 observations). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable
definitions and data sources.
           Appendix Table 3: Total and Fatal Civil Conflict Events by Year (ACLED)

                        All Events                            Fatal Events                      Percentage
      Year          Number    Percentage                   Number    Percentage                    Fatal


     1997             1,992           3.08                   810           4.16                   40.7%
     1998             2,490           3.85                   848            4.36                  34.1%
     1999             3,572           5.52                  1,000          5.14                   28.0%
     2000             3,289           5.09                  1,185          6.09                   36.0%
     2001             2,811           4.35                   951            4.89                  33.8%
     2002             3,313           5.12                   987            5.07                  29.8%
     2003             2,706           4.18                  1,003          5.16                   37.1%
     2004             2,348           3.63                   797             4.1                  33.9%
     2005             1,958           3.03                   528            2.71                  27.0%
     2006             1,952           3.02                   455            2.34                  23.3%
     2007             2,212           3.42                   559            2.87                  25.3%
     2008             3,127           4.84                   674            3.46                  21.6%
     2009             2,806           4.34                   873            4.49                  31.1%
     2010             3,509           5.43                  1,460           7.51                  41.6%
     2011             5,261           8.14                  1,460            7.5                  27.8%
     2012             8,741          13.54                  2,347          12.08                  26.9%
     2013            12,563          19.43                  3,511          18.06                  27.9%

     Total           64,650           100                  19,448           100                   30.1%


The table gives the distribution (number and share) of all conflict incidents and deadly conflict incidents for
each year for the ACLED database (vintage 4). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources.
                    Appendix Table 4: Total and Fatal Conflict Incidents by ACLED Category

Conflcit Category                                       All Events                    Fatal Events                Percentage
                                                     Number Percentage             Number Percentage                 Fatal


Battle-Government regains territory                  1,205          1.86             224          1.15              18.59%
Battle-No change of territory                        20,892         32.31           9,115         46.86             43.63%
Battle-Non-state actor overtakes territory            1,283          1.98            255           1.31             19.88%
Headquarters or base established                       271           0.42             2            0.01              0.74%
Non-violent activity by a conflict actor              3,913          6.05             37           0.19              0.95%
Non-violent transfer of territory                      543           0.84             3            0.02              0.55%
Riots/Protests                                       16,147         24.97           1,039         5.35              6.43%
Violence against civilians                           20,396         31.56           8,773         45.11             43.01%

Total                                                64,650          100            19448           100              30.1%


The table gives the distribution (number and percentage share) of all conflict incidents and deadly conflict incidents for each
conflict category for the ACLED database (vintage 4). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
                                                  Appendix Table 5: Conflict Events by Actors (ACLED). 1997-2013

                                                                         Panel A: All Conflict Events

Conflict Actor                    Id Number          0            1            2            3            4            5           6            7            8             Total

Government Force                        1           829          764         6,891       3,043         229          546          435         3,743         198            16,678
Rebel Force                             2          1,298        3,007         397         642           71            8           3          3,354         853             9,633
Political Militia                       3           938         2,733         478        1,036         111           14          28          8,886         329            14,553
Ethnic Militia                          4           70           235          61          149         1,422           1           1          1,189         24              3,152
Rioters                                 5          2,196        2,110          14          66          13           440          14           213          58             5,124
Protesters                              6          8,845        1,272          14          29           5            26          44            0           30             10,265
Civilians                               7            1           569          868        1,215         125           52           0            0           43              2,873
Outside/external Force                  8           284          397          865         288           21            9           3           455          50              2,372
Total                                             14,461       11,087        9,588       6,468        1,997        1,096         528        17,840        1,585           64,650

                                                                        Panel B: Deadly Conflict Events

Conflict Actor                         Id            0            1            2            3            4            5           6            7            8             Total


Government Force                        1            7           279         2,426       1,277         121           84           37         1,229         50             5,510
Rebel Force                             2           14          1,326         159         236           25            7           1          1,879         254            3,901
Political Militia                       3           14          1,243         160         373           57            6           3          3,230         106            5,192
Ethnic Militia                          4            0           113          21          84           796           0            1           699          16             1,730
Rioters                                 5           205          432           7          14            3            83           1            43           5              793
Protesters                              6           87           81            0           4            1            1            1            0            3              178
Civilians                               7            0           240          530         545           82           13           0            0           26             1,436
Outside/external Force                  8            0            76          278         96            7            5            0           227          19              708
Total                                               327         3,790        3,581       2,629        1,092         199           44         7,307         479            19,448

The table gives the distribution (number) of all conflict incidents (in Panel A) and deadly conflict incidents (in Panel B) by ACLED conflict actors. There are 8 actor categories
(1: Government Forces; 2: Rebel Forces; 3: Political Militia; 4: Ethnic Militia; 5: Rioters; 6; Protesters; 7: Civilians; and 8: Outside/external Force. 0 indicates unassigned
conflict actor). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
                                             Appendix Table 6: Civil Conflict by Country (ACLED and UCDP GED)

                      Murdock (1959)                                           ACLED 4                                                UCDP GED 1.5

Country Name         Ethnic     Split     All Conflict All Types of Civilian Riots and Government   Rebel                        State One-Sided Non-State
                    Homelands Homelands    Incidents      Battles   Violence Protests    Forces     Forces   Militias Civilians Conflict Violence Conflict


Angola                 29        13          2443        1848        337      113        1947       2166        70     339      782      156           0
Burundi                 3         3          2824        1433       1250       49        1404       2303       447    1250      481      333          19
Benin                  16        12            64          1          6       55          21          0         4       6        0       10           0
Botswana               30        14           204          18         23      156          85         1        23      23        0        0           0
Burkina Faso           17         7            47          3          7        35          8          2         9       7        0        0           0
Central African        26        18          1166        444        485      120         395        446       417     486       53       89           0
Cote d'Ivoire          33        13          1305         452        406      413         604        150       482     408       50       66          25
Cameroon               65        28           187          61         55       62          87        11        89      56        1       19           7
Congo, Rep.            16        11           285         173         66       21         190         1        231      68      104       86           0
Djibuti                 2         2            54         17         11        20          34         6         4      11       21        0           0
Algeria                26         8          2057         958        518      482        1182       1052       482    524      1854      192           6
Egypt, Arab Rep.       10         3          3838        449        414      2628        1449        33       816     427      205        99          0
Eritrea                 9         4           256         97        126        7         178         12        21     126       73       15           0
Western Sahara         5         5            80           2         20       55          51          0         5      16        4        0           0
Ethiopia               48        13          1186        703        239       181        855        638       179     248      590       105         156
Gabon                  13         8            79          3         13       58          32          3        12      13        0        0           0
Ghana                  31        17           205         61         70       67          53          2       118      71        0        0          31
Guinea                 19        14           591        166        182       209        330        113       162     181       20        35          1
Gambia, The            3         2            81           9         39       27          20          7        32      40        1        1           0
Guinea-Bissau          9         6           190         102         23       48         129         18        18      26       18        0           0
Equatorial Guinea       5         4            31          7         13        6          24          5         5      15        0        0           0
Kenya                  36        15          3095        753        1042     1148        1026       194       1577    1056       2        87         152
Liberia                14         8           917        580        163       121         609       659         91    162      108       231          46
Libya                  12         3          1535        777        287       289         880       288        609    298        0         0           0
Lesotho                 3         1            90         26         30       32          38          1        35      30        3        0           0
Morocco                20              6             369              3          43         290          143              4          28        39           3           2            0
Madagascar             11             0             484             45          119         305          164              0         137       120          0            1           32
Mali                   24             13             614            222         173         119          204             327          87      181          21           37           3
Mozambique              21            15             369             38          144        163           115             0         176       150          94           67           2
Mauritania             11             7              237            19           23         180          118             17          12        21          3            8            5
Malawi                 12             11             179              5          68          97           84              0          52        71           0           0            0
Namibia                14              9             419             47          85         284           70             70          34        85           6           7            0
Niger                  23             12             311            137          61         106          190             78          52        63          43          13            1
Nigeria                112            23            4309           1471         1641        1052         1412            133        2833      1646         31           88          186
Rwanda                  5             4              529           143          324          25          276             173        200       327          93          140           0
Sudan                  83             23            3590           1411         1431        483          1702           1025        1289      1444        480          467          148
Senegal                12              9             565            207         138         200          241             233         107      142          91           94          11
Sierra Leone           13             7             1250           797          266          74          318            1032        222       275         497          766          11
Somalia                12              6            9559           5309         2761        574          3830           3150        5558      2807        1077         141          505
Swaziland               2             2              147             1           36          90           78              0          29        43          0            2            0
Chad                   45             19             446            252         161          17          274             155         196      165          91           73           8
Togo                   24             17             182             10          24         143           80              0          17        22           0          89            1
Tunisia                12              5            1025             89          82         765          313              5         178        85           0           1            0
Uganda                 27             13            1919            657         660         416          907            1032        330       674         310          220          34
South Africa            28            11            3342             85          574        2637          769             2         589       613           5          531         2125


Congo, Dem. Rep.       104            30            5872           3098         1614        399          2470           3183        1903      1618        297          898          129
Zambia                 34             20             803            20           217        537           157            9           158      229          0            5            0
Zimbabwe               14             10            4759            59          3701        597          1239            0          3101      3780         0           37            0

Total                  1212           518           64541         23314        20375       16137         26934          18757      23438      20693       7512        5219         3645

The table gives the number of ethnic homelands, partitioned ethnic homelands, and conflict incidents for each country with the ACLED (vintage 4) and UCDP GED (vintage 1.5) database.
ACLED covers the period 1997-2013. UCDP GED covers the period 1989-2010. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
                                   Appendix Table 7: Correlation Structure - Main Conflict Variables (ACLED and UCDP)

                                                                                   ACLED                                                                          UCDP
                                                   Deadly       Fatalities   Duration       Duration       Battles     Civilian      Riots &         State      One-Sided      Non-State
                                   All Events      Events                    All Events     Deadly                     Violence      Protests                   Violence


ACLED
All Conflict Events                    1
Deadly Events                       0.8727*          1
Fatalities                          0.2285*       0.2551*          1
Duration All Events                 0.4274*       0.3413*       0.1392*          1
Duration Deadly Events              0.4725*       0.4096*       0.1778*       0.9053*           1
Battles                             0.8325*       0.9496*       0.3050*       0.3003*        0.3455*          1
Civilian Violence                   0.8585*       0.7120*       0.1493*       0.3543*        0.4087*       0.6443*         1
Riots and Protests                  0.5678*       0.2417*       0.0324        0.3230*        0.3259*       0.1309*      0.2988*         1

UCDP
State Conflict                      0.6318*       0.7494*       0.2672*       0.2373*        0.2867*       0.7191*      0.4695*      0.1888*          1
One-Sided Violence                  0.5243*       0.5377*       0.2213*       0.3900*        0.4299*       0.4740*      0.4304*      0.2765*       0.4978*          1
Non-State Conflict                  0.1896*       0.1701*       0.0152        0.1361*        0.1717*       0.1527*      0.1318*      0.1587*       0.0888*       0.3024*            1


The table gives the correlation structure of the main civil conflict variables across all country-ethnic homelands (N=1212). * indicate statistical significance at the 5% level.
                                      Appendix Table 8: Border Artificiality
              Pre-colonial Ethnic Features (using data from Murdock (1967)) and Ethnic Partitioning

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)


Log Land Area                      0.0748*** 0.0777*** 0.0725*** 0.0725*** 0.0679*** 0.0790*** 0.0818*** 0.0739***
                                    (0.0171) (0.0207) (0.0205) (0.0178) (0.0195) (0.0164) (0.0222) (0.0176)

Lake Indicator                       0.0866        0.1015        0.1057       0.0808        0.0835       0.0888        0.1176       0.0997
                                    (0.0678)      (0.0679)      (0.0665)     (0.0799)      (0.0771)     (0.0685)      (0.0785)     (0.0657)

River Indicator                     -0.0169       -0.0248      -0.0172       -0.0053       -0.0259      -0.0238      -0.0003      -0.0224
                                    (0.0430)      (0.0432)     (0.0429)      (0.0419)      (0.0472)     (0.0428)     (0.0426)     (0.0417)

Complex Settlement Patterns         -0.0004
                                    (0.0538)

Dependence on Agriculture                          0.0015
                                                  (0.0112)

Animal Husbandry                                                0.0088
                                                               (0.0108)

Local Elections                                                              -0.0459
                                                                             (0.0848)

Inheritance Rule for Property                                                               0.0040
                                                                                           (0.0891)

Political Centralization                                                                                -0.0719
                                                                                                        (0.0482)

Class Stratification                                                                                                 -0.0674
                                                                                                                     (0.0444)

Polygyny                                                                                                                           -0.0121
                                                                                                                                   (0.0498)

adjusted R-squared                    0.081        0.081         0.082        0.095        0.0790        0.0830        0.098        0.077

Region Fixed Effects                   Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                           451          451           437          437           394           394          487          487

The table reports linear probability model (LPM) estimates associating ethnic partitioning (SPLIT) with variables reflecting ethnic-specific
pre-colonial economic, social and political traits (using data from Murdock (1967)). In all specifications the dependent variable is an
indicator that equals one when at least 10% of the historical ethnic homeland (as portrayed in Murdock’s (1959) Ethnolinguistic map) falls
to more than one contemporary country (using the 2000 Digital Chart of the World). All specifications include a set of (five) region fixed
effects (constants not reported). Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for double clustering at the country-dimension and the ethno-
linguistic family dimension. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                   Appendix Table 9: "Balancedeness Tests". Ethnic Partitioning and Geographic Characteristics within Countries

                                                        Panel A: All Country-Ethnic Homelands

                                                                         Dependent variable is:
               Log Land   Lake      River     Mean      Land      Malaria Diamond Petroleum Major City Coastal Capital Distance            Distance   Distance
                 Area   Indicator Indicator Elevation Suitability Stability Indicator Indicator in 1400 Indicator Indicator Sea             Border    Capital
                  (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)    (10)      (11)    (12)             (13)       (14)

SPLIT          -0.1702    -0.0027 0.0023     0.0165     0.0009  -0.0092 -0.0132     -0.0212       -0.0005    -0.0173 -0.024       0.0219 -100.8410***0.1059***
               (0.1045)   (0.0225) (0.0333) (0.0365)   (0.0193) (0.0218) (0.0189)   (0.0220)      (0.0094)   (0.0274) (0.0159)   (0.0316) (13.3237) (0.0276)

marginal R2     0.003     0.000     0.000    0.001     0.000     0.000    0.001      0.001         0.000      0.001    0.003      0.000     0.154      0.017

Mean DV         2.071     0.108     0.504    0.617     0.407     0.717    0.093      0.084         0.026      0.129    0.039      0.600    107.412     0.505

Observations     1212      1212     1212     1212       1212     1212      1212      1212          1212       1212     1212       1212      1212       1212
Country FE       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
                  Appendix Table 9: "Balancedeness Tests." Ethnic Partitioning and Geographic Characteristics within Countries (cont.)

                                                       Panel B: Country-Ethnic Homelands near the National Border


                                                                                           Dependent variable is:

                 Log Land   Lake      River     Mean      Land      Malaria Diamond Petroleum Major City Coastal Capital Distance                                       Distance     Distance
                   Area   Indicator Indicator Elevation Suitability Stability Indicator Indicator in 1400 Indicator Indicator Sea                                        Border      Capital
                    (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)    (10)      (11)    (12)                                        (13)         (14)

SPLIT            0.7236*** -0.0191 0.0864* 0.0010                    0.0243  -0.0090 0.0123              0.0095        0.0057       0.0475   0.0118        -0.0268       -1.9752      -0.0128
                  (0.1762) (0.0294) (0.0399) (0.0326)               (0.0154) (0.0214) (0.0250)          (0.0212)      (0.0045)     (0.0311) (0.0094)       (0.0303)      (2.8585)     (0.0370)

marginal R2        0.052        0.001       0.005       0.000        0.002       0.000       0.001       0.001         0.002        0.005       0.001        0.001        0.002        0.000

Mean Dep. Var. 1.2276           0.0941     0.4620       0.5928      0.4314      0.7714      0.0594       0.0413       0.0033       0.1089        0.0215     0.5855       24.8881      0.5163

Observations        606          606         606         606          606         606         606         606           606          606         606          606          606          606
Country FE          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
The table reports OLS estimates associating various geographical, ecological, and natural resource characteristics with ethnic partitioning within countries. The unit of analysis is an ethnic
territory in a country (ethnicity-country). Panel A reports estimates in the full sample of (country-ethnicity) homelands (1212 observations). Panel B gives estimates in the sample of country-
ethnic homelands that are close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers).
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. All specifications
include country fixed effects (constants not reported). The dependent variable in column (1) is the log of a country-ethnicity’s region surface area; in column (2) is an indicator for regions
               Appendix Table 10: Test of Means and Medians for Main Civil Conflict Measures
                                           Panel A: All Ethnic Homelands

                                          Indicator   Number of Incidents      Excluding           Excluding
                                         Likelihood          - All               Capitals       Outliers (top 1%)
                                            mean        mean      median    mean       median   mean        median
                                             (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)    (6)          (7)

All Types of Conflict Events (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.815       47.616    3.000      30.495    3.000     30.464     3.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.878       65.031    13.000     47.872    10.000    52.526     13.000
 difference                                 0.062      17.415    10.000     17.377    7.000     22.062     10.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.07)      (0.42)    (0.00)     (0.05)    (0.09)    (0.02)     (0.01)
Battles (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.649       19.837     1.000     14.551     1.000    12.566     1.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.725       30.052     3.000     22.782     2.000    21.212     2.000
 difference                                 0.076      10.215     2.000      8.231    1.000      8.646     1.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.33)      (0.20)    (0.03)     (0.10)    (0.19)    (0.03)     (0.12)
Violence against Civilians (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.683       17.648     1.000     10.502     1.000    10.007     1.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.777       23.258     3.000     16.758     2.000    17.079     3.000
 difference                                 0.094      5.610      2.000      6.257    1.000      7.073     2.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.05)      (0.53)    (0.03)     (0.05)    (0.10)    (0.05)     (0.03)

Riots and Protests (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.530        7.792     0.000     3.757     0.000     4.640      0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.673        6.590     1.000     4.735     1.000     5.996      1.000
 difference                                 0.142      -1.202     1.000      0.978    1.000      1.356     1.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.00)      (0.56)    (0.00)     (0.47)    (0.00)    (0.21)     (0.00)
State-driven Conflict (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.299        8.886     0.000     4.518     0.000     3.160      0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.446        9.677     0.000     6.820     0.000     6.872      0.000
 difference                                 0.147      0.791      0.000      2.302     0.000    3.713      0.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.00)      (0.87)               (0.31)              (0.01)
One-Sided Violence (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.334        4.745     0.000     3.366      0.000    3.447      0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)          0.48        10.44     0.000      7.64      0.000     6.44      0.000
 difference                                 0.147      5.696      0.000      4.278     0.000    2.998      0.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.00)      (0.14)               (0.12)              (0.07)
Non-State-Driven Conflict (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)     0.201        5.341     0.000     4.368      0.000    1.396      0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)         0.205        2.018     0.000     2.038      0.000    1.147      0.000
 difference                                 0.004      -3.323     0.000     -2.330     0.000    -0.249     0.000
 difference (p-value)                      (0.93)      (0.37)               (0.47)              (0.50)
               Appendix Table 10: Test of Means and Medians for Main Civil Conflict Measures
                                 Panel B: Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border

                                           Indicator                            Excluding             Excluding
                                          Likelihood   Number of Incidents        Capitals              Outliers
                                             mean        mean     median     mean       median     mean       median
                                              (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)          (7)

All Types of Conflict Events (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=200)      0.873       32.300    1.000      29.270       1.000    24.704    1.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=213)          0.725       66.067    12.000     47.249       10.000   52.524    12.000
 difference                                  0.148      33.667    11.000     17.978       9.000    27.820    11.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.10)    (0.01)     (0.09)       (0.02)   (0.00)    (0.00)
Battles (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=200)      0.714       15.700     0.000     13.867       0.000    9.879     0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=213)          0.550       30.230     3.000     22.173       2.000    20.719    3.000
 difference                                  0.164      14.530     3.000      8.305       2.000    10.840    3.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.16)    (0.15)     (0.18)       (0.10)   (0.01)    (0.01)
Violence against Civilians (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=200)       0.615      11.390     0.000     10.786       0.000     7.525    0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=213)           0.765      24.033     3.000     16.919       2.000    17.393    3.000
 difference                                  0.150      12.643     3.000      6.133       2.000     9.868    3.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.13)    (0.01)     (0.08)       (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)
Riots and Protests (ACLED)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups               0.420      3.325      0.000      4.528       0.000     3.325    0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups                   0.667      6.394      1.000      2.924       1.000     5.755    1.000
 difference                                  0.247      3.069      1.000      1.604       1.000     2.430    1.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.23)       (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)
State-driven Conflict (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)      0.195        3.315     0.000     2.515        0.000    2.281     0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)          0.432        9.662     0.000     6.503        0.000    6.645     0.000
 difference                                  0.237      6.347      0.000      3.987       0.000    4.363     0.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.05)               (0.06)                (0.00)
One-Sided Violence (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)      0.245       4.695      0.000     3.714        0.000    1.505     0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)          0.479       11.042     0.000     8.000        0.000    6.751     0.000
 difference                                  0.234      6.347      0.000      4.286       0.000    5.246     0.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.00)      (0.07)               (0.13)                (0.00)
Non-State-Driven Conflict (UCDP)
 non-partitioned ethnic groups (N=596)      0.165        9.175     0.000     9.321        0.000    1.136     0.000
 partitioned ethnic groups (N=229)          0.207        2.042     0.000     2.056        0.000    1.105     0.000
 difference                                  0.042      -7.133     0.000     -7.266       0.000    -0.030    0.000
 difference (p-value)                       (0.35)      (0.39)               (0.40)                (0.95)
The table reports summary statistics and test of means and medians for the ACLED and UCDP civil conflict variables at the ethnic
homeland level. Panel A reports test of means/medians at the full sample of ethnic homelands. Panel B reports test of means/medians across
ethnic homelands close to the national border (using as a cutoff the median distance from the centroid of each ethnic homeland to the
national border; 102 kilometers). Column (1) reports the likelihood that a type of conflict (all conflict incidents, battles, violence against the
civilian population, riots and protests, state-driven conflict, one-sided violence, and non-state-actor driven conflict) affect ethnic homelands.
Columns (2)-(3) report the mean and the median value for each type of conflict, respectively. Columns (4)-(5) report the mean and the
median value for each type of conflict excluding ethnic homelands where capital cities fall. Columns (6)-(7) report the mean and the
median value for each type of conflict, excluding ethnic regions where the respective variable exceeds the 99th percentile (outliers).
For each variable the table reports the mean/median value using all ethnic homelands, partitioned ethnicities and non-partitioned ethnicities.
The table also reports the mean and median difference and the p-value of mean-median equality between the group of partitioned and non-
partitioned ethnicities. The associated p-values for the test of means are based on double-clustered standard errors at the country level and
at the ethnolinguistic level. The associated p-values for the test of medians are based on clustered at the country-level standard errors
(recovered via median regression). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
              Appendix Table 11: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict. Baseline Country Fixed-Effects Estimates over 1997-2010

                                        All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                       Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                                                                       Excl.      Excl.                                                 Excl.      Excl.
                                     All Observations                                                   All Observations
                                                                      Outliers   Capitals                                              Outliers   Capitals
                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)       (12)


                                                                     Panel A. Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.4764*** 0.3604** 0.4930*** 0.5073*** 0.5383*** 0.5109***          1.0389*** 0.7799*** 0.6505*** 0.6119** 0.6119** 0.6063**
                         (0.1369) (0.1990) (0.1542) (0.1498) (0.1381) (0.1524)               (0.1858) (0.2997) (0.2763) (0.2794) (0.2794) (0.2776)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)    0.2969      0.2734     0.2444     0.2808      0.3421     0.2031      0.3394     0.2884     0.1758     0.1646   0.1646   0.0925
                        (0.3246)    (0.3904)   (0.3182)   (0.3076)    (0.3137)   (0.3217)    (0.5658)   (0.5069)   (0.4212)   (0.3767) (0.3767) (0.3922)

Log Likelihood          -3899.33    -3687.30   -3542.93   -3524.40    -3402.42   -3221.60   -1488.05    -1363.22 -1327.74 -1320.62 -1320.62 -1259.95
R-square                  0.135       0.429      0.476      0.421       0.093      0.091      0.151       0.342    0.467    0.516    0.516    0.484

                                                               Panel B. Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.0852*** 0.0833*** 0.0896*** 0.0918*** 0.0889*** 0.0877***         0.1269*** 0.0967* 0.1025** 0.0987** 0.0987** 0.0967**
                         (0.0307) (0.0289) (0.0300) (0.0304) (0.0304) (0.0313)               (0.0457) (0.0499) (0.0475) (0.0461) (0.0461) (0.0465)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.0556     0.0761     0.0836     0.0953     0.0984*     0.0957    0.1653**    0.1305*    0.1310*    0.1294* 0.1294*    0.116
                         (0.0619)   (0.0600)   (0.0596)   (0.0583)    (0.0581)   (0.0602)    (0.0721)   (0.0776)   (0.0766)   (0.0727) (0.0727) (0.0734)

Adjusted R-squared        0.283      0.448      0.457      0.461       0.462       0.46       0.286      0.467      0.471      0.479    0.479      0.474

Simple Controls           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
Location Controls          No         No        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         No         Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
Geographic Controls        No         No         No        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         No         No         Yes      Yes        Yes
Country Fixed Effects      No        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          No         Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
Observations              1212       1212       1212       1212        1199       1165         579        579        579        579      579        568
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in Panel B, associating civil conflict with
ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the total number of civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the
period 1997-2010. The dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced conflict and zero
otherwise over the period 1997-2010. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than
one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country.
The specifications in columns (2)-(6) and (8)-(12) include country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close
to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). The specifications in
columns (5) and (11) exclude country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. The specifications in columns (6) and (12) exclude country-ethnic
homelands where capital cities fall. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of
location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that
takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls
includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major
city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
           Appendix Table 12: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict Intensity. Baseline Country-Fixed-Effects Estimates over 1997-2010

                                                 All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                                    Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                                              Deadly                                           Duration                        Deadly                                Duration
                              Deadly         Incidents       Total      Duration                Deadly             Deadly     Incidents   Total      Duration         Deadly
                             Incidents       Indicator    Casualties All Incidents             Incidents          Incidents   Indicator Casualties All Incidents     Incidents
                              NB-ML            LPM           NB-ML         Poisson - ML Poisson - ML               NB-ML           LPM         NB-ML       Poisson - ML Poisson - ML
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)              (10)

SPLIT (Partitioning)        0.4484***       0.0963***       0.7665***       0.2240***          0.2087**          0.6639***       0.1180** 1.4786***           0.3156**         0.5145***
                             (0.1668)        (0.0344)        (0.2094)        (0.0717)          (0.0892)           (0.2681)       (0.0478) (0.4783)            (0.1385)          (0.1744)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)         0.2718         0.1101*          -0.0442         0.2486*          0.4181**            0.3548        0.1707**      0.5772          0.2709            0.4806
                             (0.3554)        (0.0566)        (0.4216)         (0.1433)         (0.1904)           (0.4350)       (0.0678)     (0.6975)        (0.2506)          (0.3287)
Log Likelihood               -2452.01           __          -3913.681        -2487.784          -1971.27           -892.18          __         -1441.2        -932.983           -710.46
Adjusted R-squared              __             0.381           __               __                 __                __            0.417         __              __                __

Rich Set of Controls           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes
Country Fixed Effects          Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                   1212            1212            1199             1212              1212               579            579          575             579               579

The table reports estimates associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. In columns (1) and (6) the dependent variable is the total number
of deadly civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the sample period (1997-2010). These models are estimated with the negative binomial ML model. In columns
(2) and (7) the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one deadly conflict incident over the
period 1997-2013 and zero otherwise. These columns give linear probability model estimates. In columns (3) and (8) the dependent variable is the total number of fatalities at each
country-ethnic homeland over 1997-2010. These models are estimated with the negative binomial ML model. For the estimation we exclude country-ethnic homelands where the
dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. In columns (4) and (9) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has experienced conflict over
the period 1997-2010. These columns give Poisson ML estimates. In columns (5) and (10) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has
experienced deadly conflict (at least one casualty) over the period 1997-2010. These columns give Poisson ML estimates. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned
ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned
ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national
border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include country fixed
effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of controls. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator
for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border,
an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of
geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for
areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country
and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                  Appendix Table 13: Ethnic Partitioning and Main Aspects of Civil Conflict over 1997-2010

                                                All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                                    Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                                  Battles                Civilian Violence            Riots & Protests              Battles               Civilian Violence           Riots & Protests
                             NB-ML       LPM             NB-ML       LPM             NB-ML      LPM            NB-ML       LPM            NB-ML       LPM            NB-ML      LPM
                              (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)              (5)       (6)            (7)         (8)            (9)         (10)           (11)       (12)

SPLIT (Partitioning)        0.5360*** 0.0839**          0.4036*** 0.0654**            0.0917 -0.0002          0.6111** 0.0976**          0.5448*** 0.0717             0.0077       0.004
                             (0.1540) (0.0366)           (0.1453) (0.0315)           (0.1868) (0.0290)        (0.3186) (0.0420)           (0.2344) (0.0450)          (0.2769)     (0.0382)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)         0.3345       0.0497         0.0247       0.0438         0.0896 0.0235            0.3491        0.085         -0.3973      0.0666        0.5937       0.026
 Double-clustered s.e.       (0.3193)     (0.0525)       (0.3709)     (0.0576)       (0.2963) (0.0399)        (0.4126)      (0.0620)      (0.4326)     (0.0674)      (0.4842)     (0.0595)

Log Likelihood               -2511.84       __            -2420.43       __           -1620.2       __           -957.28      __           -868.121       __         -469.618       __
Adjusted R-squared             __          0.453            __          0.393           __         0.413          __         0.461           __          0.442          __         0.375

Rich Set of Controls           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
Country Fixed Effects          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
Observations                   1212         1212           1212         1212           1212        1212          579          579            579          579           579         579

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in odd-numbered columns and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in even-numbered columns,
associating the main categories of civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. Columns (1)-(2) and (7)-(8) focus on battles. Columns (3)-(4) and (9)-
(10) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12) focus on riots and protests. In odd-numbered columns the dependent variable is the total number
of battles (in columns (1) and (7)), violent events against the civilian population (in columns (3) and (9)) and riots and protests events (in columns (5) and (11)) over the period 1997-
2010. In even-numbered columns the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one battle (in columns (2) and
(8)), at least one violent event against the civilian population (in columns (4) and (10) and at least one event of riots and protests (in columns (6) and (12)) over the period 1997-2010
(and zero otherwise). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one
contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The
specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country
homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple
controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid
of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the
homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture,
mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                     Appendix Table 14: Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict Actors over 1997-2010.

                                       All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                            Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                        Government Rebels &     Riots &    Civilian    Nearby       Other     Government Rebels &      Riots &    Civilian   Nearby      Other
                          Forces    Militias    Protests   Violence    External    External     Forces    Militias     Protests   Violence   External   External
                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)

                                                                       Panel A. Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.5520*** 0.5675*** 0.1237 0.4065*** 1.2291*** 0.0602                 0.8461*** 0.7028*** 0.1282 0.5658*** 1.1803*** 1.0811
                         (0.1571)  (0.1476) (0.0865) (0.1451) (0.3299) (0.2391)                (0.2960)  (0.2921) (0.2065) (0.2299) (0.4290) (0.9560)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.2273     0.1189      0.0051     0.0349      -0.0842     -1.1965     -0.1332     -0.0912     0.2292     -0.3655    -0.4716 -2.0554**
                         (0.3778)   (0.3140)    (0.0920)   (0.3675)    (0.5777)    (0.7729)    (0.4800)    (0.3989)    (0.2856)   (0.4345)   (0.5595) (1.0131)

Log Likelihood           -2640.84   -3057.78    -669.28    -2426.80     -940.63    -373.20      -953.45    -1120.16    -234.12    -870.70    -383.79    -134.27

                                                                   Panel B. Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.1197***   0.0710**    -0.0027 0.0678**        0.0561*     0.017      0.1148**    0.0829**     0.004     0.0749* 0.0638**      0.0455*
                         (0.0291)    (0.0317)   (0.0296) (0.0319)       (0.0321)   (0.0174)     (0.0453)    (0.0417)   (0.0382)   (0.0449) (0.0314)     (0.0273)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.0633     0.0285      0.0228     0.0459       0.0189    -0.0219      0.0723      0.0523      0.026      0.0711     -0.053     -0.053
                         (0.0577)   (0.0642)    (0.0404)   (0.0574)     (0.0469)   (0.0223)    (0.0733)    (0.0657)    (0.0595)   (0.0682)   (0.0474)   (0.0340)

Adjusted R-square         0.453      0.472       0.437      0.424        0.345      0.378       0.467       0.485       0.418      0.436      0.384      0.425
Observations              1212       1212        1212       1212         1212       1212         579         579         579        579        579        579

Simple Controls            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Location Controls          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Geographic Controls        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Country Fixed Effects      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in Panel B, associating civil conflict by actor
with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level over the period 1997-2010. Columns (1) and (7) focus on conflict where government forces participate. Columns (2)
and (8) focus on conflict where rebels and militias participate. Columns (3) and (9) focus on riots and protests. Columns (4) and (10) focus on violence against the civilian population.
Columns (5) and (11) focus on military interventions of adjacent (nearby) African countries Columns (6) and (12) focus on foreign interventions by peace-keeping forces (United
Nations, African Union, etc.). In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of events of each category across country-ethnic homelands over the period 1997-2010. In Panel B
the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one event from each type of civil conflict over the period 1997-
2010 (and zero otherwise).
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that
captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns (7)-(12)
focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cutoff the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3
kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log
of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the
respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for
country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in
parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                         Appendix Table 15: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict. Alternative Estimation Techniques

                                        All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                         Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border

                                     All Observations                  Excl.      Excl.                  All Observations                 Excl.      Excl.
                                                                      Outliers   Capitals                                                Outliers   Capitals
                           (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)

                                            Panel A. Conditional Negative Binomial ML Estimates (Hausman, Hall, and Griliches (1984))

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.1304** 0.1304** 0.2473*** 0.2537*** 0.2705*** 0.2470***            0.2618** 0.2618** 0.4177*** 0.4139*** 0.4139*** 0.3577***
                         (0.0650) (0.0650) (0.0699) (0.0711) (0.0713) (0.0742)                (0.1171) (0.1171) (0.1241) (0.1253) (0.1253) (0.1228)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)   0.3482*** 0.3482*** 0.4839*** 0.5055*** 0.5440*** 0.6342***           0.3047     0.3047 0.3959**      0.3425*    0.3425* 0.4491**
                         (0.1172) (0.1172) (0.1153) (0.1162) (0.1189) (0.1188)               (0.1871)   (0.1871) (0.1806)     (0.1832)   (0.1832) (0.1914)

Log Likelihood          -3959.55    -3959.55   -3837.44    -3826.74   -3709.21   -3531.86    -1344.66   -1344.66   -1315.7    -1309.81   -1309.81   -1242.05
Observations              1212        1212       1212        1212       1199       1162        579        579        579        579        579        568
Country Fixed Effects      No          No         No          No         No         No          No         No        No          No         No         No

                                                            Panel B. Fixed-Effects Poisson ML Estimates (excl. Outliers)

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.2546** 0.2372*** 0.3712*** 0.3892***                   0.3435***   0.5054** 0.4868*** 0.6954*** 0.7213***                 0.5835***
                         (0.1022) (0.0794) (0.1117) (0.1026)                      (0.1016)    (0.2005) (0.1409) (0.1754) (0.1574)                    (0.1589)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.1119     0.1443      0.2800     0.3069                 0.1975     0.4569     0.4853    0.6001*     0.4922                 0.5426
                         (0.2264)   (0.2288)    (0.2413)   (0.2346)               (0.2447)   (0.3658)   (0.3998)   (0.3193)   (0.3000)               (0.3986)

Log Likelihood           -19100     -14200      -12000     -11700                 -11000     -7200.19   -4746.57   -4061.54   -3934.52              -3697.48
R-square                  0.264      0.434       0.527      0.543                  0.498       0.210      0.454      0.553      0.596                 0.542
Observations              1151       1151        1151       1151                   1125         570        570        570        570                   562

Simple Controls           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes                   Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes                   Yes
Location Controls         No          No         Yes         Yes                   Yes         No         No         Yes        Yes                   Yes
Geographic Controls       No          No         No          Yes                   Yes         No         No         No         Yes                   Yes
Country Fixed Effects     No          Yes        Yes         Yes                   Yes         No         Yes        Yes        Yes                   Yes
Panel A reports Conditional Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates, using the method of Hausman, Hahn, and Griliches (1984) to account for country-level
unobservable features. Panel B reports country fixed-effects Poisson Maximum Likelihood estimates. Both panels associate civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-
ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in both panels is the total number of civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. For the
Poisson ML estimates we exclude country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 95th percentile. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned
ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned
ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country.
The specifications in columns (2)-(6) and (8)-(12) include country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas
close to the national border (using as a cutoff the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). The specifications
in columns (5) and (11) in Panel A exclude country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. The specifications in columns (6) and (12) exclude
country-ethnic homelands where capital cities fall. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for
rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an
indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of
geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator
for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Panel B reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                      Appendix Table 16: Ethnic Partitioning and Main Aspects of Civil Conflict
                                        Alternative Estimation Techniques

                                                                                              Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                       All Ethnicity-Country Homelands
                                                                                                          National Border
                                                      Civilian           Riots                               Civilian       Riots
                                    Battles           Violence         & Protests               Battles     Violence      & Protests
                                     (1)                 (2)              (3)                    (4)            (5)          (6)

                                                       Panel A: Conditional Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)              0.2589***          0.2229***         0.2841***              0.5204***        0.4289***          0.3690*
                                   (0.0891)           (0.0831)          (0.0949)               (0.1584)         (0.1461)          (0.1954)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)              0.2976**          0.5722***         0.4158***               0.4559**          0.2999             0.0743
                                    (0.1462)          (0.1350)          (0.1536)                (0.2256)        (0.2216)           (0.2790)

Log Likelihood                     -2696.18           -2676.78          -1983.24                -898.64         -863.07            -523.86
Observations                         1212               1212              1212                    570             577                579

                                                   Panel B: Fixed-Effects Poisson ML Estimates (Excl. Outliers)

SPLIT (Partitioning)              0.3247***          0.4543***          0.2827**              0.7334***        0.8135***            0.1207
                                   (0.1089)           (0.1299)           (0.1115)              (0.2577)         (0.2294)           (0.1658)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)             0.5559***            0.3573             0.245                 0.5343*          0.1605             0.5298
                                   (0.1776)           (0.2913)           (0.1945)               (0.2962)        (0.3755)           (0.4281)

Adjusted R-square                  -5281.91           -4415.02          -2742.90               -1926.75         -1511.16           -842.91
Observations                         1151               1151              1151                   565              569                572
Rich Set of Controls                  Yes                Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes               Yes

Panel A reports Conditional Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates, using the method of Hausman, Hahn, and Griliches
(1984) to account for country-level unobservable features. Panel B reports fixed-effects Poisson Maximum Likelihood estimates. Both
panels associate civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in both panels is the
total number of civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. For the Poisson ML estimates (in Panel
B) we exclude country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 95th percentile. Columns (1) and (4) focus on battles.
Columns (2) and (5) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (3) and (6) focus on riots and protests. In both panels the
dependent variable is the total number of battles (in columns (1) and (4)), violent events against the civilian population (in columns (2) and
(5)) and riots and protests events (in columns (3) and (6)). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those
with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share
of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in
columns (4)-(6) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of
each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications in Panel B include country fixed effects
(constants not reported). All specifications in both panels include rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of
land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance
of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that
takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the
sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and data sources. Panel B reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                      Appendix Table 17: Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict Actors
                                                         Fixed-Effects Poisson ML Estimates (excl. Outliers)

                                              All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                                     Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                          Government Rebels &           Riots &      Civilian     Nearby        Other       Government Rebels &            Riots &      Civilian     Nearby        Other
                            Forces    Militias          Protests     Violence     External     External       Forces    Militias           Protests     Violence     External     External
                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)            (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)         (12)

SPLIT (Partitioning)       0.4290*** 0.3531*** 0.2970** 0.4688*** 0.5570**                      -0.4439       0.8499*** 0.9103*** 0.1910 0.7984*** 0.6471                          0.2613
                            (0.1200)  (0.1114) (0.1481) (0.1262) (0.2666)                      (0.2746)        (0.2548)  (0.1624) (0.2242) (0.2116) (0.3952)                      (0.5226)

SPIL (Adjacent Split) 0.5140***           0.3607**       0.2584       0.3611      0.7794** -0.8987*             0.4196         0.2414       0.6637       0.0192      0.8836**      -1.0169
                       (0.2229)           (0.1827)      (0.2146)     (0.2787)     (0.2747) (0.4835)            (0.3467)       (0.2529)     (0.5411)     (0.3652)     (0.4303)     (0.7607)

Log Likelihood              -6196.64      -8442.94     -2810.11      -4482.95     -1010.49     -399.206       -2037.086       -2786.1      -888.711     -1517.88     -410.167     -111.053
Observations                  1149          1151         1151          1151         1116         621             568            567          572          568          421          173

Simple Controls                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Location Controls              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Geographic Controls            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Country Fixed Effects          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
The table reports country-fixed effects Poisson Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates associating civil conflict by actor with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland
level. Columns (1) and (7) focus on conflict where government forces participate. Columns (2) and (8) focus on conflict where rebels and militias participate. Columns (3) and (9)
focus on riots and protests. Columns (4) and (10) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (5) and (11) focus on military interventions of adjacent (nearby) African
countries Columns (6) and (12) focus on foreign interventions by peace-keeping forces (United Nations, African Union, etc.). The dependent variable is the total number of events of
each category across country-ethnic homelands over the period 1997-2013, excluding country-ethnic homelands where the dependent variable exceeds the 95th percentile. SPLIT is
an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures
spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on
country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3
kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log
of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the
respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for
country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in
parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                                 Appendix Table 18: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                            Not Accountring for Spillovers


                                     All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                       Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                                                                                       National Border
                                    All         Excl. Outliers     Excl. Capitals             All        Excl. Outliers      Excl. Capitals
                                    (1)               (2)                (3)                  (4)              (5)                 (6)

                                                             Panel A: Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)            0.4543***         0.4755***          0.4376***             0.5044**         0.5040**            0.5009**
                                 (0.1319)          (0.1287)           (0.1327)             (0.2585)         (0.2576)            (0.2566)

Log Likelihood                  -3752.875         -3637.696          -3462.719            -1379.347         -1371.668          -1323.013

                                                      Panel B: Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)            0.0830***         0.0831***          0.0828***             0.0804*           0.0804*             0.0809*
                                 (0.0303)          (0.0306)           (0.0306)             (0.0487)          (0.0487)            (0.0489)

Adjusted R-square                  0.458             0.458              0.457                0.465            0.465               0.463

Country Fixed Effects              Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes
Simple Controls                    Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes
Location Controls                  Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes
Geographic Controls                Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes
Observations                       1212              1199               1165                  579              579                 568

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates
in Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is
the total number of main civil conflict incidents (excluding riots and protests)) at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-
2013. The dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have
experienced conflict and zero otherwise (in Panel B) over the period 1997-2013.. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned
ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. The specifications in
columns (4)-(6) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of
each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers).The specifications in columns (2) and (5) exclude country-ethnic
homelands where conflict events exceed the 99th percentile. The specifications in columns (3) and (6) exclude country-ethnic homelands
where capital cities fall.
All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls
includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls
includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national
border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-
ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a
malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data
Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                                 Appendix Table 19: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                       Alternative Measure of Ethnic Partitioning

                                                                                            Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                      All Ethnicity-Country Homelands
                                                                                                        National Border
                                     All         Excl. Outliers Excl. Capitals                 All        Excl. Outliers     Excl. Capitals
                                     (1)               (2)            (3)                      (4)              (5)                (6)

                                                              Panel A: Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT-5PC (Partitioning)         0.4977***         0.5385***         0.5024***             0.7601***        0.7597***          0.7390***
                                  (0.1107)          (0.1029)          (0.1184)              (0.2185)         (0.2174)           (0.2160)

Log Likelihood                    -3752.14          -3636.22          -3461.39              -1377.07         -1369.39           -1321.07

                                                            Panel B: Linear Probability Model Estimates

SPLIT-5PC (Partitioning)          0.0670**         0.0701***          0.0691**               0.0649           0.0649              0.0633
                                   (0.0268)         (0.0269)           (0.0275)             (0.0495)         (0.0495)            (0.0502)

Adjusted R-square                   0.456             0.456             0.455                 0.462            0.462              0.460

Simple Controls                     Yes               Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Location Controls                   Yes               Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Geographic Controls                 Yes               Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                        1212              1199              1165                   579              579                568

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in
Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
total number of main civil conflict incidents (excluding riots and protests)) at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. The
dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced
conflict and zero otherwise (in Panel B) over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT-5PC is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities
as those with at least 5% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. The specifications in columns (4)-(6)
focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-
country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). The specifications in columns (2) and (5) exclude country-ethnic homelands
where conflict events exceed the 99th percentile. The specifications in columns (3) and (6) exclude country-ethnic homelands where capital
cities fall. All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple
controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location
controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the
national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for
country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean
elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The
Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                             Appendix Table 20: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
        Sensitivity Analysis: Controlling for Unobservables. Distance to the Border. 3rd-order Polynomial


                                            All Ethnic Homelands
                                                                                           Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border
                             All Events       Battles      Violence         Riots         All Events Battles       Violence       Riots
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)

                                                      Panel A: Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)         0.5234*** 0.4483*** 0.5425***                 0.1792         0.5712***       0.4637       0.5158***        0.0484
                              (0.1294)  (0.1631)  (0.1501)                (0.1740)         (0.2183)      (0.2949)       (0.1803)       (0.2437)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)         0.5301**        0.4553         0.4276       0.5437**          0.4490        0.4201         -0.0115       0.9463*
                              (0.2654)       (0.2900)       (0.3478)      (0.2347)         (0.3580)      (0.3702)       (0.3718)       (0.4930)
Log Likelihood                -4108.06       -2917.84      -2874.90       -2198.11         -1510.36      -1067.17       -1000.35       -648.12

                                                   Panel B: Fixed-Effects Linear Probability (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)         0.0911*** 0.1015***             0.0606        0.0192          0.0838*       0.0863*         0.0674         0.0205
                              (0.0327)  (0.0387)            (0.0370)      (0.0326)         (0.0467)      (0.0495)       (0.0447)       (0.0548)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)        0.1504***        0.0678       0.1784***       0.0836         0.2409*** 0.1692***          0.1860***        0.084
                              (0.0406)       (0.0449)       (0.0583)      (0.0541)         (0.0570)  (0.0610)           (0.0722)       (0.0760)
Adjusted R-square               0.445          0.465         0.422          0.441            0.49          0.458          0.435         0.422
Rich Set of Controls            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Country Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                    1212           1212           1212          1212              579           579            579           579

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in
Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
total number of main civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. The dependent variable in Panel B
is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced main conflict and zero otherwise over
the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical
homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic
homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. Columns (1) and (5) focus on all types of civil conflict.
Columns (2) and (6) focus on battles. Columns (3) and (7) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (4) and (8) focus on
riots and protests. In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of all conflict events (in columns (1) and (5)), battles (in columns (2)
and (6)), violent events against the civilian population (in columns (3) and (7)) and riots and protests events (in columns (4) and (8)). In
Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one conflict
event (in columns (1) and (5)), a battle (in columns (2) and (6)), at least one violent event against the civilian population (in columns (3) and
(7) and at least one event of riots and protests (in columns (4) and (8)) over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). The specifications in
columns (5)-(8) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each
ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported)
and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for
lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the
respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the
homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an
index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an
indicator for areas with major city in 1400. All specifications include a third-order polynomial on distance from the centroid of each country-
ethnic homeland to the national border. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                          Appendix Table 21: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
      Sensitivity Analysis: Controlling for Unobservables. Distance to the Border. 4th-order Polynomial


                                           All Ethnic Homelands                        Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border

                             All Events      Battles       Violence        Riots       All Events      Battles      Violence        Riots
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)

                                                  Panel A: Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial ML Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)         0.5183*** 0.4332*** 0.5299***                0.1782       0.5787***       0.4806       0.5112***       0.0496
                              (0.1339)  (0.1630)  (0.1481)               (0.1733)       (0.2254)      (0.3056)       (0.1831)      (0.2459)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)        0.5233**        0.4350         0.4104       0.5416**        0.4313        0.4046         -0.0023      0.9455*
                             (0.2651)       (0.2838)       (0.3444)      (0.2510)       (0.3666)      (0.3817)       (0.3767)      (0.4914)

Log Likelihood                -4108.008 -2917.585          -2874.157 -2198.107          -1509.827      -1066.38      -1000.234      -648.12

                                                 Panel B: Fixed-Effects Linear Probability (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)         0.0917*** 0.1006***           0.0635*        0.0193        0.0841*       0.0869*         0.0676        0.0204
 Double-clustered s.e.        (0.0325)  (0.0385)           (0.0368)      (0.0332)       (0.0466)      (0.0495)       (0.0443)      (0.0539)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)        0.1511***        0.0667      0.1820***       0.0837       0.2418*** 0.1712*** 0.1867***                0.0839
 Double-clustered s.e.        (0.0402)       (0.0446)      (0.0584)      (0.0558)       (0.0577) (0.0600)   (0.0719)               (0.0761)
Adjusted R-square               0.445         0.465          0.423         0.441          0.491         0.461         0.436         0.422

Rich Set of Controls            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Country Fixed Effects           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                    1212          1212           1212          1212            579           579           579           579

The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM)
estimates in Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable
in Panel A is the total number of main civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. The
dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced
main conflict and zero otherwise over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those
with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the
share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. Columns (1) and
(5) focus on all types of civil conflict. Columns (2) and (6) focus on battles. Columns (3) and (7) focus on violence against the civilian
population. Columns (4) and (8) focus on riots and protests. In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of all conflict events
(in columns (1) and (5)), battles (in columns (2) and (6)), violent events against the civilian population (in columns (3) and (7)) and riots
and protests events (in columns (4) and (8)). In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic
homelands that have experienced at least one conflict event (in columns (1) and (5)), a battle (in columns (2) and (6)), at least one
violent event against the civilian population (in columns (3) and (7) and at least one event of riots and protests (in columns (4) and (8))
over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). The specifications in columns (5)-(8) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the
national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3
kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of
simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of
location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast,
from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an
indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for
agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with
major city in 1400. All specifications include a fourth-order polynomial on distance from the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland
to the national border. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                Appendix Table 22: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                      Ethnic Family Fixed Effects Specifications

                                                                                            Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                           All Ethnicity-Country Homelands
                                                                                                          National Border
                                                           Indicator       Duration                          Indicator     Duration
                                      All Incidents         Conflict        Conflict        All Incidents     Conflict      Conflict
                                        NB-ML                LPM          Poisson-ML          NB-ML            LPM        Poisson-ML
                                           (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)           (6)

SPLIT (Partitioning)                    0.3605**           0.0657**        0.1804***          0.5296**           0.0879          0.3629***
                                        (0.1487)           (0.0327)         (0.0681)          (0.2419)          (0.0604)          (0.1422)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                    0.3516           0.1264***          0.1245             0.7025         0.2425***          0.4645*
                                        (0.2687)           (0.0484)         (0.1424)           (0.4192)         (0.0806)          (0.2504)

Log Likelihood                          -3991.88              __            -2560.59           -1431.32             __             -941.82
Adjusted R-square                          __                0.49              __                 __               0.58              __

Simple Controls                           Yes                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Location Controls                         Yes                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Geographic Controls                       Yes                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Ethnic Family Fixed Effects               Yes                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Country Fixed Effects                     Yes                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Observations                              1212               1199             1165                579              579               579

The table reports estimates associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level conditioning on both
country fixed effects and ethnic family fixed effects. In columns (1) and (4) the dependent variable is the total number of all main civil
conflict incidents (of all types) at each country-ethnic homeland over the sample period (1997-2013). These models are estimated with the
negative binomial ML model. In columns (2) and (5) the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for
country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one conflict incident over the period 1997-2013 and zero otherwise. These
columns give linear probability model estimates. In columns (3) and (6) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-
ethnic homeland has experienced conflict over the period 1997-2013. These models are estimated with Poisson ML. SPLIT is an
indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one
contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of
adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the
national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3
kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported), ethnic family fixed effects and a rich set of control
variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for
rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from
the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group
and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for
agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with
major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                            Appendix Table 23. Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                          Sensitivity Analysis. Dropping Iteratively Each African Region

                                                                                  Excluding
                                 North                      South                      West                     East                     Central
                           All       Border           All       Border          All       Border         All           Border      All        Border
                           (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)            (8)        (9)         (10)

                                                             Panel A: Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.4801*** 0.5310***        0.4999*** 0.5370**        0.5421*** 0.8586***      0.5328*** 0.5950**        0.2538*       0.2071
                         (0.1281) (0.2335)          (0.1346) (0.2422)         (0.1296) (0.1649)        (0.1420) (0.2775)        (0.1481)     (0.2274)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)    0.3463      0.2237          0.3773      0.2725       0.2222       -0.3947    0.6717**      0.4515       0.3254       0.5987
                        (0.3132)    (0.3538)        (0.3154)    (0.3428)     (0.3311)     (0.3373)    (0.3063)     (0.4129)     (0.3272)     (0.4258)

Log Likelihood          -3494.47    -1342.93        -3347.17   -1259.38      -2710.46     -882.393    -2657.01     -1048.1      -2750.78      -956.73

                                                      Panel B: Fixed-Effects Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.0817**      0.0763       0.0817**      0.0786      0.0736**     0.0976*     0.0803**     0.0984*      0.1014***     0.1028*
                         (0.0340)    (0.0516)       (0.0332)    (0.0499)      (0.0324)    (0.0551)     (0.0357)    (0.0534)      (0.0353)     (0.0542)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)   0.1489*** 0.2185***        0.1418*** 0.2125***       0.1311** 0.1874**        0.1582*** 0.2293***       0.1440*** 0.2477***
                         (0.0504) (0.0595)          (0.0501) (0.0606)         (0.0572) (0.0786)        (0.0522) (0.0638)         (0.0516) (0.0642)

Adjusted R-square         0.463          0.482       0.457          0.477      0.435          0.452     0.471          0.488      0.496        0.500

Simple Controls           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Location Controls         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Geographic Controls       Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Country Fixed Effects     Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Observations              1127           556         1067           511         838           353       907             460       909              436
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in Panel B, associating civil
conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the total number of main civil conflict incidents (excluding
riots and protests) at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. The dependent variable in Panel B is an dummy variable that takes on the value of one for
country-ethnic homelands that have experienced conflict and zero otherwise (in Panel B) over the period 1997-2013.
In columns (1)-(2) we exclude ethnicity-country observations that fall in North Africa. In columns (3)-(4) we exclude observations that fall in South Africa. In columns (5)-
(6) exclude observations that fall in West Africa. In columns (7)-(8) we exclude observations that fall in East Africa. In column (9)-(10) we exclude observations that fall in
Central Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2008). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the
historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number
of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. Odd-numbered specifications report estimates in the full sample of country-ethnic homelands. Even-numbered columns
focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national
border; 61.3 kilometers).
All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from
the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an
indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria
stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                            Appendix Table 24: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                        Sensitivity Analysis: Accounting for Spillovers with Spatial Models

Weighting Matrix                                 Linear in Eucledian Distance                   Quadratic in Eucledian Distance
Spatial Model Type                             Simple        Durbin      Generalized          Simple         Durbin        Generalized
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)

                                                           Panel A: Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)                         0.0883*** 0.0702*** 0.0880***                  0.0863***       0.0698***       0.0866***
                                              (0.0245)  (0.0247)  (0.0246)                   (0.0245)        (0.0256)        (0.0249)

Log Likelihood                                 -414.8       -352.653       -414.792          -413.051       -358.925        -414.933
rho                                          0.76 [0.00] 1.27 [0.02] 0.746 [0.00]           0.28 [0.00] 0.10 [0.22] 14.62 [0.00]
lamda                                                                0.068 [0.90]                                   0.0733 [0.79]

                                                       Panel B: Log Linear Model Estimates [dep. var: ln(1+events)]

SPLIT (Partitioning)                          0.1628**       0.1259*       0.1542**          0.1512**         0.1101         0.1313*
                                              (0.0731)       (0.0716)      (0.0732)          (0.0725)        (0.0734)        (0.0750)

Log Likelihood                                -1742.28      -1638.09       -1738.49          -1730.05       -1640.76        -1732.20
rho                                          0.92 [0.00] 0.09 [0.84] 0.90 [0.00]            0.52 [0.00] 0.35 [0.00]        0.17 [0.07]
lamda                                                                0.82 [0.00]                                           0.44 [0.00]

Simple Controls                                 Yes             Yes          Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
Location Controls                               Yes             Yes          Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls                             Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
Country Fixed Effects                           Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                                    1212           1212          1212               1212           1212            1212

The table reports spatial auto-regressive model maximum-likelihood (ML) estimates, associating civil conflict with ethnic
partitioning at the country-ethnicity level. In Panel A the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for
country-ethnic homelands that have experienced a main conflict (excl. riots and protests) and zero otherwise over the period 1997-
2013. In Panel B the dependent variable is the log of one plus the total number of main civil conflict incidents (excluding riots and
protests) in an ethnic region within a country over the period 1997-2010. Columns (1) and (4) report spatial lag models that control
for conflicts in neighbouring homelands. Columns (2) and (5) report Durbin spatial models that include as additional controls the
vector of independent variables in neighbouring regions. Columns (3) and (6) report generalized spatial lag models that control both
for conflicts in neighbouring regions and for the effect of the independent variables in nearby regions. In columns (1)-(3) we use a
linear in Eucledian distance to the centroid of each country-ethnic region weighting matrix. In columns (4)-(6) we use a quadratic in
Eucledian distance to the centroid of each country-ethnic region weighting matrix. All specifications include country fixed effects
(constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid
of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on
the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea
coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses
standard errors accounting for heteroskedasticity and spatial correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                              Appendix Table 25: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                        Sensitivity Analysis: Accounting for Spillovers at the Country Level and at the Ethnic Family Level

                                              All Ethnic Homelands                                    Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border
                                    Main         Log                 Duration                           Main        Log                   Duration
                         Main      Events      (1+Main     Deadly      Main     Duration    Main       Events     (1+Main      Deadly       Main      Duration
                        Events    Indicator     Events)    Events     Events    Deadly     Events     Indicator    Events)     Events      Events     Deadly
                        NB-ML      LPM           OLS      NB-ML      PO-ML      PO-ML      NB-ML        LPM         OLS       NB-ML        PO-ML      PO-ML
                          (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)

SPLIT (Partitioning) 0.8728*** 0.1088*** 0.3397*** 0.6029*** 0.2336*** 0.1779** 1.2177*** 0.1228*** 0.4152*** 0.9065*** 0.4152*** 0.4671***
                      (0.1460)  (0.0259)  (0.1039) (0.1480) (0.0607) (0.0710) (0.2389) (0.0437) (0.1004)       (0.2094)  (0.1114) (0.1267)

Log Conflict Family    0.1887*** 0.0239*** 0.1402*** 0.1588** 0.0935*** 0.1075*** 0.1333**            0.0203*     0.0917**    0.0967**    0.0969*** 0.1110***
                        (0.0416)  (0.0074)  (0.0319) (0.0329) (0.0197) (0.0204) (0.0584)              (0.0107)     (0.0400)    (0.0443)    (0.0363) (0.0331)

Log Conflict Country 0.1634*** 0.0205*** 0.1112*** 0.1362*** 0.0601*** 0.0594*** 0.1464*** 0.0230** 0.1061*** 0.1375*** 0.0682*** 0.0632***
                      (0.0307)  (0.0069)  (0.0225) (0.0287) (0.0157) (0.0168) (0.0347) (0.0107) (0.0289)       (0.0370)  (0.0232) (0.0243)

Log Likelihood         -4031.87     __            __      -3101.18 -2999.45     -2529.91   -1637.02      __         __        -1204.98    -1357.03 -1042.35
Adjusted R-square         __       0.354         0.479       __       __           __         __        0.349      0.406         __          __       __

Region Fixed Effects     Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Simple Controls          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Location Controls        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Geographic Controls      Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations             1212       1212         1212       1212      1212       1212        606        606         606         606         606         606
The table reports estimates associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. In columns (1) and (7) the dependent variable is the total number
of main civil conflict incidents (excluding riots and protests) at each country-ethnic homeland over the sample period (1997-2013). These models are estimated with the negative
binomial ML model. In columns (2) and (8) the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one
deadly conflict incident over the period 1997-2013 and zero otherwise. These columns give linear probability model (LPM) estimates. In columns (3) and (9) the dependent variable is
the log of one plus the total number of main civil conflict incidents (excluding riots and protests) in an ethnic region within a country over the period 1997-2013. These models are
estimates with OLS. In columns (4) and (10) the dependent variable is the total number of deadly civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the sample period
(1997-2013).These models are estimated with the negative binomial ML model.
In columns (5) and (11) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has experienced a main conflict over the period 1997-2013. In columns (6)
and (12) the dependent variable is the number of years that each country-ethnic homeland has experienced deadly conflict (at least one casualty) over the period 1997-2013. These
models are estimated with Poisson ML.
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country.
In all specifications we control for the log of one plus the total number of all conflict incidents in each ethnic family and the log of one plus the total number of all conflict incidents
in each country minus conflicts in each country-ethnic area. The specifications in columns (7)-(12) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the
median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include a set of (five) region fixed effects (constants
not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for
rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an
indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of
geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for
areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                               Appendix Table 26: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict.
                             Accounting for Pre-colonial Conflict and Political Centralization

                                                                                             Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the
                                       All Ethnicity-Country Homelands
                                                                                                         National Border
Historical (Pre-colonial)          Conflict       Slave Trades         Kingdom               Conflict     Slave Trades    Kingdom
                                     (1)               (2)                (3)                   (4)            (5)           (6)

                                                               Panel A: Negative Binomial ML Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)             0.4794***          0.4246***          0.5269***             0.5561***         0.4923**          0.5838***
 Double-clustered s.e.            (0.1278)           (0.1460)           (0.1268)              (0.2200)         (0.2298)           (0.2069)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)               0.4177            0.4107             0.4708                0.3695            0.2673            0.3724
 Double-clustered s.e.             (0.2930)          (0.2929)           (0.2936)              (0.3732)          (0.3510)          (0.3512)

Log Likelihood                    -3750.59           -3749.42           -3744.98              -1377.27         -1377.85           -1375.77

                                                        Panel B: Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates
SPLIT (Partitioning)              0.0820**           0.0860**          0.0825***              0.0896*           0.0914*            0.0889*
 Double-clustered s.e.             (0.0308)           (0.0474)          (0.0307)              (0.0463)          (0.0331)           (0.0504)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)            0.1443***          0.1453***          0.1446***             0.2316***         0.2192***         0.2282***
 Double-clustered s.e.            0.0492)            (0.0600)           (0.0509)              (0.0610)          (0.0487)          (0.0573)
Adjusted R-square                   0.463              0.463             0.463                  0.481            0.478              0.480

Rich Set of Controls                 Yes               Yes                Yes                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Country Fixed Effects                Yes               Yes                Yes                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                         1212              1212               1212                   579              579                579


The table reports Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM) estimates in
Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
total number of main civil conflict incidents at each country-ethnic homeland over the period 1997-2013. The dependent variable in Panel
B is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced main conflict and zero otherwise
over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical
homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic
homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands. Specifications (1) and (4) control for an indicator for pre-colonial wars and
the log distance of each homeland to the centroid of the closest war during the period 1400-1700, using data from Besley and Reynal-
Querol (2014). Specifications (2) and (5) control for an indicator that takes on the value of one for ethnicities that were directly affected by
the slave trades and the log of one plus the number of slaves at the ethnicity level normalized by the surface area of each homeland, using
data from Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Watchekon (2011). Specifications (3) and (6) control for an indicator that takes the value of one
when the historical homeland falls within the boundaries of a large pre-colonial kingdom and empire and log distance to the closest pre-
colonial empire/kingdom using data from Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014). The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on country-
ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to
the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control
variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for
rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from
the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group
within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land
suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for
areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic
family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                          Appendix Table 27: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                  Accounting for Regional Development


                                     All Ethnic Homelands               Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border

                        All Events     Battles    Violence    Riots     All Events   Battles    Violence      Riots
                           (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)

                                           Panel A: Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial ML Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.4556*** 0.4367*** 0.4209*** 0.0871            0.5722***    0.5124*    0.4819**     0.0478
                         (0.1220)  (0.1466)  (0.1246) (0.1548)           (0.2180)    (0.2811)   (0.1952)    (0.2388)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)   0.4891*        0.4818      0.3883     0.4404      0.4219      0.4101      -0.0027   0.9475*
                        (0.2636)      (0.3073)    (0.3530)   (0.2666)    (0.3467)    (0.3730)    (0.3648)   (0.4955)

Log GDP p.c.            -0.1298      -0.3084*** -0.2789       0.3569    -0.8097*** -0.8035** -0.7639*** 0.1650
                        (0.1089)       (0.1484) (0.1689)     (0.2826)     (0.2495)  (0.3287)   (0.2869) (0.3418)

Log Likelihood          -4107.81     -2916.114    -2874.75 -2201.445    -1507.682 -1066.397      -998.492   -648.303

                                         Panel B: Fixed-Effects Linear Probability (LPM) Estimates

SPLIT (Partitioning)    0.0818***     0.0907**     0.0511     0.0195     0.0921*     0.0891*      0.0673      0.0062
                         (0.0269)      (0.0374)   (0.0322)   (0.0305)    (0.0471)    (0.0468)    (0.0464)    (0.0548)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)   0.1420***      0.0596 0.1689***       0.0776    0.2367*** 0.1635***     0.1717**      0.0763
                         (0.0415)     (0.0444) (0.0571)      (0.0543)    (0.0559)  (0.0614)      (0.0756)    (0.0784)
                                                   -
Log GDP p.c.             -0.0454      -0.0392 0.0837***      -0.0074    -0.0948**    -0.0535    -0.1453**     0.0211
                         (0.0295)     (0.0331) (0.0305)      (0.0279)    (0.0442)    (0.0600)    (0.0611)    (0.0701)

Adjusted R-square         0.445        0.465       0.424      0.438        0.49       0.458        0.439      0.417

Simple Controls           Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Location Controls         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Geographic Controls       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Country Fixed Effects     Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations              1211          1211       1211       1211         578         578         578         578
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates in Panel A and linear probability model (LPM)
estimates in Panel B, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. SPLIT is an indicator
variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one
contemporary country.
SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in
the same country. Columns (1) and (5) focus on all types of civil conflict. Columns (2) and (6) focus on battles. Columns (3) and (7)
focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (4) and (8) focus on riots and protests. In Panel A the dependent variable is
the total number of all conflict events (in columns (1) and (5)), battles (in columns (2) and (6)), violent events against the civilian
population (in columns (3) and (7)) and riots and protests events (in columns (4) and (8)). In Panel B the dependent variable is an
indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one conflict event (in columns (1) and (5)), a
battle (in columns (2) and (6)), at least one violent event against the civilian population (in columns (3) and (7) and at least one event of
riots and protests (in columns (4) and (8)) over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus
on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-
country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported)
and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator
for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland
from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls
in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls
includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field
indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. All specifications include the log of GDP per capita in 2000 (data come
from the G-Econ project, Nordhaus et al. (2006)). The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and
the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                        Appendix Table 28: Ethnic Partitioning and Conflict Actors. Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates
                                                        Accounting for Regional Development

                                         All Ethnicity-Country Homelands                          Ethnicity-Country Homelands Close to the National Border
                         Government Rebels &      Riots &    Civilian   Nearby      Other     Government Rebels &      Riots &    Civilian   Nearby      Other
                           Forces    Militias     Protests   Violence   External   External     Forces    Militias     Protests   Violence   External   External
                             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)

SPLIT (Partitioning)      0.1087***   0.0659*      0.0134    0.0581* 0.0652**       0.0063    0.1255***    0.0862*     -0.0020    0.0745* 0.0696** 0.0349
                           (0.0280)   (0.0344)    (0.0304)   (0.0309) (0.0332)     (0.0225)    (0.0435)    (0.0501)    (0.0540)   (0.0448) (0.0348) (0.0303)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)     0.1270**    0.1025**     0.0719 0.1690*** 0.0677         -0.0111    0.1863***    0.1582**     0.0741 0.1727**      -0.0036 -0.0647
                           (0.0532)    (0.0489)   (0.0542) (0.0574) (0.0484)       (0.0291)    (0.0622)     (0.0640)   (0.0783) (0.0822)     (0.0470) (0.0425)

Log GDP p.c.               -0.0448    -0.0445     -0.0109 -0.0803*** -0.0863*      -0.0314     -0.0607     -0.0752      0.022 -0.1342** -0.0963* -0.0189
                           (0.0386)   (0.0337)    (0.0311) (0.0305) (0.0447)       (0.0351)    (0.0536)    (0.0552)    (0.0704) (0.0620) (0.0492) (0.0294)

Adjusted R-square           0.453      0.472       0.436      0.426      0.349      0.379       0.467       0.486       0.417      0.439      0.388      0.425
Observations                1211       1211        1211       1211       1211       1211         578         578         578        578        578        578

Simple Controls              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Location Controls            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Geographic Controls          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Country Fixed Effects        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
The table reports linear probability model (LPM) estimates, associating civil conflict incidence by actor with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level over the
period 1997-2013. Columns (1) and (7) focus on conflict where government forces participate. Columns (2) and (8) focus on conflict where rebels and militias participate. Columns
(3) and (9) focus on riots and protests. Columns (4) and (10) focus on violence against the civilian population. Columns (5) and (11) focus on military interventions of adjacent
(nearby) African countries Columns (6) and (12) focus on foreign interventions by peace-keeping forces (UN, African Union, etc.). The dependent variable is an indicator (dummy)
variable for country-ethnic homelands that have experienced at least one event from each type of civil conflict over the period 1997-2013 (and zero otherwise). SPLIT is an indicator
variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is
the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications in columns (4)-(6) focus on country-
ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All
specifications include the log of GDP per capita in 2000 (data come from the G-Econ project). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set
of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location
controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the
value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an
index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                Appendix Table 29: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                 Sensitivity Analysis. Accounting for Measurement Error in the Civil Conflict Databases

                                                         All Ethnic Homelands                                          Ethnic Homelands close to the National Border
                                    Trichotomous Trichotomous                 Binary          Binary           Trichotomous Trichotomous                   Binary          Binary
                                         All         Main                      All            Main                  All         Main                        All            Main
                                          (1)               (2)                 (3)             (4)                  (5)               (6)                   (7)             (8)

SPLIT (Partitioning)                  0.1250**          0.1148**             0.0720**        0.0661**              0.1394            0.1311               0.0957**        0.0894**
                                      (0.0500)          (0.0509)             (0.0311)        (0.0317)             (0.0869)          (0.0865)              (0.0458)         (0.0437)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                 0.2260**          0.2058**            0.1309***        0.1262**            0.2159**           0.2008**              0.0937*         0.0910*
                                       (0.0913)          (0.0983)            (0.0455)         (0.0497)            (0.1059)           (0.1020)             (0.0550)        (0.0486)
Adjusted R-square                       0.564              0.56                0.476           0.477                0.567             0.566                 0.485           0.487
Rich Set of Controls                     Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes                   Yes               Yes                   Yes             Yes
Country Fixed Effects                    Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes                   Yes               Yes                   Yes             Yes
Observations                             1212             1212                 1212            1212                  579               579                   579             579
The table reports OLS estimates, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (5) is a
trichotomous (0, 1, 2) civil conflict index that takes on the value of two when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP
GED databases; the index takes on the value of one if a country-ethnic homeland has experienced conflict according to either the ACLED or the UCDP GED; and the index takes
on the value of zero when the country-ethnic area has not experienced conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED. The dependent variable in columns (2) and (6)
is a trichotomous main civil conflict index that takes on the value of two when a homeland has experienced a main conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED
databases (excluding riots and protests that are only covered by ACLED); the index takes on the value of one if a homeland has experienced main conflict according to either the
ACLED or the UCDP GED; and the index takes on the value of zero when the country-ethnic area has not experienced main conflict according to both the ACLED and the
UCDP GED. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (7) is a dichotomous (binary) civil conflict index that takes on the value of one when a homeland has experienced
conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED databases and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in columns (4) and (8) is a dichotomous (binary) main civil
conflict index that takes on the value of one when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced main conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED databases and
zero otherwise (excluding riots and protests that are only covered by ACLED). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of
the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number
of adjacent ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (5)-(8) focus on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the
centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers). All specifications include country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of
controls. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls
includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value
of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls
includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with
major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
                                                      Appendix Table 30: Ethnic Partitioning and Civil Conflict
                                       Sensitivity Analysis: Accounting for Measurement Error in the Civil Conflict Databases

                                                   State (Government Forces) Conflict                                             One-Sided Violence Against the Civilians
                                                                         Homelands close to the                                                           Homelands close to the
                                        All Ethnic Homelands                                                              All Ethnic Homelands
                                                                             National Border                                                                  National Border
                                     Trichotomous       Binary        Trichotomous       Binary                        Trichotomous      Binary        Trichotomous        Binary
                                          (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)                              (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)

SPLIT (Partitioning)                   0.1684***         0.1117***              0.1947***           0.1157**              0.0947**           0.0683**               0.1080             0.0377
                                        (0.0463)          (0.0290)               (0.0685)            (0.0473)              (0.0466)          (0.0293)              (0.0725)           (0.0432)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                    0.1535*            0.0815                 0.1148            0.0856                 0.1288            0.0416                0.0872             0.0368
                                         (0.0897)          (0.0584)               (0.1032)          (0.0709)               (0.0874)          (0.0617)              (0.1111)           (0.0784)

Adjusted R-square                          0.53             0.461                  0.536              0.483                 0.499              0.427                 0.52              0.459

Rich Set of Controls                      Yes                Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes                   Yes                Yes
Country Fixed Effects                     Yes                Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes                   Yes                Yes
Observations                              1212               1212                   579                579                   1212              1212                  579                579
The table reports OLS estimates, associating civil conflict with ethnic partitioning at the country-ethnicity homeland level. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (3) is a trichotomous
state conflict index that takes on the value of two when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced state conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED databases; the index
takes on the value of one if a country-ethnic homeland has experienced state conflict according to either the ACLED or the UCDP GED; and the index takes on the value of zero when the
country-ethnic area has not experienced state conflict according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (7) is a trichotomous one-sided
violence against the civilian population that takes on the value of two when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced a violence against civilians according to both the ACLED and the
UCDP GED databases; the index takes on the value of one if a country-ethnic homeland has experienced violence against civilians according to either the ACLED or the UCDP GED; and
the index takes on the value of zero when the country-ethnic area has not experienced violence against civilians according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED. The dependent
variable in columns (2) and (4) is a dichotomous (binary) state civil conflict index that takes on the value of one when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced state conflict according
to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED databases and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in columns (6) and (8) is a dichotomous (binary) one-sided violence against the civilian
population index that takes on the value of one when a country-ethnic homeland has experienced violence against civilians according to both the ACLED and the UCDP GED databases
and zero otherwise. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary
country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (5)-(8) focus
on country-ethnicity areas close to the national border (using as a cut-off the median distance from the centroid of each ethnicity-country homeland to the national border; 61.3 kilometers).
All specifications include a country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of control variables. The set of simple controls includes the log of land area, the log of population in
1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from
the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-
ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine
indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic
family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                     Appendix Table 31: Heterogeneous Effects by Country-Ethnicity Features

                                       Panel A: Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (NB-ML) Estimates


                                  Adjacent    Population   Adjacent    Share Groups   Share Adjacent   High - Low     Across &       2-Way Splits vs.
                                   Split        Share      Largest     Same Family     Same Family       Fractal    Within Colony   More-than-2 Splits
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)               (8)

SPLIT - High                      0.5394***                                                             0.4216**
                                   (0.1667)                                                              (0.1817)
SPLIT - Low                       0.4361***                                                            0.5635***
                                   (0.1435)                                                             (0.1325)
SPLIT - Small Share                           0.4927***    0.5012***    0.5897***         0.2148
                                               (0.1565)     (0.1707)     (0.1632)        (0.1462)
SPLIT - Large Share                           0.4693***    0.4609***    0.3479***       0.7711***
                                               (0.1382)     (0.1250)     (0.1338)        (0.1643)
SPLIT - Between Colonial Powers                                                                                      0.6674***
                                                                                                                      (0.1427)
SPLIT - Within Colonial Power                                                                                           0.1155
                                                                                                                       (0.1519)

SPLIT - Two-Way Splits                                                                                                                  0.5559***
                                                                                                                                         (0.1502)
SPLIT - Multiple-Way Splits                                                                                                             0.3572***
                                                                                                                                         (0.1325)
SPIL (Adjacent Split)              0.4883*     0.4184*      0.4155*      0.4149*         0.4234*        0.4532*        0.4462*          0.4567*
                                   (0.2727)    (0.2330)     (0.2337)     (0.2375)        (0.2294)       (0.2543)       (0.2291)          (0.2390)

Log Likelihood                    -3750.46    -3750.61     -3750.58      -3749.48       -3743.86        -3570.01      -3744.46          -3749.61

Country Fixed Effects               Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
Rich Set of Controls                Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
Observations                        1212        1212         1212         1212            1212            1131          1212              1212
                                     Appendix Table 31: Heterogeneous Effects by Country-Ethnicity Features

                                               Panel B: Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

                                  Adjacent    Population   Adjacent    Share Groups   Share Adjacent   High - Low     Across &       2-Way Splits vs.
                                   Split        Share      Largest     Same Family     Same Family       Fractal    Within Colony   More-than-2 Splits
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)               (8)


SPLIT - High                      0.0869**                                                               0.0405
                                   (0.0396)                                                             (0.0413)

SPLIT - Low                       0.0801**                                                             0.1125***
                                   (0.0334)                                                             (0.0320)
SPLIT - Small Share                           0.0781**       0.0377       0.0600         0.0719*
                                               (0.0395)     (0.0462)     (0.0383)        (0.0385)
SPLIT - Large Share                           0.0890***    0.1273***    0.1117***       0.0945**
                                               (0.0328)     (0.0274)     (0.0382)        (0.0434)
SPLIT - Between Colonial Powers                                                                                       0.0885**
                                                                                                                       (0.0378)
SPLIT - Within Colonial Power                                                                                         0.0732**
                                                                                                                       (0.0361)
SPLIT - Two-Way Splits                                                                                                                    0.0623
                                                                                                                                         (0.0403)

SPLIT - Multiple-Way Splits                                                                                                             0.1163***
                                                                                                                                         (0.0402)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)             0.1494**    0.1429***    0.1389***    0.1491***       0.1445***      0.1427***     0.1454***          0.1387***
 Double-clustered s.e.             (0.0628)    (0.0488)     (0.0493)     (0.0488)        (0.0482)       (0.0491)      (0.0479)           (0.0509)
adjusted R-square                   0.46         0.47        0.47          0.46            0.46           0.46          0.46               0.47
Country Fixed Effects               Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
Rich Set of Controls                Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
Observations                        1212        1212         1212         1212            1212           1131           1212              1212
The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (NB-ML) estimates (in Panel A) and linear probability model estimates (in Panel B), civil conflict with ethnic partitioning. In
Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of all conflict over the period 1997-2013. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic homelands
that have experienced at least one conflict event over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical
homeland falling into more than one contemporary country.
The coefficient on SPLIT is allowed to differ by the share of adjacent groups that are split, in column (1) by the population share of each partition relative to the country’s population, in
column (2) by the population size of your co-ethnics on the other side of the border relative to the population of the neighboring country, in column (3) by share of adjacent groups that belong
to the same ethnic family, in column (4) by the share of groups in the country that belong to the same ethnic family, in column (5) by the share of adjacent groups that belong to the same
ethnic family, in column (6) by whether the group is partitioned by a relatively straight border (low fractal) or a relatively squiggly one (high fractal), in column (7) by whether the group is
split between or within a colonial power, and in column (8) by whether the group is split between 2 or more countries (3, 4, 5 or 6).
SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. All specifications include a vector of
country fixed effects (constants not reported). All specifications condition on a rich set of controls that includes: log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes, an
indicator for rivers, distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of
one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group, an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast, an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria
stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                        Appendix Table 32: Heterogeneous Effects by Country Features

                  Panel A: Negative Binomial Maximum Likelihood (NB-ML) Estimates


                                  Ethnic          Linguistic        Religious        Landlocked -   Large - Small
                             Fractionalization Fractionalization Fractionalization     Coastal       Land Area
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)

SPLIT - High                    0.5556***         0.6128***         0.4963***
                                 (0.1713)          (0.1482)          (0.1561)

SPLIT - Low                      0.3379**           0.1032           0.3636**
                                  (0.1555)         (0.1757)           (0.1742)

SPLIT - Landlocked                                                                    0.8424***
                                                                                       (0.2017)

SPLIT - Coastal                                                                        0.2250*
                                                                                       (0.1247)

SPLIT - Big Countries                                                                                0.6110***
                                                                                                      (0.1362)

SPLIT - Small Countries                                                                                0.1022
                                                                                                      (0.1983)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)            0.4676**          0.4546**          0.4937**         0.4654**        0.5019**
                                  (0.2186)          (0.2144)          (0.2192)         (0.2231)        (0.2157)

Log Likelihood                   -4108.04          -4105.48          -4108.53          -4103.57       -4105.90

Country Fixed Effects              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
Rich Set of Controls               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
Observations                       1212              1212              1212             1212            1212
                         Appendix Table 32: Heterogeneous Effects by Country Features

                                Panel B: Linear Probability Model (LPM) Estimates

                                      Ethnic          Linguistic        Religious                  Landlocked -       Large - Small
                                 Fractionalization Fractionalization Fractionalization               Coastal           Land Area
                                        (1)               (2)               (3)                        (4)                 (5)

SPLIT - High                          0.0605*              0.0774**             0.0755**
                                      (0.0326)              (0.0318)             (0.0330)

SPLIT - Low                          0.1086**               0.0916*             0.0986***
                                      (0.0422)              (0.0485)             (0.0377)

SPLIT - Landlocked                                                                                  0.1512***
                                                                                                     (0.0345)

SPLIT - Coastal                                                                                        0.0479
                                                                                                      (0.0336)

SPLIT - Big Countries                                                                                                   0.0794**
                                                                                                                         (0.032))

SPLIT - Small Countries                                                                                                  0.0870*
                                                                                                                         (0.046))

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                0.1507***            0.1457***             0.1458***           0.1398***           0.1442***
                                      (0.0405)             (0.0412)              (0.0407)            (0.0416)            (0.0409)

adjusted R-square                       0.446                0.445                 0.445               0.447              0.445

Country Fixed Effects                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Rich Set of Controls                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Observations                            1212                  1212                 1212                 1212               1212


The table reports Negative Binomial (NB) Maximum Likelihood (NB-ML) estimates (in Panel A) and linear probability model
estimates (in Panel B), civil conflict with ethnic partitioning. In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of all conflict
events over the period 1997-2013. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator (dummy) variable for country-ethnic
homelands that have experienced at least one conflict event over the period 1997-2013. SPLIT is an indicator variable that
identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary
country. In columns (1)-(3) the coefficient on SPLIT is allowed to differ for high and low ethnic fragmentation countries, using as
cut-offs the median value of the ethnic (in column (1)), linguistic (in column (2)), and religious (in column (3)) fractionalization
index of Alesina et al. (2003). In column (4) the coefficient on SPLIT differs for landlocked countries and countries with access to
the sea. In column (5) the coefficient on SPLIT differs for large and small countries using as a cut-off the median value of land
area. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic
homelands in the same country. All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). All
specifications condition on a rich set of controls that includes: log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for
lakes, an indicator for rivers (simple controls), distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective
capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the
homeland of an ethnic group, an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast, an index of land suitability for
agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas
with major city in 1400. Panel A reports in parentheses clustered at the ethno-linguistic family dimension standard errors. Panel B
reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                   Appendix Table 33. EPR Descriptive Patterns
                                    Ethnic Partitioning and Political Violence

                      Panel A: Ethnic Wars, Political Discrimination and Ethnic Partitioning


                                                                  Political Violence

                                         Ethnic Civil Wars                        Political Discrimination                Total
    Ethnic Groups                       No                  Yes                    No                  Yes

    Non-Partitioned               290 (80.78%)        69 (19.22%)            307 (85.52%)         52 (14.48%)             359

    Partitioned                   162 (69.23%)        72 (30.77%)            176 (75.21%)         58 (24.79%)             234

    Total                               452                 141                   483                  110                 593



                         Panel B: Ordered Political Violence and Ethnic Partitioning


    Political Violence                        Partitioned                              Non-Partitioned
    Status                           Number              Share                 Number                 Share              Total

    Peace                              140              59.83%                    266               74.09%                406
    Repression Only                     22               9.40%                     24               6.69%                 46
    Ethnic Civil Wars                  72               30.77%                     69               19.22%                141

    Total                              234                  359                   359                                     593

Panel A tabulates EPR [Ethnic Power Relations] database classification of ethnic-based civil wars and political discrimination
for partitioned and non-split ethnicities. Panel B tabulates the ordered index of political violence for partitioned and non-split
ethnic groups. The construction of the ordered index of political violence follows Besley and Persson (2011). The political
violence takes three values. Peace (index value 0) when the ethnic group is neither discriminated from the national government
nor it is involved in ethnic civil war. Repression (index value 1) when the ethnic group is subject to political discrimination
from the government, but the ethnicity is not engaged in an ethnic civil war. Civil War (index value 2) when the ethnic group
is engaged in a major civil war (two-sided conflict). For details see Section 6 in the main body for the paper. The EPR database
(Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009)) covers 40 African countries during the post-independence period.
                                              Appendix Table 34A:
          Ethnic Partitioning, Exclusion from Central Government and Ethnic War Incidence and Onset


                                      Ethnic War Incidence                                       Ethnic War Onset
                                         Cross-Sectional
                                                                                              Time Series Variation
                                            Variation
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)



SPLIT (Partitioning)                0.1702***          0.0115      0.0056*** 0.0018**          0.0003       0.0054*** 0.0019**           0.0005
                                    (0.0558)          (0.0289)      (0.0020) (0.0008)         (0.0011)       (0.0019) (0.0009)          (0.0012)

Excluded from National Power                                                                0.0093***                                 0.0085***
                                                                                             (0.0031)                                  (0.0030)

Excluded x SPLIT                                                                            0.0053**                                  0.0049**
                                                                                             (0.0023)                                  (0.0024)

Excluded from National Power             Yes            No             Yes          No             .            Yes          No             .
                                                                     Any Time in the Past 3 Years             Any Time in the Past 5 Years

Adjusted R-square                        0.49           0.75         0.042        0.041        0.026           0.04         0.043        0.025
Observations                             331            262          10186        16641        26827          10492         16335        26827

Country Fixed Effects                    Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                        .              .             Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
All Controls                             Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes


The table reports OLS estimates. Columns (1) and (2) exploit cross-sectional variation and the dependent variable is an indicator that takes
the value of 1 if the ethnic group has engaged in an ethnic war between 1960-2010. Data on ethnic wars and exclusion from the central
government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)).
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more
than one contemporary country. The specifications in columns (3)-(8) explore time series variation and the dependent varriable takes tha
value of 1 in years that an ethnic conflict erupts. In columns (3)-(5) we classify as excluded those groups that in the last 3 years before the
current period have been excluded from the central government for at least one year. We use the 5-year threshold for columns (6)-(8). All
columns include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of controls including log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers (simple controls); distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic
homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city
falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast (location controls); and an index of
land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for
areas with major city in 1400 (geographic controls). Columns (3)-(8) also include year fixed effects. The table reports in parentheses standard
errors clustered at the group level for columns (3)-(8) and double clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions in columns (1) and (2). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                              Appendix Table 34B :
          Ethnic Partitioning, Exclusion from Central Government and Ethnic War Incidence and Onset


                                      Ethnic War Incidence                                       Ethnic War Onset
                                         Cross-Sectional
                                                                                              Time Series Variation
                                            Variation
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)

                                         Cross-Sectional                                      Time Series Variation

ALT - SPLIT (Partitioning)          0.1865***          0.0167      0.0062*** 0.0014**          0.001        0.0060*** 0.0015**           0.0011
                                     (0.0569)         (0.0264)      (0.0020) (0.0006)         (0.0010)       (0.0020) (0.0007)          (0.0010)

Excluded from National Power                                                                0.0092***                                 0.0084***
                                                                                             (0.0033)                                  (0.0032)

Excluded x ALT - SPLIT                                                                      0.0050**                                  0.0046*
                                                                                             (0.0024)                                  (0.0024)

Excluded from National Power             Yes            No            Yes       No           .                 Yes        No           .
                                                                     Any Time in the Past 3 Years             Any Time in the Past 5 Years

Adjusted R-square                        0.49           0.75         0.042        0.041        0.026           0.04         0.043        0.025
Observations                             331            262          10186        16641        26827          10492         16335        26827

Country Fixed Effects                    Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                        .              .            Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
All Controls                             Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes


The table reports OLS estimates. Columns (1) and (2) exploit cross-sectional variation and the dependent variable is an indicator that takes
the value of 1 if the ethnic group has engaged in an ethnic war between 1960-2010. Data on ethnic wars and exclusion from the central
government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)).
SPLIT-ALT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 5% of the historical homeland falling into more
than one contemporary country. The specifications in columns (3)-(8) explore time series variation and the dependent varriable takes tha
value of 1 in years that an ethnic conflict erupts. In columns (3)-(5) we classify as excluded those groups that in the last 3 years before the
current period have been excluded from the central government for at least one year. We use the 5-year threshold for columns (6)-(8). All
columns include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of controls including log of land area, the log of
population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers (simple controls); distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic
homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city
falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast (location controls); and an index of
land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for
areas with major city in 1400 (geographic controls). Columns (3)-(8) also include year fixed effects. The table reports in parentheses standard
errors clustered at the group level for columns (3)-(8) and double clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions in columns (1) and (2). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                             Appendix Table 35: Ethnic Partitioning and Political Violence
                                               Sensitivity Analysis. Alternative Estimation Techniques

                                                                        OLS                                                         Ordered Probit ML
                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)                  (5)          (6)          (7)                (8)

SPLIT (Partitioning)                         0.2581**        0.2620***        0.1914**        0.1976**            0.3863*** 0.5180***            0.3809**       0.3633**
                                             (0.1005)         (0.0716)        (0.0793)        (0.0796)             (0.1502)  (0.1347)            (0.1410)       (0.1309)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                                                                         0.4877**                                                           0.6805
                                                                                               (0.2312)                                                         (0.3735)

Adjusted R-square                              0.024            0.421           0.469           0.480              -467.367       -432.564       -411.108       -407.905
Observations                                    593              593             593             593                 593            593            593            593
Countries                                        40               40              40              40                  40             40             40             40
Country Fixed Effects                            No              Yes             Yes             Yes                   No            No             No             No
Regional Fixed Effects                           No              No              No              No                    No            Yes            Yes            Yes
Simple Controls                                  No              No              Yes             Yes                   No            No             Yes            Yes
Location Controls                                No              No              Yes             Yes                   No            No             Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls                              No              No              Yes             Yes                   No            No             Yes            Yes

The table reports OLS estimates (in columns (1)-(4)) and ordered probit ML estimates (in columns (5)-(8)), associating an ethnic-based ordered index of political
violence with ethnic partitioning. The dependent variable index of political violence equals two if the ethnic group is engaged in a major civil war (two-sided conflict);
the index equals one when the group is subject to political discrimination from the national government but not in civil war (one-sided violence); the index equals zero
when the ethnicity is neither discriminated from the national government nor involved in civil war (the construction of the ordered index of political violence follows
Besley and Persson (2011). Data on ethnic wars and ethnic-based political discrimination from the national government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR)
database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)).
SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary
country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The
specifications in columns (2)-(4) include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (6)-(8) include a vector of region fixed
effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an
indicator for rivers (simple controls); distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border,
an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast
(location controls); and an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an
indicator for areas with major city in 1400 (geographic controls). The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic
family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                  Appendix Table 36: Ethnic Partitioning, Ethnic-based Political Discrimination, and Major Ethnic Civil Wars.
                      Sensitivity Analysis. Alternative Index of Ethnic Partitioning. Linear Probability Model Estimates

                                                                       Ethnic War                                                        Ethnic Discrimination
                                                   (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)                    (5)            (6)          (7)                (8)

SPLIT-5PC (Partitioning)                       0.1057**          0.1451***        0.1176***      0.1180***              0.1244***        0.0933***      0.0864***       0.0864***
                                               (0.0472)           (0.0392)         (0.0402)       (0.0388)               (0.0311)         (0.0266)       (0.0279)        (0.0282)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)                                                                             0.2518**                                                                0.0203
                                                                                                   (0.1140)                                                              (0.0759)

Adjusted R-square                                0.017              0.425            0.476          0.488                  0.027           0.479           0.498           0.523
Observations                                      593                593              593            593                    593             593             593             593
Countries                                          40                 40               40             40                     40              40              40              40
Country Fixed Effects                              No                Yes              Yes            Yes                    No              Yes             Yes             Yes
Simple Controls                                    No                No               Yes            Yes                    No              No              Yes             Yes
Location Controls                                  No                No               Yes            Yes                    No              No              Yes             Yes
Geographic Controls                                No                No               No             Yes                    No              No              No              Yes


The table reports linear probability model estimates, associating ethnic-based civil wars and political discrimination from the national government with ethnic partitioning. The
dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced a major or minor civil war with an explicit ethnic
dimension over the period 1960-2010. The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced
discrimination from the central government for at least one year over the period 1960-2010. Data on ethnic wars and ethnic-based political discrimination from the national
government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)).
SPLIT 5PC is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 5% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country.
SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country. The specifications
in columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(12) include log of land area, the
log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers (simple controls); distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic homeland from the respective
capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic group and an indicator for
country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast (location controls); and an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine
indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400 (geographic controls). The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                         Appendix Table 37: Ethnic Partitioning, Ethnic-based Political Discrimination, and Major Ethnic Civil Wars.
                                                          Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) Database.
                                           Sensitivity Analysis. Excluding Each Time a Different African Region

                                                                                                           Excluding
                                          North                             East                           West                             Central                             South
                               Ethnic War      Discrim.          Ethnic War Discrim.            Ethnic War      Discrim.          Ethnic War     Discrim.         Ethnic War         Discrim.
                                   (1)           (2)                 (3)      (4)                   (5)           (6)                 (7)          (8)                (9)              (10)

SPLIT (Partitioning)           0.1210***       0.0766**           0.1123**      0.0681**          0.0906*         0.0561*          0.0803**       0.0624*          0.1326***        0.0824***
                                (0.0428)        (0.0309)           (0.0451)      (0.0333)         (0.0529)        (0.0335)          (0.0389)      (0.0352)          (0.0417)         (0.0269)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)           0.3033**         0.0487            0.2043*         -0.0326       0.3144**          -0.045            0.1329        0.0777           0.3016**          0.0402
                                 (0.1227)       (0.0874)           (0.1172)        (0.0631)       (0.1535)        (0.1007)          (0.0866)      (0.0809)           (0.1298)        (0.0864)

Adjusted R-squared                0.485           0.520             0.505           0.492          0.516           0.568             0.481            0.546           0.487             0.519
Observations                       551             551               434             434            395             395               470              470             522               522

Country Fixed Effects              Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Simple Controls                    Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Location Controls                  Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Geographic Controls                Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
The table reports linear probability mode estimates, associating ethnic civil wars and ethnic-based political discrimination with ethnic partitioning. The dependent variable in odd-numbered
columns is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced a major or minor civil war with an explicit ethnic dimension over the period 1960-2010. The
dependent variable in even-numbered columns is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced discrimination from the central government for at least one
year over the period 1960-2010. Data on ethnic wars and ethnic-based political discrimination from the national government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database
(Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)). In columns (1)-(2) we exclude North Africa. In columns (3)-(4) we exclude East Africa. In columns (5)-(6) we exclude West Africa. In columns (7)-
(8) we exclude Central Africa. In column (9)-(10) we exclude South Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2008). SPLIT is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned
ethnicities as those with at least 10% of the historical homeland falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic
homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic homelands. All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of controls. The simple set of
controls includes log of land area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each
country-ethnic homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an ethnic
group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for agriculture, mean elevation, a
malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at
the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
              Appendix Table 38: Ethnic Partitioning, Ethnic-based Political Discrimination, and Major Ethnic Civil Wars.
                                               Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) Database.
   Sensitivity Analysis. Excluding Each Time a Different African Region and Employing an Alternative Index of Ethnic Partitioning.

                                                                                                 Excluding
                                        North                           East                        West                         Central                          South
                             Ethnic War      Discrim.       Ethnic War Discrim.           Ethnic War Discrim.           Ethnic War Discrim.           Ethnic War      Discrim.
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)      (4)                  (5)      (6)                  (7)      (8)                  (9)           (10)

SPLIT-5PC (Partitioning) 0.1355*** 0.0958***                 0.1147*** 0.0765**            0.1182**      0.0779**         0.0752**     0.0771**        0.1329*** 0.0925***
                          (0.0420)  (0.0315)                  (0.0432) (0.0362)             (0.0542)      (0.0368)         (0.0364)     (0.0327)        (0.0417)  (0.0239)

SPIL (Adjacent Split)         0.2996**        0.0472          0.2045*          -0.0320     0.3060**        -0.0504         0.1298        0.0760         0.2908**        0.0326
                               (0.1209)      (0.0874)         (0.1176)         (0.0632)     (0.1484)       (0.1017)       (0.0869)      (0.0818)         (0.1282)      (0.0873)

Adjusted R-squared              0.487           0.522           0.505           0.493        0.520          0.571           0.481          0.548          0.487           0.521
Observations                     551             551             434             434          395            395             470            470            522             522

Country Fixed Effects            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Simple Controls                  Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Location Controls                Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
The table reports linear probability mode estimates, associating ethnic civil wars and ethnic-based political discrimination with ethnic partitioning. The dependent variable
in odd-numbered columns is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced a major or minor civil war with an explicit ethnic dimension
over the period 1960-2010. The dependent variable in even-numbered columns is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if an ethnicity has experienced
discrimination from the central government for at least one year over the period 1960-2010. Data on ethnic wars and ethnic-based political discrimination from the national
government come from the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database (Wimmer, Cederman and Min (2009)). In columns (1)-(2) we exclude North Africa. In columns (3)-(4)
we exclude East Africa. In columns (5)-(6) we exclude West Africa. In columns (7)-(8) we exclude Central Africa. In column (9)-(10) we exclude South Africa. The
regional classification follows Nunn (2008). SPLIT 5PC is an indicator variable that identifies partitioned ethnicities as those with at least 5% of the historical homeland
falling into more than one contemporary country. SPIL –that captures spillovers- is the share of adjacent partitioned ethnic homelands to the total number of adjacent ethnic
homelands. All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a rich set of controls. The simple set of controls includes log of land
area, the log of population in 1960, an indicator for lakes and an indicator for rivers. The set of location controls includes the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic
homeland from the respective capital, from the sea coast, from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value of one if a capital city falls in the homeland of an
ethnic group within a country and an indicator for country-ethnic areas that are by the sea coast. The set of geographic controls includes an index of land suitability for
agriculture, mean elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, an oil field indicator, and an indicator for areas with major city in 1400. The table reports in
parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.
                      Appendix Table 39: DHS Descriptive Patterns and Summary Statistics
                       Ethnic Partitioning at the Identity Level and at the Location Level

                                                        Panel A: Descriptives


Ethnic Partitioning                                               Ethnic Homeland (Location)

                                                                Non-Partitioned        Partitioned                Total

                                          Non-Partitioned            36694               13256                    49950
Ethnic Identity
                                          Partitioned                12590               25631                    38221

                                          Total                      49284               38887                    88171


                                                  Panel B: Summary Statistics


variable                                          Obs.                mean               st. dev.     median       min        max


Composite Wealth Index                            88171               3.168               1.433          3           1             5
Education                                         88043               5.460               4.699          6           0         24
Ethnic Partitioning Index                         88171               0.433               0.496          0           0             1
Location Ethnic Partitioning Index                88171               0.441               0.497          0           0             1
Non-Indigenous Indicator                          88171               0.612               0.487          1           0             1



Panel A reports descriptive patterns in the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) sample. Panel B reports summary statistics for
the main variables employed in the empirical analysis using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). The data
cover 20 countries. The countries and interview years are Benin in 2001, Burkina Faso in 2010, Central African Republic in 1994,
Ethiopia in 2011, Ghana in 2008, Guinea in 2005, Kenya in 2008, Mali in 2006, Mozambique in 2011, Malawi in 2010, Namibia
in 2000, Niger in 1998, Senegal in 2010, Sierra Leone in 2008, Togo in 1998, Uganda in 2011, the Democratic Republic of Congo
in 2007, and Zambia in 2007. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
                           Appendix Table 40: The Long-Run Effects of Ethnic Partitioning.
                                Enumeration-area (Village) Fixed Effects Estimates

                                          All Observations (Individuals)                         Observations close to the Border
                                  Composite Wealth                                          Composite Wealth
                                      Index                          Education                  Index                        Education
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)

Partitioning - Identity        -0.0665*** -0.0644*** -0.0856** -0.0799** -0.0541** -0.0506**                           -0.0680*      -0.0582
 Double-clustered s.e.           (0.0196)  (0.0196)   (0.0364) (0.0347)   (0.0237) (0.0243)                             (0.0407)     (0.0396)

Non-Indigenous Indicator 0.0761*** 0.0729***                    0.039         0.0328 0.1027*** 0.1022***                0.0212        0.0164
 Double-clustered s.e.    (0.0208)  (0.0205)                   (0.0341)      (0.0321) (0.0243) (0.0238)                (0.0460)      (0.0430)

Adjusted R-squared                0.694          0.696          0.463         0.482         0.656         0.658         0.416         0.435
Observations                      88171          88171          88171         88171         44090         44090         44090         44090

Enumeration-Area FE                 Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Individual Controls                 No            Yes            No            Yes           No            Yes            No           Yes
Location Controls                   No            Yes            No            Yes           No            Yes            No           Yes
The table reports OLS estimates associating a composite wealth index (in columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) and years of education (in
columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)) with ethnic partitioning. The ethnic partitioning index (Partitioning-Identity) takes on the value of one for
individuals that identify with a partitioned ethnicity and zero otherwise. The composite wealth index is calculated by the DHS team in
each country via a principal component method using easy-to-collect data on a household's ownership of selected assets (e.g.,
televisions and bicycles), materials used for housing construction and public good access (e.g., type of water access, electrification, and
sanitation).
All specifications in include a vector of enumeration area (village/town/city) fixed effects (constants not reported). The set of individual
controls includes a vector of year-of-birth fixed effects, a vector of 6 marital-status fixed effects, and a vector of 7 religion fixed effects.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses standard errors
clustered at the respondent's ethnicity. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                  Appendix Table 41: The Long-Run Effects of Ethnic Partitioning on Individual Well-Being and Education. DHS Data
                                      Channels; Location and Identity. Looking at "Movers" & "Non-Movers"

                                                    Composite Wealth Index                                                                         Education
                                                       Movers in Non-
                                                        Partitioned       Movers in Partitioned                                             Movers in Non-              Movers in Partitioned
                                Non-Movers              Homelands            Homelands                           Non-Movers              Partitioned Homelands             Homelands
                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)             (11)          (12)

Partitioning - Identity    -0.2070** -0.1843** -0.2932* -0.2290                 -0.2109** -0.1984**          -0.5686*     -0.4687*       -0.9172**      -0.5913*        -0.6031** -0.5113**
 Double-clustered s.e.      (0.0936) (0.0909) (0.1615) (0.1479)                  (0.0894) (0.0903)           (0.3309)     (0.2798)        (0.4493)      (0.3438)         (0.2650) (0.2536)

Adjusted R-squared            0.117        0.140        0.210       0.246         0.147        0.177          0.246         0.293          0.256         0.328             0.208         0.255
Observations                  34179        34179        30606       30606         23386        23386          34179         34179          30606         30606             23386         23386

Country Fixed Effects          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
Location Controls              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
Individual Controls            No           Yes          No           Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes            No             Yes              No            Yes

The table reports OLS estimates, associating DHS composite wealth index (in columns (1)-(6)) and years of education (in columns (7)-(12)) with ethnic partitioning. The ethnic
partitioning identity index (Partitioned-Identity) takes on the value of one for individuals that identify with a partitioned group. Columns (1), (2) and (7) and (8) focuse on individuals that
reside inside their ethnicity’s ancestral homeland (“non-movers”). In the rest of the columns we focus on those that reside outside their ethnicity's ancestral homeland ("movers"). The
composite wealth index is calculated by the DHS team in each country via a principal component method using easy-to-collect data on a household's ownership of selected assets (e.g.,
televisions and bicycles), materials used for housing construction and public good access (e.g., type of water access, electrification, and sanitation). The specifications in columns (3)-(4)
and (9)-(10) restrict estimation to individuals (movers) currently residing in non-partitioned ethnic homelands. The specifications in columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12) restrict estimation to
individuals (movers) currently residing in partitioned ethnic homelands.
All specifications include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported) and a set of location controls. This includes the distance of each enumeration area to the capital city, the
distance to the coast, the distance to the national border and an indicator that takes on the value of one for enumeration areas close to the capital city (distance to the capital less than the
25th percentile). The individual controls is added in even-numbered columns and it includes a vector of year-of-birth fixed effects, a vector of 6 marital status fixed effects, and a vector of
7 religion fixed effects. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
ethnicity and the ethnic homeland dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                        Appendix Table 42: The Long-Run Effects of Ethnic Partitioning
                                                            Examining Persistence

                                              DHS Composite Wealth Index                                                         Education
                                     Old            Young               Old           Young               Old           Young              Old               Young
                                      (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)              (7)                (8)

Partitioning - Identity           -0.2290**        -0.1882**        -0.2468**       -0.1856**          -0.5861**       -0.4047*         -0.6729**          -0.4354*
 Double-clustered s.e.             (0.0968)         (0.0865)         (0.0986)        (0.0902)           (0.2782)       (0.2336)          (0.2900)          (0.2437)

Partitioning - Location                                               0.0683         -0.0112                                              0.3331             0.1343
 Double-clustered s.e.                                               (0.0735)        (0.0789)                                            (0.2058)           (0.1803)

Non-Indigenous Indicator          0.1910**         0.1785**         0.1940***       0.1783**             0.3626          0.255            0.3774             0.257
 Double-clustered s.e.             (0.0751)         (0.0700)         (0.0741)        (0.0702)           (0.2825)        (0.1950)         (0.2792)           (0.1934)

Adjusted R-squared                  0.172            0.174            0.172           0.174              0.283           0.266            0.283              0.266
Observations                        43283            44888            43283           44888              43231           44812            43231              44812

Country Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes
Location Controls                    Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes
Individual Controls                  Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes


The table reports OLS estimates associating a composite wealth index in columns (1) - (4) and years of education in columns (5) - (8) with ethnic partitioning.
The ethnic partitioning identity index (Partitioning-Identity) takes on the value of one for individuals that identify with a partitioned group. The location-based
ethnic partitioning index (Partitioning-Location) takes on the value of one for individuals that currently reside in ethnic homelands that have been partitioned by
the national border and zero otherwise. Even-numbered columns report estimates restricting estimation to individuals born after 1977 (young). Odd-numbered
columns report estimates restricting estimation to individuals born before (or on) 1977 (old). The composite wealth index (dependent variable) is calculated by
the DHS team in each country via a principal component method using easy-to-collect data on a household's ownership of selected assets (e.g., televisions and
bicycles), materials used for housing construction and public good access (e.g., type of water access, electrification, and sanitation).
All specifications include a vector of country ethnic homeland fixed effects (constants not reported). All specifications include a vector of year-of-birth fixed
effects, a vector of 6 marital-status fixed effects, and a vector of 7 religion fixed effects (individual controls). We also include as location controls the distance of
each enumeration area to the capital city, the distance to the coast, the distance to the national border and an indicator that takes on the value for enumeration
areas close to the capital city (distance to the capital less than the 25th percentile). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the ethnicity and the ethnic homeland dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                 Appendix Table A: Partitioned Ethnicities


                      % of   Country  #                                        % of   Country  #
No Ethnicity Name   Homeland Code Partitions      No Ethnicity Name          Homeland Code Partitions

 1 ABABDA             0.72    EGY       2        120 LAKA (ADAMAWA)            0.69    TCD      3
   ABABDA             0.28    SDN       2            LAKA (ADAMAWA)            0.20    CMR      3
 2 ADELE              0.48    GHA       2            LAKA (ADAMAWA)            0.11    CAF      3
   ADELE              0.52    TGO       2        121 LAMBA                     0.39    ZAR      2
 3 AFAR               0.17     DJI      3            LAMBA                     0.61    ZMB      2
   AFAR               0.22     ERI      3        122 LAMBYA                    0.17    MWI      3
   AFAR               0.61    ETH       3            LAMBYA                    0.33    TZA      3
 4 ALUR               0.16    ZAR       2            LAMBYA                    0.50    ZMB      3
   ALUR               0.84    UGA       2        123 LIGBI, DEGHA (SE)         0.72    GHA      2
 5 AMBA               0.87    ZAR       2            LIGBI, DEGHA (SE)         0.28    CIV      2
   AMBA               0.13    UGA       2        124 LOBI                      0.42    CIV      2
 6 AMBO               0.41    AGO       2            LOBI                      0.58    BFA      2
   AMBO               0.59    NAM       2        125 LUGBARA                   0.45    ZAR      3
 7 AMER               0.56     ERI      2            LUGBARA                   0.04    SDN      3
   AMER               0.44    SDN       2            LUGBARA                   0.51    UGA      3
 8 ANA                0.33    BEN       2        126 LUNGU                     0.31    TZA      2
   ANA                0.67    TGO       2            LUNGU                     0.69    ZMB      2
 9 ANUAK              0.75    ETH       2        127 LUVALE                    0.81    AGO      3
   ANUAK              0.25    SDN       2            LUVALE                    0.01    ZAR      3
10 ANYI               0.42    GHA       2            LUVALE                    0.17    ZMB      3
   ANYI               0.58    CIV       2        128 MADI                      0.42    SDN      2
11 ASBEN              0.89    NER       2            MADI                      0.58    UGA      2
   ASBEN              0.11    DZA       2        129 MAKONDE                   0.56    MOZ      2
12 ASSINI             0.51    GHA       2            MAKONDE                   0.44    TZA      2
   ASSINI             0.49    CIV       2        130 MALINKE                   0.03    GMB      6
13 ATTA               0.51    MAR       2            MALINKE                   0.13    CIV      6
   ATTA               0.49    DZA       2            MALINKE                   0.27    MLI      6
14 ATYUTI             0.13    GHA       2            MALINKE                   0.04    GNB      6
   ATYUTI             0.87    TGO       2            MALINKE                   0.25    GIN      6
15 AULLIMINDEN        0.55    MLI       3            MALINKE                   0.29    SEN      6
   AULLIMINDEN        0.40    NER       3        131 MAMBILA                   0.57    CMR      2
   AULLIMINDEN        0.05    DZA       3            MAMBILA                   0.43    NGA      2
16 AUSHI              0.27    ZAR       2        132 MANDARA                   0.35    CMR      2
   AUSHI              0.73    ZMB       2            MANDARA                   0.65    NGA      2
17 AVATIME            0.51    GHA       2        133 MANGA                     0.60    NER      2
   AVATIME            0.49    TGO       2            MANGA                     0.40    NGA      2
18 AZANDE             0.62    ZAR       3        134 MANYIKA                   0.39    MOZ      2
   AZANDE             0.15    CAF       3            MANYIKA                   0.61    ZWE      2
   AZANDE             0.23    SDN       3        135 MASAI                     0.38    KEN      2
19 AZJER              0.24    LBY       3            MASAI                     0.62    TZA      2
   AZJER              0.00    NER       3        136 MASALIT                   0.13    TCD      2
   AZJER              0.75    DZA       3            MASALIT                   0.87    SDN      2
20 BABUKUR     0.82   ZAR   2   137 MASHI      0.12   AGO   2
   BABUKUR     0.18   SDN   2       MASHI      0.88   ZMB   2
21 BAJUN       0.37   KEN   2   138 MASINA     0.82   MLI   3
   BAJUN       0.63   SOM   2       MASINA     0.09   BFA   3
22 BALANTE     0.73   GNB   2       MASINA     0.09   MRT   3
   BALANTE     0.27   SEN   2   139 MATAKAM    0.70   CMR   2
23 BANYUN      0.48   GNB   2       MATAKAM    0.30   NGA   2
   BANYUN      0.52   SEN   2   140 MBERE      0.02   TCD   3
24 BANZIRI     0.14   ZAR   2       MBERE      0.24   CMR   3
   BANZIRI     0.86   CAF   2       MBERE      0.74   CAF   3
25 BARABRA     0.31   EGY   2   141 MBUKUSHU   0.74   AGO   3
   BARABRA     0.69   SDN   2       MBUKUSHU   0.15   BWA   3
26 BARARETTA   0.18   ETH   3       MBUKUSHU   0.12   NAM   3
   BARARETTA   0.44   KEN   3   142 MBUNDA     0.89   AGO   2
   BARARETTA   0.38   SOM   3       MBUNDA     0.11   ZMB   2
27 BARGU       0.77   BEN   4   143 MENDE      0.18   LBR   3
   BARGU       0.03   NER   4       MENDE      0.82   SLE   3
   BARGU       0.19   NGA   4   144 MINIANKA   0.01   CIV   3
   BARGU       0.02   BFA   4       MINIANKA   0.72   MLI   3
28 BASHI       0.09   BDI   3       MINIANKA   0.27   BFA   3
   BASHI       0.83   ZAR   3   145 MOMBERA    0.72   MWI   2
   BASHI       0.08   RWA   3       MOMBERA    0.28   ZMB   2
29 BATA        0.29   CMR   2   146 MPEZENI    0.11   MWI   2
   BATA        0.71   NGA   2       MPEZENI    0.89   ZMB   2
30 BAYA        0.20   CMR   2   147 MUNDANG    0.80   TCD   2
   BAYA        0.80   CAF   2       MUNDANG    0.20   CMR   2
31 BERABISH    0.80   MLI   2   148 MUNDU      0.30   ZAR   2
   BERABISH    0.20   MRT   2       MUNDU      0.70   SDN   2
32 BERTA       0.75   ETH   2   149 MUSGU      0.76   TCD   2
   BERTA       0.25   SDN   2       MUSGU      0.24   CMR   2
33 BIDEYAT     0.21   LBY   4   150 NAFANA     0.74   GHA   2
   BIDEYAT     0.40   TCD   4       NAFANA     0.26   CIV   2
   BIDEYAT     0.03   EGY   4   151 NALU       0.41   GNB   2
   BIDEYAT     0.36   SDN   4       NALU       0.59   GIN   2
34 BIRIFON     0.52   GHA   3   152 NAMA       0.18   ZAF   2
   BIRIFON     0.47   BFA   3       NAMA       0.82   NAM   2
35 BOBO        0.20   MLI   2   153 NAUDEBA    0.87   BEN   2
   BOBO        0.80   BFA   2       NAUDEBA    0.13   TGO   2
36 BOKI        0.22   CMR   2   154 NDAU       0.86   MOZ   2
   BOKI        0.78   NGA   2       NDAU       0.14   ZWE   2
37 BONDJO      0.14   ZAR   2   155 NDEMBU     0.26   AGO   3
   BONDJO      0.86   COG   2       NDEMBU     0.39   ZAR   3
38 BONI        0.67   KEN   2       NDEMBU     0.35   ZMB   3
   BONI        0.33   SOM   2   156 NDOGO      0.01   ZAR   3
39 BORAN       0.46   ETH   2       NDOGO      0.18   CAF   3
   BORAN       0.54   KEN   2       NDOGO      0.81   SDN   3
40 BRONG       0.84   GHA   2   157 NDUKA      0.23   TCD   2
   BRONG       0.16   CIV   2       NDUKA      0.77   CAF   2
41 BUEM        0.40   GHA   2   158 NGAMA      0.30   TCD   2
     BUEM        0.60   TGO   2         NGAMA       0.70   CAF   2
42   BULOM       0.85   SLE   2   159   NGERE       0.65   CIV   3
     BULOM       0.15   GIN   2         NGERE       0.29   LBR   3
43   BUSA        0.14   BEN   2         NGERE       0.06   GIN   3
     BUSA        0.86   NGA   2   160   NGUMBA      0.65   CMR   2
44   BWAKA       0.81   ZAR   3         NGUMBA      0.35   GNQ   2
     BWAKA       0.15   CAF   3   161   NGWAKETSE   0.86   BWA   2
     BWAKA       0.04   COG   3         NGWAKETSE   0.14   ZAF   2
45   CHAGA       0.24   KEN   2   162   NSENGA      0.15   MOZ   3
     CHAGA       0.76   TZA   2         NSENGA      0.78   ZMB   3
46   CHAKOSSI    0.27   GHA   2         NSENGA      0.06   ZWE   3
     CHAKOSSI    0.73   TGO   2   163   NSUNGLI     0.78   CMR   2
47   CHEWA       0.34   MWI   3         NSUNGLI     0.22   NGA   2
     CHEWA       0.50   MOZ   3   164   NUKWE       0.44   AGO   4
     CHEWA       0.16   ZMB   3         NUKWE       0.24   BWA   4
48   CHIGA       0.12   RWA   3         NUKWE       0.05   ZMB   4
     CHIGA       0.87   UGA   3         NUKWE       0.26   NAM   4
49   CHOKWE      0.81   AGO   2   165   NUSAN       0.30   BWA   3
     CHOKWE      0.19   ZAR   2         NUSAN       0.37   ZAF   3
50   COMORIANS   0.82   COM   2         NUSAN       0.33   NAM   3
     COMORIANS   0.18   MYT   2   166   NYAKYUSA    0.12   MWI   2
51   DAGARI      0.67   GHA   2         NYAKYUSA    0.88   TZA   2
     DAGARI      0.33   BFA   2   167   NYANGIYA    0.17   SDN   2
52   DARI        0.78   TCD   2         NYANGIYA    0.83   UGA   2
     DARI        0.22   CMR   2   168   NYANJA      0.64   MWI   2
53   DAZA        0.27   TCD   2         NYANJA      0.36   MOZ   2
     DAZA        0.73   NER   2   169   NYASA       0.05   MWI   3
54   DELIM       0.55   ESH   2         NYASA       0.68   MOZ   3
     DELIM       0.45   MRT   2         NYASA       0.27   TZA   3
55   DENDI       0.60   BEN   3   170   NZANKARA    0.14   ZAR   2
     DENDI       0.39   NER   3         NZANKARA    0.86   CAF   2
56   DIALONKE    0.36   MLI   3   171   PANDE       0.38   CAF   2
     DIALONKE    0.58   GIN   3         PANDE       0.62   COG   2
     DIALONKE    0.06   SEN   3   172   POPO        0.72   BEN   2
57   DIDINGA     0.04   KEN   3         POPO        0.28   TGO   2
     DIDINGA     0.89   SDN   3   173   PUKU        0.31   CMR   3
     DIDINGA     0.07   UGA   3         PUKU        0.49   GNQ   3
58   DIGO        0.62   KEN   2         PUKU        0.19   GAB   3
     DIGO        0.38   TZA   2   174   REGEIBAT    0.34   ESH   2
59   DIOLA       0.14   GMB   3         REGEIBAT    0.66   MRT   2
     DIOLA       0.07   GNB   3   175   RESHIAT     0.83   ETH   3
     DIOLA       0.78   SEN   3         RESHIAT     0.06   KEN   3
60   DUMA        0.63   GAB   2         RESHIAT     0.11   SDN   3
     DUMA        0.37   COG   2   176   RONGA       0.60   MOZ   3
61   DZEM        0.74   CMR   3         RONGA       0.35   ZAF   3
     DZEM        0.03   GAB   3         RONGA       0.05   SWZ   3
     DZEM        0.24   COG   3   177   RUANDA      0.02   BDI   5
62   EGBA        0.41   BEN   3         RUANDA      0.06   ZAR   5
     EGBA        0.52   NGA   3         RUANDA      0.89   RWA   5
     EGBA          0.07   TGO    3         RUANDA     0.02   TZA    5
63   EKOI          0.38   CMR    2         RUANDA     0.02   UGA    5
     EKOI          0.62   NGA    2   178   RUNDI      0.76   BDI    4
64   ESA           0.03    DJI   3         RUNDI      0.04   RWA    4
     ESA           0.52   ETH    3         RUNDI      0.20   TZA    4
     ESA           0.44   SOM    3   179   RUNGA      0.74   TCD    3
65   EWE           0.44   GHA    2         RUNGA      0.26   CAF    3
     EWE           0.56   TGO    2   180   SABEI      0.56   KEN    2
66   FANG          0.37   CMR    4         SABEI      0.44   UGA    2
     FANG          0.07   GNQ    4   181   SAHO       0.43    ERI   2
     FANG          0.54   GAB    4         SAHO       0.57   ETH    2
     FANG          0.02   COG    4   182   SAMO       0.12   MLI    2
67   FON           0.86   BEN    3         SAMO       0.88   BFA    2
     FON           0.14   TGO    3   183   SANGA      0.26   CMR    3
68   FOUTADJALON   0.01   MLI    4         SANGA      0.19   CAF    3
     FOUTADJALON   0.11   GNB    4         SANGA      0.55   COG    3
     FOUTADJALON   0.88   GIN    4   184   SEKE       0.34   GNQ    2
     FOUTADJALON   0.01   SEN    4         SEKE       0.66   GAB    2
69   FUNGON        0.81   CMR    2   185   SHAMBALA   0.10   KEN    2
     FUNGON        0.19   NGA    2         SHAMBALA   0.90   TZA    2
70   GADAMES       0.25   LBY    3   186   SHEBELLE   0.58   ETH    2
     GADAMES       0.27   TUN    3         SHEBELLE   0.42   SOM    2
     GADAMES       0.48   DZA    3   187   SHUWA      0.62   TCD    3
71   GIL           0.80   MAR    2         SHUWA      0.17   CMR    3
     GIL           0.20   DZA    2         SHUWA      0.21   NGA    3
72   GOMANI        0.86   MWI    2   188   SONGHAI    0.57   MLI    3
     GOMANI        0.14   MOZ    2         SONGHAI    0.36   NER    3
73   GREBO         0.33   CIV    2         SONGHAI    0.07   BFA    3
     GREBO         0.67   LBR    2   189   SONINKE    0.68   MLI    3
74   GRUNSHI       0.68   GHA    2         SONINKE    0.03   SEN    3
     GRUNSHI       0.32   BFA    2         SONINKE    0.29   MRT    3
75   GUDE          0.83   CMR    2   190   SOTHO      0.24   LSO    2
     GUDE          0.17   NGA    2         SOTHO      0.76   ZAF    2
76   GULA          0.61   TCD    2   191   SUBIA      0.11   BWA    4
     GULA          0.39   CAF    2         SUBIA      0.53   ZMB    4
77   GUN           0.48   BEN    2         SUBIA      0.06   ZWE    4
     GUN           0.52   NGA    2         SUBIA      0.30   NAM    4
78   GURENSI       0.74   GHA    3   192   SUNDI      0.37   ZAR    2
     GURENSI       0.13   TGO    3         SUNDI      0.63   COG    2
     GURENSI       0.13   BFA    3   193   SURI       0.71   ETH    2
79   GURMA         0.15   BEN    4         SURI       0.29   SDN    2
     GURMA         0.12   NER    4   194   SWAZI      0.45   ZAF    2
     GURMA         0.01   TGO    4         SWAZI      0.55   SWZ    2
     GURMA         0.72   BFA    4   195   TABWA      0.57   ZAR    2
80   GUSII         0.53   KEN    2         TABWA      0.43   ZMB    2
     GUSII         0.47   TZA    2   196   TAJAKANT   0.15   MAR    4
81   HAMAMA        0.80   TUN    2         TAJAKANT   0.14   ESH    4
     HAMAMA        0.20   DZA    2         TAJAKANT   0.66   DZA    4
82   HAUSA         0.14   NER    2         TAJAKANT   0.05   MRT    4
      HAUSA        0.86   NGA   2   197 TAMA             0.30   TCD    2
83    HIECHWARE    0.81   BWA   2       TAMA             0.70   SDN    2
      HIECHWARE    0.19   ZWE   2   198 TAWARA           0.57   MOZ    2
84    HLENGWE      0.82   MOZ   3       TAWARA           0.43   ZWE    2
      HLENGWE      0.00   ZAF   3   199 TEDA             0.34   LBY    3
      HLENGWE      0.18   ZWE   3       TEDA             0.35   TCD    3
85    HOLO         0.84   AGO   2       TEDA             0.31   NER    3
      HOLO         0.16   ZAR   2   200 TEKE             0.31   ZAR    3
86    IBIBIO       0.11   CMR   2       TEKE             0.03   GAB    3
      IBIBIO       0.89   NGA   2       TEKE             0.66   COG    3
87    IFORA        0.30   MLI   2   201 TEKNA            0.53   MAR    2
      IFORA        0.70   DZA   2       TEKNA            0.47   ESH    2
88    IMRAGEN      0.10   MAR   3   202 TEM              0.17   BEN    2
      IMRAGEN      0.74   ESH   3       TEM              0.83   TGO    2
      IMRAGEN      0.16   MRT   3   203 TENDA            0.57   GIN    2
89    ISHAAK       0.20   ETH   2       TENDA            0.43   SEN    2
      ISHAAK       0.80   SOM   2   204 THONGA           0.58   MOZ    3
90    IWA          0.33   TZA   2       THONGA           0.42   ZAF    3
      IWA          0.67   ZMB   2   205 TIENGA           0.22   NER    3
91    JERID        0.90   TUN   2       TIENGA           0.78   NGA    3
      JERID        0.10   DZA   2   206 TIGON            0.32   CMR    2
92    JIE          0.24   KEN   2       TIGON            0.68   NGA    2
      JIE          0.76   UGA   2   207 TIGRINYA         0.51    ERI   3
93    KABRE        0.39   BEN   2       TIGRINYA         0.44   ETH    3
      KABRE        0.61   TGO   2       TIGRINYA         0.05   SDN    3
94    KANEMBU      0.73   TCD   3   207 TLOKWA           0.14   BWA    3
      KANEMBU      0.25   NER   3       TLOKWA           0.77   ZAF    3
      KANEMBU      0.02   NGA   3       TLOKWA           0.09   ZWE    3
95    KAONDE       0.21   ZAR   2   208 TOMA             0.29   LBR    2
      KAONDE       0.79   ZMB   2       TOMA             0.71   GIN    2
96    KAPSIKI      0.65   CMR   2   209 TONGA            0.84   ZMB    2
      KAPSIKI      0.35   NGA   2       TONGA            0.16   ZWE    2
97    KARA         0.85   CAF   2   210 TRIBU            0.25   GHA    2
      KARA         0.15   SDN   2       TRIBU            0.75   TGO    2
98    KARAMOJONG   0.27   KEN   2   211 TRIPOLITANIANS   0.74   LBY    2
      KARAMOJONG   0.73   UGA   2       TRIPOLITANIANS   0.26   TUN    2
99    KARE         0.75   ZAR   2   212 TUBURI           0.25   TCD    2
      KARE         0.25   CAF   2       TUBURI           0.75   CMR    2
100   KGATLA       0.13   BWA   2   213 TUKULOR          0.39   SEN    2
      KGATLA       0.87   ZAF   2       TUKULOR          0.61   MRT    2
101   KISSI        0.12   LBR   3   214 TUMBUKA          0.74   MWI    2
      KISSI        0.02   SLE   3       TUMBUKA          0.26   ZMB    2
      KISSI        0.86   GIN   3   215 TUNISIANS        0.87   TUN    2
102   KOBA         0.89   BWA   2       TUNISIANS        0.13   DZA    2
      KOBA         0.11   NAM   2   216 UDALAN           0.82   MLI    3
103   KOMA         0.57   ETH   2       UDALAN           0.05   NER    3
      KOMA         0.43   SDN   2       UDALAN           0.13   BFA    3
104   KOMONO       0.49   CIV   2   217 VAI              0.76   LBR    2
      KOMONO       0.51   BFA   2       VAI              0.24   SLE    2
105 KONGO                      0.77        AGO            3          218 VENDA                               0.70        ZAF            2
    KONGO                      0.23        ZAR            3              VENDA                               0.30        ZWE            2
106 KONJO                      0.81        ZAR            2          219 VILI                                0.20        AGO            4
    KONJO                      0.19        UGA            2              VILI                                0.22        ZAR            4
107 KONKOMBA                   0.24        GHA            2              VILI                                0.11        GAB            4
    KONKOMBA                   0.76        TGO            2              VILI                                0.47        COG            4
108 KONO                       0.74        SLE            2          220 WAKURA                              0.28        CMR            2
    KONO                       0.26        GIN            2              WAKURA                              0.72        NGA            2
109 KONYANKE                   0.30        CIV            2          221 WANGA                               0.79        KEN            2
    KONYANKE                   0.70        GIN            2              WANGA                               0.21        UGA            2
110 KORANKO                    0.39        SLE            2          222 WUM                                 0.88        CMR            2
    KORANKO                    0.61        GIN            2              WUM                                 0.12        NGA            2
111 KOTA                       0.41        GAB            2          223 YAKA                                0.16        AGO            2
    KOTA                       0.59        COG            2              YAKA                                0.84        ZAR            2
112 KOTOKO                     0.67        TCD            2          224 YAKOMA                              0.40        ZAR            2
    KOTOKO                     0.33        CMR            2              YAKOMA                              0.60        CAF            2
113 KPELLE                     0.48        LBR            3          225 YALUNKA                             0.25        SLE            2
    KPELLE                     0.52        GIN            3              YALUNKA                             0.75        GIN            2
114 KRAN                       0.16        CIV            2          226 YAO                                 0.13        MWI            3
    KRAN                       0.84        LBR            2              YAO                                 0.65        MOZ            3
115 KREISH                     0.10        CAF            2              YAO                                 0.22        TZA            3
    KREISH                     0.90        SDN            2          227 YOMBE                               0.13        AGO            3
116 KUNDA                      0.84        MOZ            3              YOMBE                               0.48        ZAR            3
    KUNDA                      0.15        ZMB            3              YOMBE                               0.39        COG            3
117 KUNG                       0.10        BWA            2          228 ZAGHAWA                             0.14        TCD            2
    KUNG                       0.90        NAM            2              ZAGHAWA                             0.86        SDN            2
118 KUNTA                      0.85        MLI            2          229 ZEKARA                              0.83        MAR            2
    KUNTA                      0.15        DZA            2              ZEKARA                              0.17        DZA            2
119 KWANGARE                   0.84        AGO            2          230 ZIMBA                               0.16        MWI            2
    KWANGARE                   0.16        NAM            2              ZIMBA                               0.84        MOZ            2

Appendix Table A reports the name of partitioned ethnic groups (as coded by Murdock (1959)) and the percentage of the historical
homeland of the split ethnic groups that fall into more than one country. Section 2.1 gives details on our approach in identifying partitioned
ethnicities. There are 230 partitioned ethnicities. In the empirical analysis we do not consider the Comorians, as the conflict databases do
not cover the Comoros.
