NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECESSIONS AND THE COST OF JOB LOSS
Steven J. Davis
Till M. von Wachter
Working Paper 17638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17638

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

We thank Bob Hall, Richard Rogerson, David Romer and conference participants for many helpful
comments on an earlier draft. April Chen, Olga Deriy and Gregor Jarosch provided outstanding research
assistance. Davis thanks the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Steven J. Davis and Till M. von Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Recessions and the Cost of Job Loss
Steven J. Davis and Till M. von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 17638
December 2011
JEL No. E24,J3,J6
ABSTRACT
We develop new evidence on the cumulative earnings losses associated with job displacement,
drawing on longitudinal Social Security records for U.S. workers from 1974 to 2008. In present
value terms, men lose an average of 1.4 years of pre-displacement earnings if displaced in masslayoff events that occur when the national unemployment rate is below 6 percent. They lose a
staggering 2.8 years of pre-displacement earnings if displaced when the unemployment rate
exceeds 8 percent. These results reflect discounting at a 5% annual rate over 20 years after
displacement. We also document large cyclical movements in the incidence of job loss and job
displacement and present evidence on how worker anxieties about job loss, wage cuts and job
opportunities respond to contemporaneous economic conditions. Finally, we confront leading
models of unemployment fluctuations with evidence on the present value earnings losses
associated with job displacement. The model of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) extended to
include search on the job generates present value losses only one-fourth as large as observed
losses. Moreover, present value losses in the model vary little with aggregate conditions at the
time of displacement, unlike the pattern in the data.

Steven J. Davis
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Till M. von Wachter
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
MC 147703
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu

A Programs and Data Files is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17647

1. Introduction
Major economic downturns bring large increases in permanent layoffs among workers
with high prior tenure on the job. We refer to this type of job loss event as a displacement.
Previous research shows that job displacements lead to large and persistent earnings losses for
the affected workers.1 The available evidence also indicates that job displacement leads to less
stability in earnings and employment, worse health outcomes, higher mortality, lower
achievements by children, and other unwelcome consequences.2
We develop new evidence on the cumulative earnings losses associated with job
displacement and the role of labor market conditions at the time of displacement. In present
value terms, men lose an average of 1.4 years of pre-displacement earnings if displaced in masslayoff events that occur when the national unemployment rate is below 6 percent. They lose a
staggering 2.8 years of pre-displacement earnings if displaced when the unemployment rate
exceeds 8 percent. These results reflect discounting at a 5% annual rate over 20 years after
displacement. We also document large cyclical movements in the incidence of job loss and job
displacement, and we investigate how worker anxieties about job loss, wage cuts and other labor
market prospects respond to contemporaneous economic conditions. Finally, we confront leading
models of unemployment fluctuations in the tradition of work by Peter Diamond, Dale
Mortensen and Christopher Pissarides with evidence on the present value earnings losses
associated with job displacement.
Our study builds on three major areas of research: empirical work on cyclical fluctuations
in job destruction, job loss and unemployment; empirical work on earnings losses and other
outcomes associated with job displacement; and theoretical work on search and matching models
of unemployment fluctuations along the lines of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). In terms of a
broad effort to bring together these areas of research, the closest antecedent to our study is Hall
(1995). In terms of its effort to confront equilibrium search and matching models with evidence
on the earnings losses associated with job displacement, the closest prior work is Den Haan,
Ramey and Watson (2000).
Our empirical investigation of the earnings losses associated with job displacement draws
heavily on recent research by von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011). They develop new
1

See, for example, Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993), Couch and Placzek (2010) and von Wachter, Song, and
Manchester (2011).
2
We review the evidence and provide citations to the relevant literature in Section 4. See also Wachter (2010).

1	  

evidence on the short- and long-term earnings effects of job loss using longitudinal Social
Security records covering U.S. workers for a period of more than 30 years. Drawing on their
estimated empirical models, our first main contribution is to characterize how present value
earnings losses due to job displacement vary with business cycle conditions at the time of
displacement. For men with 3 or more years of prior tenure who lose jobs in mass-layoff events
at larger firms, job displacement reduces the present value of future earnings by 12 percent in an
average year. The present value losses are high in all years, but they rise steeply with the
unemployment rate in the year of displacement. Present value losses for displacements that
occur in recessions are nearly twice as large as for displacements in expansions. The entire
future path of earnings losses is much higher for displacements that occur in recessions. In short,
the present value earnings losses associated with job displacement are very large, and they are
highly sensitive to labor market conditions at the time of displacement.
Drawing on data from the General Social Survey and Gallup polling, we examine the
relationship of anxieties about job loss, wage cuts, ease of job finding and other labor market
prospects to actual labor market conditions. The available evidence indicates that cyclical
fluctuations in worker perceptions and anxieties track actual labor market conditions rather
closely, and that they respond quickly to deteriorations in the economic outlook. Gallup data, in
particular, show a tremendous increase in worker anxieties about labor market prospects after the
peak of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. They also show a recent return to the same high
levels of anxiety. These data suggest that fears about job loss and other negative labor market
outcomes are themselves a significant and costly aspect of economic downturns for a broad
segment of the population. These findings also imply that workers are well aware of and
concerned about the costly nature of job loss, especially in recessions.
Our second main contribution is to analyze whether leading theoretical models of
unemployment fluctuations can account for our evidence on the magnitude and cyclicality of
present value earnings losses associated with job displacement. Following Hall and Milgrom
(2008), we consider three variants of the basic Mortensen-Pissarides model analyzed by Shimer
(2005) and many others. We also consider a richer model of Burgess and Turon (2010) that
introduces search on the job and replacement hiring into the model of Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994).

	  

The richer model generates worker flows apart from job flows, heterogeneity in

2	  

productivity and match surplus values, and recessionary spikes in job destruction, job loss and
unemployment inflows of the sort we see in the data.
The search and matching models we consider do not account for our evidence on the
present value earnings losses associated with job displacement. The empirical losses are an order
of magnitude larger than those implied by basic versions of the Mortensen-Pissarides model.
Wage rigidity of the form considered by Hall and Milgrom (2008) greatly improves the model’s
ability to explain aggregate unemployment fluctuations, but it does not bring the model closer to
evidence on the earnings losses associated with displacement. The model of Burgess and Turon
(2010) generates larger present value losses, because most job-losing workers in the model do
not immediately recover pre-displacement wage levels upon re-employment. Instead,
unemployed persons tend to flow into jobs on the lower rungs of the wage distribution and move
up the distribution over time. Yet, when calibrated for consistency with U.S. unemployment
flows, the model of Burgess and Turon yields present value earnings losses due to job loss less
than one-fourth as large as the empirical losses. Moreover, present value losses in the model
vary little with aggregate conditions at the time of displacement, unlike the pattern in the data.
Present value income losses associated with job loss are even smaller in the search
models we consider. Indeed, a fundamental weakness of these models is their implication that
job loss is a rather inconsequential event from the perspective of individual welfare. In this
sense, and despite many virtues and attractions, this class of models fails to address a central
reason that job loss, unemployment and recessions attract so much attention and concern from
economists, policymakers and others. For the same reason, care should be taken in using this
class of models to form conclusions about the welfare effects of shocks and government policies.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents evidence on the incidence of job
destruction, layoffs, unemployment inflows and job displacement over the business cycle.
Section 3 first summarizes previous research on the short- and long-term consequences of job
displacements for earnings. It then draws on work by von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011)
to estimate near-term and present value earnings losses associated with job displacement, and to
investigate how the losses vary with conditions at displacement. Section 4 reviews previous work
on non-monetary costs of displacement and presents evidence on cyclical fluctuations in
perceptions and anxieties related to labor market prospects.

	  

3	  

Section 5 considers selected

equilibrium search and matching models of unemployment fluctuations and evaluates their
implications for the earnings and income losses associated with job loss. Section 6 concludes.
2. The Incidence of Job Loss and Job Displacement over Time
Figure 1 displays four time series that draw on distinct sources of data and pertain to
different concepts of job loss.

The job destruction measure captures gross employment losses

summed over shrinking and closing establishments in the Business Employment Dynamics
(BED) database.3 The layoff measure reflects data on employer-initiated separations, as reported
by employers in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and as aggregated and extended
back to 1990 by Davis et al. (2011).4 We calculate unemployment inflow rates using monthly
Current Population Survey (CPS) data on the number of employed persons and the number
unemployed less than 5 weeks. Summing over months yields the quarterly rates. The measure
of initial unemployment insurance (UI) claims is the quarterly sum of weekly new claims for
unemployment insurance benefits, expressed as a percent of nonfarm payroll employment.
Figure 1 highlights two key points.

First, the sheer volume of job loss and

unemployment incidence is enormous – in good economic times and bad. For example, the
JOLTS-based layoff rate in Figure 1 averages 7 percent per quarter from 1990 to 2011.
Multiplying this figure by nonfarm payroll employment in 2011 yields about 9 million layoffs
per quarter. Quarterly averages for job destruction and unemployment inflows are of similar
magnitude. Initial UI claims average about 5 million per quarter. In short, the U.S. economy
routinely accommodates huge numbers of lost jobs and unemployment spells.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

The BED contains longitudinally linked records for all businesses covered by state unemployment insurance
agencies – virtually a census of nonfarm private business establishments.
4
To deal with weaknesses in the JOLTS sample design, Davis et al. (2011) rely on BED data to track the crosssectional distribution of establishment-level growth rates over time. They combine micro data from the BED and
JOLTS to obtain the layoff series in Figure 1. To extend the layoff series back in time before the advent of JOLTS,
they use the BED to construct synthetic JOLTS-like layoff rates. Davis et al. (2010) discuss sample design issues in
the JOLTS and develop the adjustment methodology implemented by Davis et al. (2011).

	  

4	  

Figure 1. Layoffs, Unemployment Inflows, Job Destruction, and Initial Claims for
Unemployment Insurance Benefits, Quarterly Rates, 1990 to 2011Q2

Notes to Figure 1:
1. All series are seasonally adjusted and expressed as a percent of employment. Shaded regions
indicate NBER-dated recessions.
2. Job destruction rates in the private sector from the Business Employment Dynamics (BED)
program, as tabulated directly from establishment-level data by Davis, Faberman and
Haltiwanger (2011) for 1990Q2 to 2010Q2 and spliced to published BED data for 2010Q3
and 2010Q4. The splice is based on overlapping data from 2006Q1 to 2010Q2.
3. Quarterly layoff rates based on the layoff concept in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover
Survey (JOLTS), as constructed from establishment-level data from 2001Q3 to 2010Q2 and
extended back to 1990Q2 by Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2011). From 2010Q3 to
2011Q2, we sum the monthly layoff rate published by the JOLTS program and splice to the
quarterly layoff rates in earlier years. The splice is based on overlapping data from 2006Q1
to 2010Q2.
4. Unemployment inflow rates calculated from Current Population Survey (CPS) data as
number of short-term unemployed (less than 5 weeks) divided by civilian employment. We
calculate monthly inflow rates in the CPS data and sum over months to obtain quarterly
inflow rates. To adjust for the 1994 CPS redesign, we divide the number of short-term
unemployed by 1.1 prior to 1994. See Polivka and Miller (1998) and Shimer (2007) on the
CPS redesign.
5. Initial UI claims are quarterly sums of weekly new claims for unemployment insurance
benefits, expressed as a percent of nonfarm payroll employment in the Current Employment
Statistics. Weekly new claims data are available at
www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/claims.asp. We sum weekly claims in the month, rescale the
sum to represent 4 and 1/3 weeks worth of claims, and divide by CES employment in the
month. We then sum over months to obtain a quarterly series.

	  

5	  

Many, perhaps most, of these job loss events involve little financial loss or other hardship
for individuals and families. Indeed, the high rates shown in Figure 1 reflect an impressive
capacity for constant renewal and productivity-enhancing reallocation of jobs, workers and
capital in the U.S. economy.5 It is important to keep this point in mind when interpreting the
evidence on the costs associated with job displacement.

That evidence focuses, quite

deliberately, on the types of job loss events that often involve serious consequences for workers
and their families.
Second, all four series in Figure 1 exhibit strongly countercyclical movements, with clear
spikes in the three recessions covered by our sample period.6 For example, the quarterly layoff
rate rises by 129 basis points from 1990Q2 to 1991Q1, 85 basis points from 2000Q2 to 2001Q4,
and 208 basis points from 2007Q3 to 2009Q1. Interestingly, each measure in Figure 1 starts to
rise before the onset of a recession (as dated by the NBER) and turns down before the
resumption of an expansion. This pattern confirms the well-known usefulness of initial UI
claims as a leading indicator for business cycles, and it suggests that other job loss indicators
behave similarly in this respect.7
Much of our study examines the earnings losses of high-tenure workers who lose jobs in
large-scale layoff events. To quantify those losses, we follow individual workers over time using
annual earnings records maintained by the Social Security Administration (SSA). Figure 2 plots
an annual job displacement measure for men constructed from the SSA data and compares it to
annual measures of job destruction and initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits.8
Here, we report displacement rates in the population of male employees 50 years or younger with
at least 3 years of prior job tenure, excluding government workers and certain service sectors not
covered by the Social Security system throughout our full sample period.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5

See Bartlesman and Doms (2000) and Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2000) for reviews of the evidence on
reallocation and productivity growth.
6
This pattern holds in earlier postwar U.S. recessions as well. See, for example, Blanchard and Diamond (1989),
Davis and Haltiwanger (1990), Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) and Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009).
7
As an example, the Conference Board uses new claims for unemployment insurance benefits in constructing its
“Leading Economic Index.” See www.conference-board.org/data/bcicountry.cfm?cid=1.
8
We cumulate weekly UI claims over twelve months in Figure 2 but the calculations otherwise follow the same
approach as in Figure 1. The job destruction series in Figure 2 rely on data from Business Dynamics Statistics
(BDS) program at the Bureau of the Census. They are available at an annual frequency and extend farther back in
time than the BED-based job destruction series in Figure 1, but they are not as timely. Because the BDS-based
destruction series reflects 12-month changes in establishment-level employment, it is not directly comparable to the
BED-based job destruction series based on 3-month changes.

	  

6	  

We regard a worker as displaced in year y if he separates from his employer in y, and the
employer experiences a mass-layoff event in y. We say a worker “separates” from an employer
in year y when he has earnings with the employer in y-1 but not in y. To qualify as a mass-layoff
event in year y, the employer must meet the following criteria: (i) 50 or more employees in y-2;
(ii) employment contracts by 30% to 99% from y-2 to y; (iii) employment in y-2 is no more than
130% of employment in y-3; (iv) employment in y+1 is less than 90% of employment in y-2.
The 99% cutoff in condition (ii) ensures that we do not capture spurious firm deaths due to
broken longitudinal links. Conditions (iii) and (iv) exclude temporary fluctuations in firm-level
employment. While these criteria miss some displacements of high-tenure workers at larger
employers, they help ensure that the separations we identify as job displacement events are
indeed the result of permanent layoffs.9 To qualify as a job displacement event in y, we also
require that the separation be from the worker’s main job, defined as the one that accounts for the
highest share of his earnings in y-2. For additional details on the data, sample, and measurement
procedures, see von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011), hereafter VSM.
To express job displacements in year y as a rate in Figure 2, we divide by the number of
male workers 50 or younger in y-2 with at least 3 years of job tenure at firms with 50 or more
employees in the industries covered by Social Security throughout our sample period. These
workers comprise 31 to 36 percent of all male workers 50 or younger in industries continuously
covered by the SSA from 1980 to 2008, depending on year, 40 to 48 percent when we also
restrict attention to those with 3 or more years of job tenure, and 70 to 74 percent when we
further restrict to firms with 50 or more employees.
The annual frequency of the measures in Figure 2 somewhat obscures the timing of
cyclical movements, but the broad patterns echo those in Figure 1: job loss rates move in a
countercyclical manner, and recessions involve notable jumps in job loss. The deep recession in
the early 1980s involves dramatic increases in rates of job destruction and job displacement. For
example, the annual job destruction rate at firms with 50 or more employees rose from 11.6% in
1979 to 18.3% in 1983. To be clear, the latter figure reflects establishment-level employment
contractions that occur from March 1982 to March 1983. Our measure of the job displacement

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9

Tabulations in Davis et al. (2006) based on BED and JOLTS data indicate that most employment reductions are
achieved through layoffs when firms contract by 30% or more.

	  

7	  

rate rose from 1.9% in 1980 to 5.0% in 1983.10 More generally, the job displacement rate is
roughly 20 to 25 percent as large as annual job destruction rates, although it is worth stressing
that the two measures pertain to different at-risk populations.
Figure 2. Job Displacement, Job Destruction, and Initial Claims for Unemployment
Insurance Benefits, Annual Rates, 1977 to 2011

Notes:
1. Job destruction rates for the nonfarm private sector are from the Business Dynamics
Statistics program at the U.S. Census Bureau. They are tabulated from March-to-March
employment changes summed over all contracting establishments in the Longitudinal
Business Database. Available at www.ces.census.gov/index.php/bds/bds_database_list.
2. Job destruction rates for larger firms reflect establishment-level employment changes for
firms with at least 50 employees, computed as an average of current and previous-year
employment.
3. Initial UI Claims are annual sums of weekly new claims for unemployment insurance
benefits, expressed as a percent of employment. Its construction parallels that of the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10

The very high rates of Initial UI Claims in the early 1980s should be interpreted with caution. Temporary layoffs
were a major phenomenon in the early 1980s, unlike in later recessions, and many temporarily laid off workers
qualified for unemployment insurance benefits. Since few temporary layoff spells last more than a full year, and
given that our mass-layoff definition excludes temporary firm-level fluctuations, temporary layoffs play little role in
our job displacement measure. For similar reasons, temporary layoffs have little impact on the annual job
destruction measures.

	  

8	  

quarterly Initial UI Claims series in Figure 1, except that the monthly rates are summed
from April of the previous year through March of the indicated year.
4. [Right Axis] Job displacement is the rate of job loss in mass-layoff events among male
workers 50 years or younger with at least 3 years of prior job tenure, expressed as a
percent of all male employees 50 or younger with at least 3 years of tenure at firms with
at least 50 employees in the same age range.
5. A mass-layoff event is one in which a firm with at least 50 employees (prior to the event)
experiences a lasting employment decline of at least 30% over two years. Mass layoffs
include employment contractions up to 99%, but exclude instances in which the
Employer Identification Number (EIN) disappears. See the text for further discussion. By
a “lasting” decline from, say, y-2 to y, we mean one in which EIN employment at y+1 is
no more than 90 percent of employment of its employment at y-2. Similarly, we require
that EIN employment grow by no more than 30% from y-3 to y-2.
6. The displacement rate is calculated using administrative data from W2 earnings records
as in von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011) and described in the text.
The incidence of job displacement might seem modest in any given year, but it cumulates
to a large number during severe downturns. For example, summing the job displacement rates in
Figure 2 from 1980 to 1985 yields a cumulative displacement rate of more than 20%.11 This
figure translates to about 2.7 million job displacement events over the six-year period among
men 50 years or younger with 3 or more years of prior job tenure, and working in industries with
continuous SSA coverage. This figure is conservative, given our restrictive criteria for masslayoff events. According to the Displaced Worker Supplement to the CPS, 6.9 million persons
with at least 3 years of prior tenure lost jobs due to layoffs from 2007 to 2009 (BLS, 2011). This
figure includes women and does not impose our mass-layoff criteria. BLS also reports that an
additional 8.5 million persons were displaced in 2007-2009 from jobs held less than 3 years.
Figure 3 shows displacement rates for men with 3-5 years of prior job tenure and with 6
or more years. We impose the same requirements for age, firm size, industry coverage, and
mass-layoff events as before. Displacement rates are considerably higher for those with 3-5
years of tenure and more cyclically sensitive in the relatively shallow recessions of the early
1990s and early 2002. These patterns conform to the view that workers with lower job tenure
face greater exposure to negative firm-specific and aggregate shocks.

Figure 4 shows

displacement rates for men in three broad age groups. The basic pattern is clear: younger men
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11

In calculating this figure, we allow the at-risk population to change from year to year. For some purposes, it is
more appropriate to consider the cumulative displacement rate for a fixed at-risk population. Consider, for example,
the population of male workers younger than 50 with 3 or more years of job tenure at firms with at least 50
employees as of 1979, and working in industries with continuous SSA coverage. 16% of this fixed population
experienced a job displacement event from 1980 to 1985 by our criteria.

	  

9	  

tend to be more exposed to negative firm-specific and aggregate shocks that lead to job
destruction.
Figure 3: Annual Displacement Rates in Mass-Layoff Events by Prior Job Tenure, Men 50
or Younger at Firms with at Least 50 Employees, 1980 to 2005

Notes to Figure 3: See notes 4, 5 and 6 to Figure 2.
Putting Figures 3 and 4 together, higher job tenure and greater labor market experience
afford some insulation from the vicissitudes of firm-level employment fluctuations. However, it
is well worth noting that greater job tenure and experience provide less insulation in the deep
aggregate downturn in the early 1980s. This aspect of Figures 4 and 5 suggests that severe
recessions bite especially deeply into the distribution of valuable employment relationships.
Evidence below on the cyclical behavior of the earnings losses associated with job loss supports
this view as well.

	  

10	  

Figure 4: Annual Displacement Rates in Mass-Layoff Events by Age Group, Men at Firms
with at Least 50 Employees, 1980 to 2005

Notes to Figure 4: See notes 4, 5 and 6 to Figure 2.
3. The Long-Term Earnings Effects of Job Displacement
a. Previous Research
A growing body of research finds that job displacements lead to large, persistent earnings
losses. Most studies estimate the causal effect as the earnings change before and after job loss
relative to the contemporaneous earnings change of comparable workers who did not lose jobs.
Studies differ somewhat in how they measure job loss and how they define the control group of
non-displaced workers.
Following earlier research, VSM define job displacement as the separation of a “stable”
worker from his main employer during a period when the employer experiences a lasting
employment decline of at least 30%. A stable worker is one with at least three years of
consecutive earnings at the firm prior to the displacement event. VSM also require the employer
to have at least 50 employees in the baseline period before the mass layoff. They exclude
workers in 2-digit industries not covered by SSA in the early 1980s, chiefly the public sector.
	  

11	  

VSM compare the evolution of annual earnings for displaced workers with that of a control
group of similar workers who did not separate in the displacement year or the next two years.
They find that displacements in the early 1980s led to average annual earnings losses relative to
the control group of more than 30% of pre-displacement annual earnings.

Despite some

recovery over time, even after 20 years the earnings of displaced workers remain 15-20% below
the level implied by control group earnings.
The short- to medium-run effects of job displacement are larger in depressed areas and
sectors. For example, using information on earnings and employers from unemployment
insurance records and a comparable definition of job displacement, Jacobson, Lalonde, and
Sullivan (1993) [henceforth JLS] find that job displacement in Pennsylvania in the early 1980s
led on average to earnings losses of more than 50%. Even five years after displacement, JLS find
losses of 30% relative to the pre-displacement mean. These losses do not substantially fade even
10 years after job displacement (von Wachter and Sullivan, 2009). Schoeni and Dardia (2003)
and Kodrzycki (2007) find similar results for job displacement in manufacturing industries in the
mild recession of the early 1990s in California and Massachusetts, respectively.
Earnings losses are large and long lasting even in regions and periods with stronger labor
markets. For example, Couch and Placzek (2010) examine job displacement using quarterly
earnings data from unemployment insurance records in Connecticut in the 1990s. They find that
high-tenure workers suffer persistent losses in earnings up to five years after a job displacement.
Similarly, JLS show that workers displaced in Pennsylvania counties with below-average
unemployment rates and above-average employment growth fare significantly better than the
average worker, but still suffer earnings losses. VSM find substantial earnings losses for job
displacements during the late-1980s expansion that fade only after 15 years. Studies using
longitudinal survey data to compare earnings of job losers to a control group, which typically do
not focus on depressed areas or periods, also find large earnings and wage losses that persist up
to five to ten years (e.g., Topel, 1990, Ruhm, 1991, and Stevens, 1997).
The findings from administrative data pertain to annual or quarterly earnings. Hence, the
earnings losses potentially arise from reductions in both employment and wages. However, the
earnings loss for the median worker in the sample is about as large, and more persistent, than the
mean loss (VSM, Schoeni and Dardia, 2003). This result and survey-based evidence that
employment reductions after a job loss tend to be temporary, and that most job losers returning

	  

12	  

to the labor force find full-time jobs (e.g., Farber 1999), suggest that the bulk of earnings losses
after job displacement reflects a reduction in wage rates or hours worked per employed.
One natural question about studies based on administrative data is how the earnings loss
results depend on the definition of job displacement, the choice of control groups and the
specification of mass-layoff events. VSM find that their results survive the use of alternative
firm size thresholds, different definitions of mass layoffs, alternative employment stability
requirements for control groups, and other robustness checks. von Wachter, Handwerker, and
Hildreth (2008) obtain similar results using control groups constructed from workers in similar
firms and industries. Studies based on panel survey data that do not impose restrictions on firm
size or firm events yield results for earnings similar to results based on administrative data.
Overall, a central finding in previous research is that job displacement leads to large and
long-lasting earnings losses, especially under weak labor market conditions. This observation
suggests that workers who have experienced job displacement events since 2008 are likely to
experience unusually severe and persistent earnings losses. Direct evidence on the losses of
recently displaced workers is limited, in part because of lags in processing and analyzing
administrative data sources. The latest Displaced Worker Supplement (DWS) to the Current
Population Survey, conducted in January 2010, contains recall data for workers displaced from
2007 to 2009. Given the absence of a control group, the inability to incorporate earnings losses
due to employment reductions, and the presence of measurement error in wages and job loss
events, DWS data tend to show lower earnings losses than studies based on administrative data
(von Wachter, Handwerker, and Hildreth 2008). However, even the DWS data implies
substantial earnings losses for persons who lost jobs from 2007 to 2009. Based on DWS data,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011) reports that only 49% of workers displaced in 2007-2009
with 3 or more years of prior job tenure are currently employed, and that among the reemployed,
36% report current earnings at least 20% lower than on the previous job.
The earnings losses associated with job displacement are large and persistent for both
women and men and in all major industries. Older workers tend to have larger immediate losses
than younger workers. Relative to a control group of similar age, however, the earnings losses of
younger displaced workers are non-negligible and persist over twenty years (VSM). Earnings
losses tend to rise with tenure on the job, industry or occupation (e.g., Kletzer 1989, Neal 1995,
Poletaev and Robinson, 2008). Yet, losses for workers with 3 to 5 years of job tenure are

	  

13	  

substantial and long lasting, and even workers with less than three years of job tenure experience
non-negligible declines in annual earnings following a job displacement event (VSM).
b. Estimated Earnings Losses Associated with Job Displacement
We now follow VSM in estimating the earnings effects of job displacement and their
sensitivity to economic conditions at the time of displacement. We define job displacement as in
Section 2 – the separation of high-tenure men, 50 years or younger, from firms with at least 50
employees at baseline in mass-layoff events. We also provide some results for women and older
men. To estimate the effects of job displacement, we compare the earnings path of workers who
experience job displacement to the path of similar workers who did not separate during the same
time period, while controlling for individual fixed effects and differential earnings trends.
We implement this comparison by estimating the following distributed-lag model
separately for each displacement year y from 1980 onwards:
!"

!!"!

=

!!!

+

!!!

+

!!! !!!

!
!!! !!"! + !!"

+ ! ! !!" +

(1)

!!!!

where the outcome variable eit is real annual earnings of individual i in year t in 2000 dollars
y
(using the Consumer Price Index), !!! are coefficients on worker fixed effects, γ t are

coefficients on calendar year fixed effects, X it is a quartic polynomial in the age of worker i at t,
and the error !!" represents random factors. To allow further differences in annual earnings
increments by a worker’s initial level of earnings, the specification includes differential year
y
effects that vary proportionally to the worker’s average earnings, ei , in the five years prior to

the displacement year. The !!"! are dummy variables equal to one in the worker’s k-th year
before or after his displacement, and zero otherwise.
We estimate (1) by displacement year using annual individual-level observations in the
SSA data from 1974 to 2008. The sample for displacement year y contains data on workers
displaced in y, y+1 and y+2 plus data on workers in a control group described below.12 The
evolution of earnings of the control group over time helps identify the year effects γ ty and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12

We include displacements that occur in y+1 and y+2 in the sample for displacement year y to raise the number of
observations on displaced workers, and to align the inclusion windows for displaced and control group workers.
Note that this approach smooths the estimated earnings effects of job displacement from one displacement year to
the next, which works against finding differences between recessions and expansions.

	  

14	  

y
!!! .    Given the presence of the year effects and worker fixed effects in (1), the coefficients δ k on

the dummies Ditk measure the time path of earnings changes for job separators from six years
before and up to 20 years after a displacement -- relative to the baseline and relative to the
change in earnings of the control group.13 The baseline consists of years seven and eight before
y
displacement.14 To interpret the estimated effects δ k as the causal effect of job displacement on

earnings requires that, conditional on worker fixed effects and the other control variables, the
counterfactual earnings of displaced workers in the absence of job displacement is captured by
workers in the control group. To obtain the counterfactual earnings path of a displaced worker i
absent displacement, we evaluate (1) at Ditk =0 for all k.
For workers displaced in year y, the control group consists of workers not separating
from in y, y+1, and y+2 (‘non separators’). Hence, as typical in the literature on job displacement
based on administrative data, we exclude so-called ‘non-mass layoff separators’ from y to y+2
from the control group. Non-mass layoff separators comprise workers who quit their jobs and
workers laid off by firms with an employment drop of less than 30%. We impose the same
restrictions with restrict to firm size, worker age and job tenure, gender, and industry as for
displaced workers. We discuss the impact of alternative control groups and concerns related to
potential selection bias in the earnings loss estimates in Section 3.d below.
Figure 5 reports results for men 50 or younger with at least 3 years of prior job tenure as
of the displacement year. To obtain average earnings losses for job displacements in expansions
and recessions, we average over estimated values of δ ky in recession and expansion years,
respectively. If a peak or trough falls inside a given calendar year, we weight the year according
to the number of its months in expansion or recession when computing the averages. Panel A
shows these average earnings loss profiles relative to the mean earnings of displaced workers,
normalized to reflect changes relative to mean earnings in years t-4 to t-1 prior to displacement.
Panel B shows the average time paths of mean raw earnings before and after displacement for
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13

Since our sample window stops in 2008, for displacement years after 1988 we do not observe 20 years of earnings
data after a displacement. For these years, the post-displacement dummies are included up to the maximum possible
number of years.
14
For 1980 (1981), the baseline is years five and six (six and seven) before displacement. We also drop the dummy
variable for the first calendar year in each regression. These zero restrictions, two for the baseline and one for the
first calendar year, resolve the potential collinearity among the dummy variables in (1).

	  

15	  

workers displaced in recessions and expansions. Panel C in Figure 5 shows the Panel A losses as
a fraction of pre-displacement mean earnings.
Earnings losses at displacement relative to the control group are very large initially, 40%
in the first year after displacement for displacements that occur in recessions and 23% for
displacements that occur in expansions. They are also long lasting. The average earnings losses
are about 20% from 10 to 20 years out for displacements that occur in recessions and about 10%
for those that occur in expansions. These estimates are robust to many specification checks, as
discussed below and in VSM. For example, the earnings losses are similar if one defines a masslayoff event as a firm-level employment decline of at least 80%. They are slightly larger for
workers with 6 years or more of job tenure (the main comparison group of JLS and others), and
slightly smaller for workers with 3 to 5 years of job tenure.
Figure 6 plots estimated short-term earnings losses against the national unemployment
rate in the year of displacement. The definition of short-term loss in this figure is the earnings
loss in t+2 for a job displacement in t, as estimated from equation (1), divided by displaced
workers’ pre-displacement mean earnings in years t-4 to t-1. The figure displays a clear inverse
relationship. If we regress the percentage loss on the unemployment rate at displacement, we
obtain an R2 of 0.22 and a slope coefficient of -0.022 (standard error of 0.008). That is, a rise in
the unemployment rate from 5% to 9% at the time of displacement implies that the earnings loss
in the third year of displacement increases from 18% to 26% of average annual pre-displacement
earnings.

Since the earnings recovery pattern in Figure 5C is approximately parallel in

expansions and recessions, Figure 6 suggests that the state of the labor market at displacement
sets the initial level of losses, from which a gradual recovery occurs. We will use this result
when calculating PDV earnings losses.

	  

16	  

Figure 5A: Average Annual Earnings Before and After Job Displacement Relative to
Control Group Earnings, Men 50 or Younger with at Least 3 Years of Job Tenure

Figure 5B: Average Annual Earnings Before and After Job Displacement, Men 50 or
Younger with at Least 3 Years of Job Tenure

	  

17	  

Figure 5C: Average Annual Earnings Losses Before and After Job Displacement Relative
to Control Group Earnings As Percentage of Pre-Displacement Earnings, Men 50 or
Younger with At Least 3 Years of Job Tenure

Notes to Figures 5A, 5B and 5C:
1. Year 1 on the horizontal axis is the displacement year. Year 0 is the last year of earnings
from the main employer before displacement.
2. Panels A show average annual earnings losses relative to pre-displacement earnings for
male workers, 50 years or younger at the time of displacement, with 3 or more years of
tenure prior to job loss. The earnings losses reflect differences in the path of mean
annual earnings between displaced workers and control group workers. Panel B, which
does not involve a control group comparison, shows average annual earnings rather than
earnings losses. Panel C shows the figures of Panel A, divided by pre-displacement
average annual earnings from t-4 to t-1.
3. One curve in each panel shows average outcomes for workers displaced in recession
years from 1980 to 2005, and the other shows average outcomes for those displaced in
expansion years. When a given displacement year straddles recession and expansion
periods, we apportion that year’s values based on its number of months in each category.
For example, if 3 months of the year are in recession, we allocate its values to recession
and expansion categories with weights 0.25 and 0.75, respectively.
4. The earnings losses in Panels A and C for each year before and after displacement is the
difference in average annual earnings (including zeros) for workers who separate from
their main employers in mass-layoffs events, expressed as a difference relative to a predisplacement baseline from t-4 to t-1 and relative to workers who did not separate from
employers. The underlying regression includes controls for worker effects, calendar year
effects, age, and interacts calendar year fixed-effects with individual average earnings in

	  

18	  

the five years preceding displacement. The earnings levels in Panel B are constructed in
a similar manner. See the text discussion of equation (1) for additional details.
5. The earnings losses and levels are estimated using administrative data on W2 earnings
following von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011), as described in the text.
Figure 6: Annual Earnings Losses in the Third Year of Job Displacement vs. National
Unemployment Rate in the Year of Job Displacement, Men with at Least 3 Years of Job
Tenure Prior to Displacement

Notes:
1. The figure shows the loss in annual earnings (including zeros) for high-tenure workers
displaced in mass-layoff events three years of displacement, expressed as a fraction of
displaced workers’ mean annual earnings in the four years before displacement. The
figure plots this earnings loss measure against the unemployment rate in the year of
displacement. High-tenure workers are those with 3 or more years of job tenure in the
year before the mass-layoff event.
2. Data point labels in the figure refer to the year of displacement and the year of the
unemployment rate.
3. The earnings loss is calculated using administrative earnings data from W2 earnings
records used in von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011) and described in the text.
c. Present Value Earnings Losses Associated with Job Displacement
Figures 5 and 6 point to large PDV earnings losses associated with job displacement and
large differences between the PDV losses of displacements that occur in expansions versus those
that occur in recessions. To derive estimates of PDV earnings losses from the annual earnings
losses before and after job displacement shown in Figure 5, we proceed as follows. Using a real
	  

19	  

interest rate of 5%, we sum the discounted losses over a 20-year period starting with the year of
displacement. Since we do not observe the full 20 years of earnings after a job displacement for
workers displaced in later years, we impose a common rate of decay past the tenth year. Hence,
the estimated PDV of earnings losses in, say, a recession can be written as
!
!"#!"##
=

!
!"
!
!!! !! (!!!)!!!

+

!!!"
!"
! (!!!)
!!!! !!" (!!!)!!!

(2)

R
where δ s is the average estimated earnings losses of displacements occurring in recessions in

year s after job displacement (derived by averaging the results for equation (1) over different
!
displacement years), and !!"
(1 − !) !!!" is the extrapolated earnings loss using the rate of decay

λ . The evolution of earnings losses is roughly parallel for displacements in expansions and
recessions, so we use the average decay rate of earnings losses over all periods. If the rate of
decay is faster in booms, this choice understates the cyclical differences in the cost of job loss.
In principle, we could use the actual earnings path for those displacement cohorts that we
follow more than ten years after job loss. In practice, however, as the sample of workers
displaced in a given year ages and labor force participation declines, the estimates for long after
the displacement year may be affected by changes in composition and greater sampling error in
smaller samples. Similarly, using actual estimates for the long-run follow up period may put
weight on cohorts that have particularly long-lasting effects. Given our aim to approximate the
average PDV loss for a typical worker in boom and recession years, we chose a common decay
rate for all displacement cohorts. To smooth out sampling variability in the recovery pattern and
to maximize the number of available cohorts, we calculate the decay rate as the average of
annualized log differences in earnings losses from years 6 to 10 to years 11 to 15 after
displacement. This approach balances the influence of displacements in the early 1990s, which
reflect a strong recovery in the high-pressure labor market of the mid to late 1990s, and the
influence of displacements in other periods.
Since earnings levels change over time and may differ between displacements that occur
in expansions and recessions, we consider three ways of normalizing the absolute earnings
losses. First, we scale the PDV earnings loss by displaced workers’ mean annual earnings in
years t-4 through t-1 prior to displacement. This approach expresses the PDV loss as the number
of earnings years lost at the previous level of earnings. Second, we express the PDV earnings
loss as percent of the average pre-displacement earnings from t-4 to t-1. Third, we express the

	  

20	  

PDV earnings losses as a percentage of PDV earnings along the counterfactual earnings path in
the absence of displacement. To do so, we first construct a counterfactual earnings path absent
job displacement by adding the absolute value of the estimated earnings loss (Panel A of Figure
5) back to the actual level of average earnings (Panel B of Figure 5). In the notation of equation
(1), for workers displaced in each year y we thereby effectively obtain etcf , y = α y + γ ty + β y X ty .
Using the mean earnings of displaced workers as a benchmark ensures that we average over the
right worker fixed effects and obtain the right earnings levels. We then take the average of the
counterfactual in years belonging to NBER recessions and expansions, respectively.15 Using
these averages, we divide the PDV earnings loss by the resulting PDV of counterfactual earnings
in booms and recession, respectively.
Table 1 reports these alternative measures of the PDV earnings loss after a job
displacement – again for men 50 years or younger with at least three prior years of positive
earnings at an employer with at least 50 workers. The definition of displacement is the same as
in Figure 5. The first row shows estimated PDV earnings losses, averaged over all displacement
years. The average PDV earnings loss is about $77,557 (Column1), which amounts to 1.71 times
average annual pre-displacement earnings (column 2) and 11.9% of the PDV of counterfactual
earnings absent job displacement (Column 3).
The next two rows of the table show our measures of PDV earnings losses separately for
expansions and recessions. As anticipated from Figure 5, the PDV losses are much larger in
recessions than expansions. A worker displaced in a recession experiences PDV losses of
$109,567, which amounts to 2.50 years of average pre-displacement earnings, and to 18.6%
decline relative to counterfactual earnings absent displacement. In contrast, the PDV of earnings
losses experienced by workers displaced in an expansion is $72,487, which amounts to 1.59 of
pre-displacement earnings. In short, job displacements lead to very large declines in PDV
earnings, and the loss is much larger for displacements that occur in recessions.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

Similarly, we calculate the corresponding mean of actual annual earnings before and after displacement by first

obtaining the average for each displacement year,

etact ., y , and then averaging over the years belonging to

expansions and recessions.

	  

21	  

Table 1. Magnitude and Cyclicality of Present Value Earnings Losses Associated with
Displacement in Mass-Layoff Events from 1980 to 2005, Men 50 or Younger with at Least
Three Years of Job Tenure Before Displacement
(1)

(2)

(3)

Present Discounted Value
(PDV) of Average Loss at
Job Displacement

Ratio of PDV
of Loss and
PDV of
Fraction of
Multiple of Counterfactual
Earnings in
Years
PreAbsence of
Covered by Dollar Value Displacement
Displacement
Row
Annual
Category
Earnings
Average All Years

--

-77,557

-1.71

-11.9

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

0.88

-72,487

-1.59

-11.0

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

0.12

-109,567

-2.50

-18.6

UR< 5%

0.23

-50,953

-1.06

-9.9

5%<=UR<6%

0.35

-71,460

-1.56

-10.9

6%<=UR<7%

0.13

-71,006

-1.58

-10.7

7%<=UR<8%

0.21

-89,792

-2.07

-14.4

UR>=8%

0.08

-121,982

-2.82

-19.8

Average in Years with:

Notes:
1. See note 5 to Figure 2 and Section 2 of the text for definition of mass-layoff events.
2. To compute the entries in this table, we averaged earnings losses by displacement year
from VSM (2011) over recession and expansion years. When a given displacement year
straddles recession and expansion periods or multiple unemployment intervals, we
apportion that year’s values based on its number of months in each category. For
	  

22	  

example, if 3 months of the year are in recession, we allocate its values to recession and
expansion categories with weights 0.25 and 0.75, respectively.
3. We calculate the estimated PV earnings losses over 20 years after job displacement, using
a 5 percent annual discount rate. See text for an explanation of how we impute earnings
losses in the out years for which we lack direct estimates.
Recall from Figure 1 that the incidence of job displacement is also much greater in
recessions. Given that displacements have more severe consequences in recessions, the unweighted averages over years in row 1 understate average PDV earnings losses taken over
displaced workers.16 Similarly, because we weight all recession years equally, while recessions
with higher displacement rates also involve higher earnings losses, Table 1 understates the
average PDV earnings losses taken over job displacements that occur in recessions.
The lower panel of Table 1 shows how estimated PDV earnings losses vary by the
unemployment rate in the year of displacement. The unemployment rate reflects
contemporaneous labor market conditions at the time of displacement in a different way than
NBER business cycle dating. As before, to calculate the table entries, we first estimate PDV
earnings losses by year of displacement. In a second step, we average over all years falling into
an indicated unemployment range, assigning fractional weights to years that fall partly into a
given range. The results show that PDV earnings losses rise steeply with the unemployment rate
in the year of job displacement. This important finding strongly reinforces and extends the
evidence in Figure 6.
To take this result one step further, we repeat our procedure for calculating PDV earnings
losses by year of displacement. We now depart from working with averages over multiple
displacement years and consider a separate earnings loss path for each displacement year. When
we have more than ten years of post-displacement information, we use the first ten years and
extrapolate from year 11 to 20 using the same average rate of decay as before. When we have
less than ten years of post-displacement information (i.e., starting in 1999), we also use the
available information for other years to construct decay rates in the earlier post-displacement
years, say 6 to 10 years after displacement. For years closer to the end of our sample period, we
necessarily rely more heavily on extrapolation.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16

Row 1 in the Table 1 effectively gives less weight to persons displaced in recessions as compared to those
displaced in expansions.

	  

23	  

Figure 7 plots the resulting PDV earnings losses (expressed as multiples of average
annual pre-displacement earnings) against the unemployment rate in the year of displacement.
The figure again shows an approximately linear relationship, which is not surprising given the
roughly linear relationship in Figure 6 and our use of a common decay rate beyond the tenth year
after displacement. Even allowing for different post-displacement recovery patterns, the figure
suggests that PDV earnings losses increase approximately linearly with the unemployment rate
in the year of displacement. A linear regression of the PDV loss measure on the unemployment
rate in the year of displacement yields an R2 of 0.27 with a slope coefficient of -0.23 (0.08).
Thus, an increase from 5% to 9% in the unemployment rate at displacement implies that PDV
earnings losses rise from 1.6 to 2.5 years of pre-displacement earnings. When we add the NBER
recession indicator to this descriptive regression model, it is not statistically significant.

1995
1996

1998
1999

1994

-1.5

1997
1990

2000

1991

1993
1985
1986

1989

-2

2002

1987

1984

2003

1980

1981

2005

-3

1992

1988

2001

-2.5

PDV Earnings Loss/Initial Wage

-1

Figure 7: Present Discounted Value of Earnings Losses By Year of Displacement vs.
Unemployment Rate in Year of Displacement, Men with At Least 3 of Job Tenure Prior to
Displacement

1983
1982

2004

4

6
8
Unemployment Rate at Displacement

10

Notes:
1. The present discounted value of earnings losses are defined as in Table 1. For each year
of displacement, we compute the discounted sum of earnings losses in the first 20 years
after a job displacement using a discount rate of 5%. To extrapolate for years beyond our

	  

24	  

sample window, we use the average rate of decay in the respective ranges of years after
job displacement observed in the remainder of the sample.
2. The earnings losses are calculated using administrative earnings data from W2 earnings
records used in von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011) and described in the text.
Table 2 shows PDV earnings losses for men with at least 6 years of tenure, for women,
and for four age groups.17 The PDV earnings losses due to job displacement are large for all
groups. Comparing Tables 1 and 2, the losses are larger for men with higher job tenure prior to
displacement.

They are smaller for women, but not dramatically so once we control for

differences in average earnings levels between men and women. For example, the average losses
for women 50 or younger with 3 or more years of prior job tenure amount to 1.5 years of predisplacement earnings (Table 2), as compared to 1.7 years for the corresponding group of men
(Table 1). Except for workers displaced near the end of their working lives, PDV earnings losses
are much larger for displacements that occur in recessions.
d. On Selection Bias and Sensitivity to Control Group Choice
We now discuss two potential concerns about the earnings loss estimates that underlie
our results in Figures 5 to 7 and Tables 1 and 2: selection bias and the sensitivity of our results to
the choice of control group. Relative to non-separators (our control group), non-mass layoff
separators experience earnings losses that are smaller and less persistent than the losses
experienced by mass-layoff separators. Thus, if we include non-mass layoff separators in the
control group, the estimated earnings losses due to job displacement become smaller. VSM
estimate a version of regression (1) with non-mass layoff separators as part of the control group.
This change in the composition of the control group reduces the estimated earnings losses by
about one quarter. VSM also consider instrumental variables estimates that are not affected by
the presence of voluntary separators, which we discuss below, and obtain results very similar to
the ones we report. After considering various estimators, VSM confirm the conclusion in
previous research that the ‘true’ loss at displacement is closer to the estimates that exclude nonmass layoff separators from the control group.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17

	  

The online appendix contains additional results by age group.

25	  

Table 2. Magnitude and Cyclicality of Present Value Earnings Losses Associated with
Displacement in Mass-Layoff Events from 1980 to 2005: Various Subgroups
(1)

Women with 3 or More Years of
Job Tenure at Displacement

Men with 3 or More Years of Job
Tenure and age 21-30 at
Displacement

Men with 3 or More Years of Job
Tenure and age 31-40 at
Displacement

Men with 3 or More Years of Job
Tenure and age 41-50 at
Displacement

Men with 3 or More Years of Job
Tenure and age 51-60 at
Displacement

(3)

Present Discounted Value (PDV)
Ratio of PDV of
of Average Loss at Job
Loss and PDV
Displacement
of
Multiple of Pre- Counterfactual
Earnings in
Displacement
Dollar Value
Absence of
Annual
Displacement
Earnings

Sub-Group
Men with 6 or More Years of Job
Tenure at Displacement

(2)

Average All Years

-106,900

-2.0

-12.9

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-100,543

-1.8

-11.9

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-148,400

-3.0

-20.0

Average All Years

-38,033

-1.5

-10.9

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-33,164

-1.3

-9.5

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-68,782

-3.3

-20.6

Average All Years

-50,240

-1.6

-9.8

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-39,639

-1.3

-7.8

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-117,322

-3.7

-22.0

Average All Years

-49,599

-1.2

-7.7

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-42,555

-1.1

-6.5

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-93,833

-2.5

-16.0

Average All Years

-98,519

-1.9

-15.9

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-95,716

-1.8

-15.1

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-116,515

-2.8

-21.9

Average All Years

-99,288

-2.4

-24.0

Avg. in NBER Expansion Years

-97,934

-2.3

-23.1

Avg. in NBER Recession Years

-108,248

-3.2

-31.1

Notes to Table 2 :
1. See notes to Table 1. This table differs from Table 1 in its focus on different groups of
workers.
2. For workers displaced up to age 40, we calculate the present discounted value over the
following 20 years. For workers displaced age 40-50 (50-60), we calculate it over 15 (10)
years.
Estimates based on equation (1) may overstate earnings losses at displacement because
displaced workers are negatively selected on observable and unobservable characteristics with
respect to the control group. VSM conduct an in-depth investigation of this question, and
conclude that earnings losses based on equation (1) are robust to a range of important sensitivity
checks. The presence of worker fixed-effects in equation (1) implies that selection based on fixed
worker attributes with a time-invariant effect on earnings poses no problem. However, different
trends in counterfactual earnings between displaced workers and the control group may
introduce a bias. For example, it is well known that there have been differential earnings growth
rates in different parts of the earnings distribution (e.g., Autor and Katz, 1999). Since displaced
workers have lower average earnings prior to displacement than non-displaced workers, our
regression models include interactions between average earnings in the five years prior to
displacement and fixed effects for calendar years. VSM also present estimates that include
differential trends by two-digit industry and by other observable characteristics of workers and
firms prior to displacement. The estimates are reasonably robust to these modifications, and only
decline somewhat when including industry-specific trends.
However, ex-ante differences in unobservable characteristics between treatment and
control groups can still lead to differential counterfactual earnings trends. In this respect, VSM
address two types of selection – within and between employers. To address the concern that
displaced workers are negatively selected on potential unobserved earnings trends within firms,
VSM replicate equation (1) using the mass-layoff event at the firm level as an instrumental
variable for displacement. That is, they use a dummy for the year of the mass layoff at the firm,

D kf (i )t , where f(i) is the worker’s employer, to instrument for the dummy of the individual layoff
( Ditk ). Hence, the comparison is now between the earnings of all workers at firms undergoing
mass layoffs and the evolution of earnings among all workers at non-mass layoff firms. Using
this type of firm-level indicator to instrument for displacement, and controlling for differential
trends by pre-mass layoff characteristics at the firm level, VSM obtain results very similar to
	  

27	  

those based on (1). This IV estimator is also robust to the presence of non-mass layoff separators,
since the instrument should be orthogonal to the rate of retirement or voluntary mobility.
To also address the potential concern that workers with lower potential earnings trends
sort into firms more likely to experience mass layoffs, VSM follow previous work and consider a
version of (1) that includes firm fixed effects. This specification yields somewhat smaller
estimated earnings losses, because the losses of workers remaining at firms with mass layoffs are
now subtracted from the losses of displaced workers. It is not clear whether the decline in
earnings for those remaining at mass-layoff firms should be subtracted or treated as part of the
outcome. In any event, the estimated earnings losses remain substantial and very persistent.
VSM conclude that estimates based on (1), on which we rely, are robust to a range of important
sensitivity checks. Hence, despite some variation in the final magnitude of the loss depending on
the exact specification, we believe our calculations based on estimated versions of (1) accurately
capture the magnitude and persistence of earnings losses caused by job displacement.
4. Other Costs of Job Displacement and Unemployment
Section 3 focuses on earnings losses associated with displacement events. We turn now
to the effects of job displacement on other outcomes such as consumption, health, mortality and
children’s achievement. We also present new evidence on cyclical movements in worker
anxieties and perceptions about the risk of job loss and the ease or difficulty of job finding.
a. Effects on Income, Consumption and Employment Stability
It is not easy to estimate the effects of job displacement on consumption and income.
Few, if any, data sets that track large numbers of workers over time contain high-quality
information about consumption outcomes. Likewise, very few data sets that track large numbers
of workers include the requisite data on earnings, asset incomes, and public and private transfer
payments needed to identify income responses to job displacement events. Moreover, transfer
payments are understated greatly in many household surveys that include such information
(Meyer, Mok and Sullivan, 2010).
The few studies that estimate the effects of job loss or unemployment on consumption
typically find sizable near-term declines in consumption expenditures (and lack evidence on
long-term consumption responses). See Gruber (1997) and Stephens (2004), for example. The
consumption responses tend to be concentrated at the lower end of the income distribution

	  

28	  

(Browning and Crossley, 2001, and CBO, 2004). While transfer programs often mitigate the
earnings loss due to job displacement, the replacement amounts are quite modest compared to
our estimates of present value earnings losses. Even the generous, long-lasting benefits available
under the German unemployment insurance system replace only a modest share of the earnings
loss associated with job displacement (Schmieder, von Wachter, and Bender, 2009).
Previous research also finds that job displacement leads to other adverse consequences.
Lasting post-displacement earnings shortfalls occur alongside lower job stability, greater
earnings instability, recurring spells of joblessness, and multiple switches of industry or
occupation (Stevens 1997, VSM). Much of the increased mobility between jobs, industries and
occupations probably reflects privately and socially beneficial adjustments. On average,
however, displaced workers who immediately find a stable job in their pre-displacement industry
obtain significantly higher earnings. Lower job stability and higher earnings volatility persist up
to ten years after displacement. Thus, there is no indication that laid-off workers trade a lower
earnings level for a more stable path of employment and earnings.
b. Effects on Health, Mortality, Emotional Well-Being and Family
There is also evidence that displaced workers suffer short- and long-term declines in
health. Survey-based research in epidemiology finds that layoffs and unemployment spells
involve a higher incidence of stress-related health problems such as strokes and heart attacks
(e.g., Burgard, Brand, and House 2007).
While studies of self-reported health and job loss outcomes face significant challenges
related to measurement error and recall and selection bias, the analysis of mortality outcomes
lends itself to the use of large administrative data sources. Sullivan and von Wachter (2010)
study the effects of job displacement on mortality outcomes for 20 years following displacement.
They use administrative data on earnings and employers from the Pennsylvania unemployment
insurance system and mortality data from the Social Security Administration. Their results show
that mature men who lost stable jobs in Pennsylvania during the early 1980s experienced nearterm increases in mortality rates of up to 100%. The initial impact on mortality falls over time,
but it remains significantly higher for job losers than for comparable workers throughout the 20year post-displacement period covered by their study. If sustained until the end of life, the higher
mortality rates for displaced workers imply a reduction in life expectancy of 1 to 1.5 years.

	  

29	  

Because the 1980s recession was especially deep in Pennsylvania and involved unusually
large earnings losses for displaced workers, the mortality effects estimated by Sullivan and von
Wachter (2010) reflect a very bad-case scenario. It is reasonable to expect smaller mortality
effects of job displacements in most other years and places. Unfortunately, U.S. labor market
conditions in the past three years have also been dismal, with persistently high unemployment
rates. In that respect, the mortality estimates in Sullivan and von Wachter may well provide a
suitable guide to mortality effects for recently displaced American workers. The available
evidence indicates that job displacement also raises mortality rates in countries with public
health insurance systems and generous social welfare systems, for example in Sweden (Eliason
and Storrie 2009) and Norway (Rege, Telle, and Votruba 2009). These studies find higher
mortality rates in the years following job displacement, but they contain little information about
long-term effects.
Several studies point to short- and long-term effects of layoffs on the children and families
of job losers and unemployed workers. In the short run, parental job loss reduces schooling
achievement of children (Stevens and Schaller, 2009). In the long run, it appears that a lasting
reduction in the earnings of fathers reduces the earnings prospects of their sons (Oreopoulos,
Page, and Stevens 2008). Wrightman (2009) also finds that parental job loss is harmful for the
educational attainment and cognitive development of children. Other studies find that layoffs
raise divorce incidence, reduce fertility, reduce home ownership, and increase the rate of
application to and entry into disability insurance programs.18 Last but not least, and perhaps not
surprisingly given the magnitude and range of adverse consequences discussed above, job loss
and unemployment also lead to a reduction in happiness and life satisfaction. See, for example,
Frey and Stutzer (2002).
Clearly, care should be taken in drawing welfare conclusions and policy prescriptions
from the range of adverse consequences associated with job displacement. However, this brief
review makes clear that job displacement entails a variety of significant short- and long-run costs
for affected workers and their families. Neither the large present value earnings losses we
estimate nor estimated consumption responses capture the full measure of costs associated with
job displacement.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18

	  

Charles and Stephens (2004); von Wachter and Handwerker (2009); Rupp and Stapleton (1995).

30	  

c. Cyclical Movements in Worker Anxieties and Perceptions
Given the severity of job displacement effects on earnings and other outcome measures, it
is natural to ask how worker anxieties and perceptions about labor market conditions track actual
conditions.

Evidence on this issue is potentially informative in several respects.

First, if

recessions or high unemployment rates cause employed workers to become more fearful about
layoffs and wage cuts, they involve psychological costs beyond the direct effects on job-losing
workers and their families. Second, perceptions about labor market conditions are likely to
influence search behavior by employed and unemployed workers, including those who
experience a displacement event. Third, high levels of worker anxiety about labor market
conditions are likely to undermine consumer confidence and depress consumption
expenditures.19 Fourth, perceptions about labor market conditions have important influences on
policymaking, politics and electoral outcomes. Because they potentially influence so many
voters, anxieties about labor market conditions may have more important political consequences
than actual conditions.
For a long-running source of data on perceptions about labor market conditions, we turn
to the General Source Survey (GSS). The GSS is a repeated cross-sectional household survey
conducted since 1972. It includes two categorical response questions that are useful for gauging
cyclical movements in perceptions about labor market conditions. One question asks the
respondent about the perceived likelihood that he or she will lose a job or be laid off in the next
12 months. Another question asks about the perceived difficulty of finding a job with the same
income and fringe benefits as the respondent’s current job.
Figure 8 shows, for all available years in the GSS, the percentage of prime age workers
who consider it “very likely” or “fairly likely” to lose a job or be laid off in the next 12 months.
We plot these values against CPS unemployment rates in 5-month windows that bracket the GSS
interview months. There is a strong, positive relationship between the perceived likelihood of
job loss and the actual unemployment rate. According to the fitted relationship in Figure 8, an
increase in the prime age unemployment rate from 4% to 8% raises from 10 to 15 the percentage

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

Stevens (2004) provides survey-based evidence that subjective assessments of job loss probabilities have
considerable predictive power for future layoffs at the individual level, even when conditioning on standard
demographic variables that are correlated with layoff risks. Nevertheless, his main empirical specification yields no
evidence of a relationship between job loss expectations and household consumption conditional upon losing a job.

	  

31	  

of prime age workers who perceive job loss as fairly or very likely. The online appendix shows
a very similar pattern for all employed workers 18-64 years of age.
Figure 8. Perceived Likelihood of Job Loss or Layoff in the Next 12 Months, All Available
Years in the General Social Survey from 1977 to 2010

Notes:
1. Tabulations of micro data in the General Social Survey and published data on seasonally
adjusted unemployment rates in the Current Population Survey. We report the weighted
percent of GSS respondents that considers it “very likely” or “fairly likely” to lose a job
or be laid off in the next 12 months.
2. Prime age workers are employed adults between 25 and 54 years of age, excluding
active-duty armed forces, persons who report self employment as the main job, and
institutionalized persons. We exclude the black oversamples in the GSS in certain years,
and weight JOBLOSE responses using the WTTSALL variable.
3. The GSS interviews take place in February, March and April of selected years. Data on
the perceived probability of job loss are available for 1977, 1978, 1982, 1983, 1985,
1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993 and every two years from 1994. We use
unemployment rates from January to May in each survey year, which extends one month
on either side of the GSS interview period.
Figure 9 shows the percent of prime age workers who perceive it to be “Not Easy” to find
a job with income and fringe benefits similar to those in their current jobs. As before, we plot
these values against contemporaneous unemployment rates. Again, there is a strong relationship
between perceived and actual labor market conditions. According to the fitted relationship in
	  

32	  

Figure 9, an increase in the prime age unemployment rate from 4% to 8% raises from 31 to 47
the percentage of prime age workers who regard it as hard to find another job with a comparable
compensation package. In this regard, it is also worth noting that quit rates are highly procyclical – see, for example, Davis et al. (2011). Quit rates plummeted in the most recession and
remain extraordinarily low, another indication that workers perceive goods jobs as hard to find.
Figure 9. Perceived Difficulty of Job Finding, All Available Years in the General Social
Survey from 1977 to 2010

Notes:
1. We report the weighted percent of GSS respondents who say it is “Not Easy” to find a
job with the same income and fringe benefits as his or her current job. We weight
JOBFIND responses using the WTTSALL variable.
2. See notes to Figure 8.
Gallup polls provide another long running, consistent source of data on perceived labor
market conditions. The Gallup data cover a shorter time period than the GSS data, but they
pertain to a highly eventful period in terms of economic developments. In addition, one of the
Gallup measures is available at a (roughly) monthly frequency, which is useful for assessing the
shorter-term relationship between perceived and actual conditions. Figure 10 draws on Gallup
data to plot the percent of adult interviewees who respond yes to the following question:
“Thinking about the job situation in American today, would you say that it is now a good time or
a bad time to find a quality job?” As seen in the figure, the percent responding “good time” is
	  

33	  

highly cyclically sensitive. As the labor market tightened, yes responses rose from about 20
percent in early 2003 to nearly 50 percent in the first half of 2007. It then dropped to about 10
percent over the next two years and has remained at very low levels ever since. This evidence
suggests that perceptions about labor market conditions respond rapidly to actual conditions.
Figure 10. Perceived Ability to Find a Quality Job, March 2002 to June 2011

Notes:
1. Based on telephone interviews with random samples of adults, 18 years and older, living
in the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. Gallup conducts the interviews
approximately once per month, and each round of interviews takes place over 3 or 4 days.
We date each survey according to the first day of interviews.
2. The survey question reads as follows: “Thinking about the job situation in American
today, would you say that it is now a god time or a bad time to find a quality job?”
Source: Gallup polling data at www.gallup.com/148121/default.aspx. Click on the link at “View
methodology, full question results, and trend data” to obtain the document titled “Gallup News
Service, June Wave 1, Final Topline”.
Table 3 reports data from Gallup polls conducted during the month of August in 1997
and 2003 to 2011. The table shows a tremendous increase in worker anxiety levels following the

	  

34	  

peak of the financial crisis in the latter part of 2008 and early 2009. There were dramatic jumps
in the percentages of employed adults who express worries that they personally will experience a
cutback in hours, a wage cut, a benefit cut and/or a layoff in the near future. After some
lessening between August 2009 and August 2010, the most recent data for August 2011 show
worker anxiety returning to peak or near-peak levels.
Table 3. Worker Anxiety Rose Sharply in the Wake of the 2008 Financial Crisis and Have
Remained High
Percent of Employed Adults Who Worry that They
Will Experience the Following in the Near Future
Hours Cut Wage Cut Benefit Cut Lay Off
August 1997 15
17
34
20
August 2003 15
17
31
19
August 2004 14
17
28
20
August 2005 13
14
28
15
August 2006 16
19
30
17
August 2007 12
14
29
14
August 2008 14
16
27
15
August 2009 27
32
46
31
August 2010 25
26
39
26
August 2011 30
33
44
30
Source: Reproduced from Gallup Polling data at www.gallup.com/poll/1720/work-workplace.aspx and www.gallup.com/poll/149261/Worries-Job-Cutbacks-Return-Record-Highs.aspx.
Based on polling of workers employed full or part time.
In summary, the evidence presented in Figures 8-10 and Table 3 indicates that worker
perceptions about labor market conditions are closely attuned to actual conditions. The Gallup
polling data, in particular, point to a dramatic deterioration in perceptions about labor market
conditions and prospects after the financial crisis – one that persists to the present day and that
involves widespread concerns about layoff risks, wage and benefit cuts, shorter hours, and the
difficulty of finding a good job. Whether or not these fears show up in realized earnings
outcomes, they involve psychological costs in the form of heightened anxiety levels for a large
segment of the population.

	  

35	  

5. The Effects of Job Loss in Leading Theoretical Models of Unemployment and Labor
Market Dynamics
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) present an equilibrium search and matching model that,
in various formulations, has become the leading framework for analyzing aggregate
unemployment fluctuations. We now evaluate how well certain “MP” models account for our
evidence on the magnitude and cyclicality of the earnings losses associated with job
displacement.20 Some preliminary remarks will set the stage and motivate our particular choice
of models.
a.

MP Models of Unemployment Fluctuations
Shimer (2005) considers a basic version of the MP model with risk-neutral workers and

firms, uniform match quality, Nash bargaining, and a constant rate of job destruction and job
loss. Aggregate shocks drive employer decisions about vacancy posting and fluctuations in job
creation, job finding and unemployment. Shimer shows that the basic MP model delivers too
little volatility in unemployment for reasonable specifications of the aggregate shock process.21
Under Nash bargaining, the equilibrium wage largely absorbs shocks to labor productivity in
the basic model. As a result, realistic shocks have little impact on employer incentives to post
vacancies, and the model generates small equilibrium responses in job-finding rates, hiring and
unemployment. This unemployment volatility puzzle has motivated a great deal of research in
recent years.
One prominent strand of this research stresses the consequences of wage rigidities.22 Hall
and Milgrom (2008), for example, step away from Nash bargaining while retaining privately
efficient compensation and separation outcomes.

They replace Nash bargaining with the

alternating-offer bargaining protocol proposed by Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1986).
The standard Nash wage bargain treats termination of the match opportunity as the threat point.
In contrast, the threat point in Hall and Milgrom’s “credible bargaining” setup is a short delay
followed, with high probability, by a resumption of bargaining. This change in bargaining
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20

There appear to be few previous efforts to evaluate whether equilibrium search and matching models can account
for the earnings losses associated with job displacement. An exception is Den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2000).
Davis (2005) provides some back-of-the-envelope calculations. The loss of earnings potential upon job loss is an
important element in the theoretical model of high European unemployment rates developed by Ljungqvist and
Sargent’s (1998).
21
See also Costain and Reiter (2008).
22
See, for example, Shimer (2004, 2010), Hall (2005), Gertler and Trigari (2009) and Kennan (2009). Mortensen
and Nagypal (2007), Ramey (2008), Pissarides (2009), Burgess and Turon (2010), and Eyigungor (2010), among
others, propose alternative resolutions to the unemployment volatility puzzle.

	  

36	  

regime goes a long way to insulate the equilibrium wage bargain from aggregate shocks and
outside labor market conditions.
A key point is that the cost of a small delay during the bargaining process is less cyclical
than the value of outside opportunities. Hence, closing the basic MP model in the manner of
Hall and Milgrom leads to greater sensitivity of the employer surplus value to aggregate shocks
and bigger responses in vacancies, job-finding rates and unemployment. Hall and Milgrom
show that their specification of the bargaining environment resolves the unemployment
volatility puzzle in a reasonably calibrated version of the basic MP model.
In our analysis below, we adopt Hall and Milgrom’s credible bargaining version of the
basic MP model and two versions with Nash bargaining. We follow this approach for two
reasons. First, Hall and Milgrom offer perhaps the most successful version of the basic MP
model in terms of explaining the cyclical behavior of job-finding rates, vacancies and
unemployment. Second, by comparing the credible bargaining and Nash versions of the model,
we can determine whether a particular form of wage rigidity improves the model’s ability to
account for the facts about earnings losses associated with job loss.
Despite much attention to the basic MP model in recent work, the model misses some
first-order features of labor market fluctuations. The basic MP model cannot reproduce the
recessionary spikes in job destruction, job loss, and unemployment inflows depicted in Figures
1 and 2. Moreover, the model has no role for hires and separations apart from job flows. There
is no search by employed workers, no job-to-job movements, and no replacement hires.
Related, the basic model entails no heterogeneity of productivity, match surplus values or
wages. This sort of heterogeneity seems important for generating large earnings losses due to
job loss. Given these limitations, we also consider a model of Burgess and Turon (2010) that
extends Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) by incorporating search on the job and other changes.
The model of Burgess and Turon produces hires and separations apart from job flows and
recessionary spikes in job destruction, job loss and unemployment inflows.
There are also good reasons to anticipate that the model of Burgess and Turon will
generate larger earnings losses associated with job loss than the basic MP model. As in Burdett
and Mortensen (1998), Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) and other models with search on the job,
their model generates persistent heterogeneity in match surplus values and wages for workers
of a given quality. As a related point, the model delivers a job ladder whereby newly re-

	  

37	  

employed workers tend to obtain jobs in the lower rungs of the wage distribution initially, and
to move up the wage distribution over time through search on the job. This job ladder feature
prolongs the period of earnings recovery after displacement. Finally, Hornstein, Krusell and
Violante (2010) show that plausibly parametrized versions of basic search models yield very
modest levels of frictional wage dispersion, which implies little scope for earnings losses due to
job loss when unemployment spells are short. Hornstein et al. also consider several extensions
to basic search models and, among those they consider, the only ones that offer much scope for
cross-sectional wage dispersion are models with search on the job.
b.

Income and Earnings Losses in the Basic MP Model
Table 4 reports statistics for three versions of the basic MP model: The credible

bargaining version of Hall and Milgrom (2008) and two versions with Nash bargaining – a
standard calibration similar to Shimer (2005) and another calibration similar to Hagedorn and
Manoviski (2008). These two calibrations differ chiefly in the level of income imputed to the
unemployed, which we interpret as the sum of unemployment insurance benefits, the value of
additional leisure and home production activity, and any savings of work-related costs.
Hagedorn and Manovskii set this value to a level nearly as large as the productivity of the
employed, thereby amplifying the equilibrium response of unemployment to aggregate shocks.
The standard calibration involves a much larger gap between productivity and the imputed
income value of unemployment, yielding much smaller equilibrium responses to shocks of a
given size. Our calibrations follow Hall and Milgrom (2008) in their choice of parameter values
for each version of the basic MP model. See the online appendix for a detailed discussion of the
model simulations and our calculations for the present value losses associated with job loss.
Panel A in Table 4 highlights an important message: job loss and unemployment is a
rather inconsequential event for persons living in the basic MP world. Using a 5% annual
discount rate, job loss reduces the present value of income by about 0.2% in the MP-CB and
standard MP-Nash versions of the model and by less that 0.05% in the Hagedorn-Manovskii
calibration. We compute these present value income losses directly from value functions. That
is, for each aggregate state we calculate the difference between the asset value of employment
and the asset value of unemployment, expressing the difference relative to the asset value of
employment. Performing this calculation for all five aggregate states yields the reported ranges
in Panel A. If these results capture the real world costs of job loss, one might well wonder why

	  

38	  

all the fuss – why are job loss and unemployment perceived as important economic phenomena
and potent political issues?
Table 4. Present Value Income and Earnings Losses Associated with Job Loss in the Basic
Mortensen-Pissarides Model of Unemployment Fluctuations
PV Income Losses, Percent of
PV Earnings
Employment Asset Value
Losses, Percent
Model Version
MP-Nash
MP-Nash
MP-CB
MP-Nash
Calibration
Standard
HagedornHallHall-Milgrom
Manovskii
Milgrom
A. Range of Mean Losses
0.20 - 0.22
0.044 - 0.047 0.20 - 0.23
Over Five Aggregate States
B. All Aggregate Paths
Mean Unemployment Rate
Monthly Job-Finding Rate
Mean PV Losses
10th/90th percentile losses
C. Aggregate Boom Paths
Unemployment Rate
Monthly Job-Finding Rate
Mean PV Losses
th
th
10 /90 percentile PV losses
D. Aggregate Bust Paths
Unemployment Rate
Monthly Job-Finding Rate
Mean PV Losses
th
th
10 /90 percentile PV losses
99th percentile PV losses

0.066
0.43
0.23
-0.55 / 1.07

Realized Outcomes
0.067
0.067
0.43
0.43
0.05
0.23
-0.29 / 0.40
-0.51 /1.04

1.28
-2.62/5.72

0.065
0.43
-0.19
-0.84 / 0.56

0.064
0.44
-0.26
-0.39 / -0.11

0.064
0.44
-0.12
-0.75 / 0.60

1.14
-2.73/5.53

0.067
0.43
0.66
0.02/ 1.38
2.18

0.07
0.41
0.37
0.26 / 0.51
0.66

0.070
0.42
0.59
-0.08 / 1.35
2.20

1.42
-2.49/5.87
10.81

Notes to Table 4:
1. Table entries report statistics for three versions of the basic Mortensen-Pissarides model of
equilibrium unemployment. The two “MP-Nash” versions entail Nash wage bargaining –
one with a standard calibration similar to Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005), and one with a
calibration similar to Hagedorn and Manoviski (2008). The “MP-CB” version is the credible
bargaining model of Hall and Milgrom (2008), which entails sequential bargaining with
disagreement costs à la Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1986). All calibrations follow
Hall and Milgrom (2008) in their choice of parameter values and the transition matrix of a
five-state Markov process for aggregate shocks.
2. We calculate the monthly job-finding rate on a day with job-finding rate ∅ as ∅ !"
!!!(1 −
∅)!!! , assuming 25 job-seeking days per month.
3. We compute the present value income losses in Panel A directly from value functions. For
each aggregate state, we calculate the difference between the asset value of employment and
the asset value of unemployment. We express this difference relative to the asset value of
employment. Performing this calculation for the five aggregate states yields the reported
ranges in Panel A. All present value calculations reflect discounting at a 5% annual rate.
	  

39	  

4. We calculate statistics for the other panels by simulating the indicated model for 1,000 draws
of the aggregate path, with each draw starting from the middle aggregate state (state 3) and
evolving according to the aggregate transition matrix. We simulate each draw for 5,000
working days, which corresponds to 20 years at 250 working days per year. We track
realized paths for 5,000 day-1 job losers and 1,000 day-1 employed persons on each of the
1,000 aggregate paths.
5. For present value income losses, an individual receives the imputed income value of leisure
if unemployed on a given day, and the annuity value of his wage bargain if employed. At the
end of the simulation horizon, we assign each individual the asset value associated with his
state on day 5,000. In this way, we obtain a realized income path plus terminal value for
each individual, which we then use to compute the realized present value income stream for
an unemployed worker as of day 1. We express this realized present value as a percent of the
mean realized income present value of the day-1 employed persons on the same aggregate
path. We then compute the statistics reported in Panels B through D. The online appendix
provides a more detailed description of the simulations and calculations.
6. For present value earnings losses, we assign 0 earnings when unemployed and the annuity
value of the wage bargain when employed. To focus on present value earnings over a 20year horizon comparable to our empirical estimates in Section 3, we set the terminal value to
0 at the end of the 5,000-day simulation horizon. We then compare the present value of the
realized earnings paths for individuals who become unemployed on day 1 to the mean
realized present value earnings paths for 1,000 individuals who remain employed on day 1 on
the same aggregate path. Earnings loss statistics are very similar across all three variants of
the MP model, so we report results only for the MP-CB version. See the online appendix for
a more detailed description of the earnings loss simulations and calculations.
7. Panel B reports simulation statistics computed over all 1,000 aggregate paths. For Panels C
and D, we first rank aggregate paths by the realized mean present value income (or earnings)
loss. We then select a subset of paths and calculate the reported statistics. Panel C
(Aggregate Boom Paths) considers paths ranked from 90 to 110 by this metric; i.e., the set of
paths near the 10th percentile aggregate path. Panel D considers paths ranked from 890 to
910.
The remaining panels of Table 4 report statistics on unemployment, job finding, and the
distribution of present value income and earnings losses. To compute these statistics, we
simulate aggregate and individual paths. Specifically, starting in the middle aggregate state, we
simulate 1,000 aggregate paths for each version of the model, letting each simulation run for 20
years (5,000 days at 250 working days per year). Along each aggregate path, we simulate paths
for large numbers of workers who either lose jobs or remain employed on day 1. Flow income
equals the annuity value of the wage bargain when employed and the imputed flow value of
unemployment otherwise. Present value income includes the discounted asset value of the
individual’s realized terminal state. To compute the realized income loss for a day-1 job loser,
we compare the present value of his realized income path to the mean realized present value

	  

40	  

income for persons who remain employed on day 1 on the same aggregate path. By comparing
day-1 job losers to persons who remain employed along the same aggregate path, we obtain a
comparison between the treated (day-1 job losers) and the controls (day-1 employed).
To compute the realized earnings loss for a day-1 job loser, we compare the present value
of his realized earnings path over the 20-year horizon to the mean present value of realized
earnings for individuals living on the same aggregate path who remain employed on day 1.
Earnings equal the wage when employed and zero when unemployed. We set the terminal value
to zero to match the 20-year horizon in our empirical estimates of present value earnings losses.
Thus, the earnings losses in Table 4 are larger than the corresponding income losses for two
reasons: earnings exclude the imputed income value of unemployment, and we set terminal
values to zero in the earnings comparisons.
Consider the results for the MP-CB model in Panel B.

Averaging over all day-1 job

losers on all aggregate paths yields an average realized present value income loss of 0.23%. This
figure essentially replicates the income loss result for the MP-CB model in Panel A, as it should.
However, the simulation approach enables us to compute the full distribution of outcomes.
Continuing to look over all aggregate and individual paths, the 90th percentile income loss in the
MP-CB version is only 1.04%, still a rather modest value. Job losers at the 10th percentile of the
distribution experience a gain of 0.51% in present value income.
Turning to earnings losses, we report results only for the MP-CB version because the
other two versions yield very similar results. Mean present value earnings losses are 1.28% in
the basic MP model – an order of magnitude smaller than the 10.7% figure in the first column
and first row of Table 1. One potential concern about this earnings loss comparison is that Table
1 considers losses associated with “job displacement” events, which by design exclude many job
loss events that involve little or no loss of earnings and income. So there is a sense in which we
have compared average job loss outcomes in the basic MP model to bad-case outcomes in the
data. While we recognize that this argument has some force, we do not find it persuasive. The
estimated earnings losses reported in Section 3 pertain to an ex ante identifiable group of
workers (men, 50 or younger, with 3 or more years of job tenure at firms with 50 or more
employees), and this group accounts for a large share of U.S. employment. We would like a
theoretical model that explains the magnitude and cyclicality of the present value earnings losses
associated with job loss for this large group of workers.

	  

41	  

The remaining panels in Table 4 consider selected aggregate paths defined by the mean
realized present value income or earnings losses. “Boom” paths are those near the 10th percentile
of average losses for day-1 job losers, and “bust” paths are near the 90th percentile. Mean present
value income losses remain small along boom and bust paths. Even when we isolate the worst
1% of individual outcomes along the bust paths, the present value income losses amount to only
2.2% in the CB and standard Nash versions of the model and only 0.7% in the HagedornManavoskii calibration. In short, the basic MP model cannot produce large welfare losses for
job losers, even at the extremes of aggregate and individual outcomes. The model can produce
large present value earnings losses at the extremes of the distribution of individual outcomes.
For example, the worst 1% of individual outcomes reported in Panel D yield earnings losses
comparable to the mean loss reported in Table 1.23 This result, however, hardly amounts to a
success for the model.
Why are the consequences of job loss so modest in the basic MP model? Two aspects of
the model deliver the result almost immediately. First, wages are uniform in the cross section, so
that unemployment spells are the only source of earnings loss upon job loss. Second, when
calibrated to job-finding rates typical of the postwar U.S. experience, expected unemployment
durations are short, about two or three months. Short unemployment spells coupled with uniform
wages in the cross section imply small earnings losses associated with job loss.
The basic MP model also implies a close relationship between the cost of job loss to the
worker and the vacancy supply condition, as stressed to us by Bob Hall. Given free entry, the
zero-profit condition for job-creating employers says that the daily vacancy-filling rate times the
asset value of a filled job equals the daily flow cost of maintaining a vacancy. JOLTS data imply
a vacancy-filling rate of about 5% per day. Drawing on Silva and Toledo (2009) and Hagedorn
and Manovskii (2008), Hall and Milgrom conclude that the daily flow cost of a vacancy is about
one-half of a worker’s daily output. Thus, the asset value of a newly filled job for the employer
is about ten days output generated by a (newly hired) worker. If employer and worker share
equally in the surplus generated by a new match, then the worker’s value of transitioning from
unemployment to employment is also about ten days’ worth of output. In other words, not much
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23

We could refine the treatment-control comparisons in Table 4 by replicating the employment stability criterion
used for controls in Section 3. This type of refinement may make sense in future research. Given the uniformity of
wages and the small consequences of job loss in Table 4, however, we do not think the basic MP model can explain
the evidence on earnings losses or rationalize strong concerns about job loss and unemployment.

	  

42	  

value is at stake in the creation and destruction of employment relationships in the basic MP
model. Richer models in the MP class need not imply such a tight relationship between the cost
of filling a new job and the surplus value of the average existing job.
In summary, we draw three conclusions from Table 4 and the related discussion. First,
job loss is a rather inconsequential event for individual welfare in the basic MP model, even at
the extremes of individual and aggregate outcomes.

Second, the basic MP model cannot

rationalize the empirical evidence on the present value earnings losses associated with job
displacement. Third, although wage rigidity of the form considered by Hall and Milgrom (2008)
greatly improves the ability of the basic MP model to explain aggregate unemployment
fluctuations, it does not bring the model closer to the evidence on the magnitude and cyclicality
of earnings losses associated with job displacement.
c.

Losses in an MP Model with Job Destruction Spikes and Search on the Job
Burgess and Turon (2010) depart from Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) by introducing

search on the job, at a cost, and by adopting a different vacancy creation process that gives
meaning to the concept of a job apart from an employer-worker match. Specifically, they assume
a finite supply elasticity of potential new job creation each period, so that firms find it optimal to
re-fill certain jobs left open by departing workers. Like MP (1994), their model also differs from
the basic MP model in capturing cross-sectional heterogeneity in match products and surplus
values. These extensions lead to cross-sectional wage dispersion, a distinction between job flows
and worker flows and endogenous job destruction spikes in the wake of negative aggregate
shocks. The model also gives rise to a job ladder that prolongs the recovery of pre-displacement
earnings for job-losing workers.
The model is set in continuous time. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks arrive according to
independent Poisson processes, and aggregate productivity, p, follows a three-state Markov
chain. When hit by an idiosyncratic shock, a job draws a new idiosyncratic productivity value in
the interval [−!, !], possibly higher or lower than the previous value. Optimizing behavior
yields three idiosyncratic productivity thresholds, as shown in Figure 11.

If idiosyncratic

productivity exceeds S(p) in a filled job, the worker’s net expected gains to search are negative.
For productivity less than S(p) in a filled job, the worker’s net expected gains to search are
positive. If the worker finds a vacant job, he quits and the firm decides whether to search for a
replacement. It does so if idiosyncratic productivity exceeds T(p); otherwise, it lets the job lapse.

	  

43	  

1
2

If a filled job draws a new idiosyncratic productivity value below R(p), the job is destroyed and
the worker experiences job loss. As indicated in Figure 11, the productivity thresholds are
functions of the aggregate state. A negative shock to p shifts R(p) to the right, triggering a burst
of job destruction. An important implication of these assumptions is that job losses due to
idiosyncratic shocks occur throughout the distribution of productivities, while job losses due to
aggregate shocks occur at low-value jobs.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Search	  on	  the	  Job	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Replacement	  Hiring	  
	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  -­‐	  σ	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  R(p)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  T(p)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  S(p)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  σ	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Figure 11. Idiosyncratic Productivity Thresholds for Job Destruction, Replacement Hiring
and On-the-Job Search in the Burgess-Turon Model
Table 5 reports statistics for the model of Burgess and Turon. We modify their calibration
to generate job-finding rates and unemployment spell durations comparable to postwar U.S.
experience.24 Rows A and B report results for a period of time corresponding to three months
with no change in the aggregate state. The remaining rows involve transitions between states
and focus on outcomes for workers who lose jobs in the early part of a downturn, roughly
corresponding to the recessionary spikes in job destruction and job loss seen in Figures 1 and 2.
All loss calculations pertain to workers who separate in job destruction/job loss events and
exclude separations that result from search on the job.
Row A in Table 5 reports present value income and earnings losses for job losers in the
good, middle and bad aggregate states. We compute the income losses using differences in
value functions at each level of the idiosyncratic productivity level, !, then integrate over the
distribution of ! that prevails in the indicated aggregate state to obtain the mean present value
income losses in Row A. For earnings losses, we adopt a simulation approach similar to the
one used for Table 5. However, we now compare the realized present value earnings of
workers who lose jobs with a given ! to the mean realized present value of earnings among
workers who remain employed (in the displacement period) at the same value of !. Once we
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24

See the online appendix for a version of Table 5 that adopts their calibration, which is meant to match features of
the British economy from 1964 to 1999.

	  

44	  

obtain the comparison for each !, we integrate with respect to the appropriate distribution to
obtain the mean realized present value earnings loss. As before, we use a 20-year horizon for
the earnings calculations. The online appendix describes the model simulations and present
value calculations in detail.
Table 5. Present Value Losses Due to Job Loss in a Mortensen-Pissarides Model with
Search on the Job, Heterogeneity in Match Values, and Job Destruction Spikes
Present Value Losses, Percent of Employment Asset Value for Income Losses and
Percent of Present Value Earnings Over a 20-Year Horizon for Earnings Losses
Aggregate State
A. Mean PV Loss Due to Idiosyncratic
Income
Shocks that Result in Job Loss
Earnings
B. Quarterly (Monthly) Job Finding Rate
Aggregate State
Transition
C. Mean Loss Due to Idiosyncratic Shocks that
Result in Job Loss, Comparison to Own Past
D. Mean Loss Due to Aggregate Shock that Results
in Job Loss, Comparison to Own Past
E. Inflow-Weighted Average of Rows C and D
F. Mean Loss Due to Idiosyncratic Shocks that
Result in Job Loss, Comparison to Control Group
G. Mean Loss Due to Aggregate Shock that Results
in Job Loss, Comparison to Control Group
H. Inflow-Weighted Average of Rows F and G
I. Mean Loss Due to Idiosyncratic Shocks that
Result in Job Loss, Comparison to Own Past
J. Mean Loss Due to Aggregate Shock that Results
in Job Loss, Comparison to Own Past
K. Inflow-Weighted Average of Rows I and J
L. Mean Loss Due to Idiosyncratic Shocks that
Result in Job Loss, Comparison to Control Group
M. Mean Loss Due to Aggregate Shock that Results
in Job Loss, Comparison to Control Group
N. Inflow-Weighted Average of Rows L and M

Good
Middle
Bad
0.39
0.35
0.32
2.44
2.54
2.71
82.5 (44.1) 73.7 (35.9) 64.9 (29.5)
Present Value Income Losses
Goodà
Middleà
Goodà
Middle
Bad
Bad
0.63
0.57
0.84
0.25

0.22

0.47

0.61
0.35

0.55
0.32

0.80
0.32

0

0

0

0.33
0.30
0.29
Present Value Earnings Losses
2.85
3.08
3.26
2.15

2.57

2.57

2.81
2.54

3.05
2.71

3.19
2.71

0

0

0

2.39

2.55

2.42

Notes:
1. Table entries report statistics for a search and matching model of Burgess and Turon
(2010). Their model differs from the basic Mortensen-Pissarides model in capturing
search on the job, a distinction between job flows and worker flows, heterogeneity in
	  

45	  

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

wages and match surplus values, and spikes in aggregate job destruction. Their model
also adopts a different vacancy creation process that gives content to the concept of a job
apart from the employer-worker match. Job destruction and job loss arise from negative
aggregate shocks and sufficiently bad idiosyncratic shocks.
Burgess and Turon set their model in continuous time. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks
arrive according to independent Poisson processes, and aggregate productivity follows a
three-state Markov chain. Rows A and B report results for a period of time
corresponding to three months with no change in the aggregate state. The remaining
rows involve transitions between states. As in Burgess and Turon, our calculations ignore
the sluggish dynamics of the match quality distribution in response to an aggregate shock.
The calibration of Burgess and Turon is meant to match features of the British economy
from 1964 to 1999. We depart from their calibration by increasing the arrival rate of
idiosyncratic shocks (from 0.15 to 0.25) and the efficiency of the matching function
(from 0.6 to 1.1). These parameter changes yield more rapid flows through the
unemployment pool and higher monthly job-finding rates, roughly in line with U.S.
outcomes. The unemployment rate is 5.2% in the middle state for our calibration.
Income loss calculations rely on value function comparisons and pertain to workers who
separate in job destruction/job loss events. The PV income losses are expressed relative
to the asset value of employment. Earnings loss calculations rely on simulated aggregate
and individual paths over 20-year horizons (80 quarters), where we set earnings to the
wage if employed and to 0 if unemployed. The wage when employed depends on the
aggregate state and the idiosyncratic productivity level of the job. The PV earnings
losses are expressed relative to the present value of earnings over a 20-year horizon; i.e.,
we assign a continuation value of 0 at the 20-year horizon in the earnings loss
calculations. All loss calculations exclude separations that result from search on the job.
For “Comparison to Own Past” we calculate losses relative to the job loser’s predisplacement employment value evaluated at the old aggregate state, and expressed
relative to that same employment value. For “Comparison to Control Group” we instead
evaluate the employment value at the new aggregate state. Either way, we evaluate the
unemployment value at the new aggregate state. The “Control Group” comparison yields
zero loss in Row G and M, because all workers in the lower tail of the productivity
distribution lose their jobs when hit by a negative aggregate productivity shock. Hence,
all get the value of unemployment in the new state. The “Own Past” and “Control
Group” benchmarks yield the same loss values in Row A because the aggregate state is
held constant. See the online appendix for a detailed explanation of the loss calculations
and the underlying simulations.
Rows E, H, K and N report inflow-weighted averages of present value losses associated
with idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks. The weights are given by the flow of job losers
due to idiosyncratic shocks during the quarter the flow of job losers triggered by a
negative aggregate shock.
Present value income losses due to job loss are larger than in the basic MP model, but

they remain quite modest – about 0.3% to 0.4% in Row A. The entries in Rows C through H
consider job loss events that occur in the quarter when the economy gets hit by a negative

	  

46	  

aggregate shock. Job loss events now arise for two reasons. As before, a flow of negative
idiosyncratic shocks produces a stream of job loss events. In addition, the negative aggregate
shock erases the surplus value of marginal jobs, producing a burst of job destruction and job
loss. All workers at jobs below the new, higher destruction threshold R become unemployed in
the wake of a negative aggregate shock. That is, for treatment-control comparisons conditional
on the idiosyncratic productivity value !, all workers below the new destruction threshold are in
the same position. Thus, we set losses to 0 in Rows G and M.25 For control group comparisons,
job loss produces present value income losses of about 0.3% in these “recession” periods (Row
H). The disproportionate loss of marginal jobs in the wake of a negative aggregate shock pulls
down the average present value income loss. So the model of Burgess and Turon does not shed
much light on why job loss events in recessions are more consequential.
Turning to earnings, our calibrated version of the Burgess and Turon model produces
nontrivial present value losses. For a given aggregate state, the losses reported in Row A range
from 2.4% to 2.7% of present value earnings. These losses amount to about one quarter of the
empirical present value earnings losses reported in Tables 1 and 2. Thus, search on the job and
heterogeneity in match surplus values clearly helps move the model closer to the evidence on
the present value earnings losses associated with job loss.
In this respect, the job ladder feature of the model plays an important role. The online
appendix displays the cross-sectional wage function, the density of all filled jobs, and the
density of first jobs for newly re-employed workers who leave unemployment.

For our

calibrated version of the model, the maximum wage in the good aggregate state exceeds the
minimum wage by 49%. The density of first jobs is much more concentrated at the low end of
the wage distribution than the density of all jobs. The average difference between the predisplacement wage and the wage on the first post-displacement job is 10% in the good
aggregate state, 8.4% in the middle state and 6.7% in the bad state. These observations and
statistics are different ways of saying that the model incorporates a significant job ladder.
A few additional remarks are in order. First, in generating the results for Table 5, we do
not impose a job tenure requirement on for displaced workers or control group workers. Doing
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25

In practice, empirical treatment-control comparisons do not perfectly condition on the idiosyncratic component of
jobs and match values. However, as long as the empirical specification at least partly captures a disproportionate
loss of marginal jobs in the wake of a negative aggregate shock, the composition effect we highlight here will also
be present in the empirical estimates of earnings losses associated with job loss in a recession.

	  

47	  

so may increase the earnings losses. Second, search intensity is a binary decision variable in
the model of Burgess and Turon. Variable search intensity for employed workers, as in
Hertweck (2010), may generate an elongated climb up the job ladder after displacement and, as
a result, produce larger present value earnings losses.26 We conclude that job ladder models can
produce nontrivial earnings losses due to job displacement but are unlikely to account for the
bulk of the empirical losses. For one thing, they do not explain why the earnings of displaced
workers remain well below that of control group workers 10 or more years after displacement.
Moreover, it does not appear that a pure job ladder model can rationalize the striking cyclical
pattern in the present value earnings losses that we documented in Section 3.

6. Concluding Remarks
High-tenure workers who lose jobs in mass-layoff events experience large and persistent
earnings losses compared to otherwise similar workers who retain their jobs. That is the central
message of a now-sizable literature on the earnings losses associated with job displacement.
We focus on displacements from 1980 to 2005 among men 50 or younger with 3 or more years
of prior job tenure. For this group, job loss in mass-layoff events reduces present value earnings
by an estimated $77,557 (2000 dollars) over 20 years at a 5% annual discount rate, equivalent
to 1.7 years of pre-displacement earnings. Losses are larger for men with greater job tenure.
They are smaller for women, even as a multiple of pre-displacement earnings.
Present value losses rise steeply with the unemployment rate at the time of displacement.
The average loss equals 1.4 years of pre-displacement earnings if unemployment at
displacement is less than 6%, and 2.8 years if unemployment exceeds 8%. More generally, the
evidence in Tables 1 and 2 and Figures 5 to 7 says that tight labor market conditions at
displacement strongly improve the medium- and long-term future earnings prospects of
displaced workers. The highly pro-cyclical behavior of job-finding rates among the
unemployed implies that tight labor market conditions strengthen near-term re-employment and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26

Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) consider a different model with search on the job and productivity heterogeneity
on both sides of the labor market. Employers have all the bargaining power, and newly re-employed workers start
at the bottom of the wage distribution after an unemployment spell. When an employed worker finds an attractive
outside opportunity, the incumbent employer may respond with a successful counter offer, i.e., a wage increase.
Thus, the model of Postel-Vinay and Robin also yields a prolonged earnings recovery path after job loss that is
tied to search on the job, but wage gains may or may not coincide with job changes.

	  
	  

48	  

earnings prospects as well. Seen in this light, economic policies that set the stage for strong
growth and low unemployment are highly beneficial to displaced workers. Indeed, pro-growth
policies may be the most efficient and cost-effective means available to policymakers to
alleviate the hardships experienced by displaced workers.
Previous work shows that job displacement also has negative consequences for
employment and earnings stability, household consumption expenditures, health and mortality
outcomes, children’s achievement, and subjective wellbeing. We present evidence that worker
perceptions about layoff risks, job-finding prospects, and the likelihood of wage cuts closely
track cyclical fluctuations in actual labor market conditions. Perception measures point to a
tremendous increase in worker anxieties about labor market prospects after the financial crisis
of 2008, an increase that persists through August 2011. It seems likely that these high anxiety
levels produce important stresses and psychological costs for a large segment of the population.
We also consider whether models of unemployment fluctuations along the lines of the
canonical contribution by Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) can account for the earnings losses
associated with job displacement. Basic versions of the MP model featured in much recent
research imply theoretical earnings losses an order of magnitude smaller than empirical losses.
The explanation is straightforward. The basic model has uniform wages in the cross section
and, when calibrated to U.S. job-finding rates, short unemployment spells. Thus, job loss has
little impact on present value earnings. Because so little is at stake in the destruction of
employment relationships in the basic MP model, it cannot rationalize the earnings losses
associated with job displacement.
Lastly, we evaluate an MP model of Burgess and Turon (2010) with search on the job
and replacement hiring. Unlike the basic MP model, the model of Burgess and Turon is at least
qualitatively consistent with several first-order features of the data: cross-sectional wage
dispersion, worker flows in excess of job flows, and recessionary spikes in job destruction and
unemployment inflows. The model also exhibits a job ladder that prolongs the earnings
recovery path after displacement. When calibrated to match U.S. job-finding rates, job loss in
the model produces present value earnings losses that, on average, are about one quarter of the
mean empirical losses due to job displacement. This is a sizable improvement over the basic
MP model, but it leaves a very large gap between theory and evidence. Moreover, the model

	  

49	  

cannot explain larger losses for displacements that occur in recessions, because negative
aggregate shocks trigger the destruction of lower value jobs.
In our view, a major shortcoming of existing MP models of unemployment fluctuations is
their implication that job loss is a rather inconsequential event for the affected workers. The
consequences of job displacement, and fears of displacement, are among the main reasons that
recessions and high unemployment create so much concern in the general population. The
negative consequences of job displacement are why unemployment is such a potent political
issue. We also think the consequential nature of job displacement is a major reason that
unemployment and unemployment fluctuations attract so much attention from economists.
It is important to put our criticism of MP models in proper context. We see MP models,
in particular, and the larger class of DMP models as a great advance. These models deliver a
coherent theory of frictional unemployment and its determinants. They provide an analytical
framework for studying cyclical movements in unemployment, vacancies, job-finding rates,
and the joint dynamics of workers flows and job flows. They provide tools for analyzing search
and matching behavior by employers and job seekers, and for studying the implications of
search and matching frictions for wage dispersion and individual wage dynamics. These tools
are widely used to study the effects of policies, wage-setting arrangements and other economic
institutions on unemployment and a variety of other labor market outcomes.
We hope to see these models taken in directions that can explain large and lasting
earnings losses at job displacement. There are potentially several ways to bring MP-type
models closer to the evidence on the earnings losses associated with job displacement. Learning
about match quality over time as in Jovanovic (1979), the acquisition of specific skills through
learning-by-doing on the job, and investments in specific training as in Becker (1962) can yield
substantial earnings losses at job loss. These three mechanisms influence match durability and
the evolution of surplus values in ongoing matches. It would be useful to integrate these
mechanisms into MP models of unemployment fluctuations, which have thus far devoted much
greater attention to the forces governing match formation. Topel (1990) and Neal (1995),
among others, argue that specific forms of human capital play a central role in determining the
magnitude of earnings losses associated with job displacement. Ljungvist and Sargent (1998)
build an equilibrium search model that hard wires a link between job loss and the destruction of
human capital, and that includes further human capital depreciation during unemployment.

	  

50	  

Workers may also enjoy rents for reasons apart from search and matching frictions and
returns on specific human capital. Explanations for worker rents include fairness norms and
concerns about pay equity (Akerlof and Yellen, 1982), high pay as a device to deter shirking
(Bulow and Summers, 1986), the appropriation of quasi-rents generated by sunk investments
(Grout, 1986 and Caballero and Hammour, 2005), and worker sharing of product market rents.
Beaudry and DiNardo (1992) stress the role of long-term contracting and one-sided
commitment as a source of downward wage stickiness. Schmieder and von Wachter (2010)
consider workers who receive higher wages due to tight labor market conditions in the past.
They find evidence that these workers experience higher layoff rates and lose their wage
premiums upon job loss, a pattern of results that supports the presence of rents. Whether this
pattern accounts for larger earnings losses in recessions, when displacements are more
widespread, is an open question.
Workers who enter the labor market in periods of slack conditions suffer negative effects
on future earnings that persist for ten years or more (e.g., Kahn, 2010). Both lasting declines in
employer quality and lasting effects of low starting wages on wage growth within firms
contribute to the persistent negative earnings effects of slack conditions at entry (e.g.,
Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz, 2010). These results are interesting, in part, because new
entrants have not accumulated job-specific rents and are unlikely to have accumulated much in
the way of specific human capital. Apparently, weak conditions at the time of labor market
entry slow the accumulation of rents and specific human capital for many years thereafter.
Similar forces could lower the future earnings prospects of workers who are displaced in
recessions and slumps.

	  

51	  

References
Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen, 1990. “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, no. 2, 255-283.
Autor, David H. and Lawrence F. Katz, 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A,
North-Holland, 1463-1555.
Bartlesman, Eric J. and Mark Doms, 2000. “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from
Longitudinal Microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature, 38 (September), 569-594.
Becker, Gary S., 1992. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 70, no. 5, Part 2, 9-49.
Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky, 1986. “The Nash Bargaining Solution in
Economic Modelling,” RAND Journal of Economics, 17, no. 2, 176-188.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond, 1989. “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity,” 2, 1-60.
Browning, Martin and T.F. Crossley. 2001. “Unemployment Insurance Levels and Consumption
Changes.” Journal of Public Economics, 80(1): 1-23.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1986. “A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with
Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian Unemployment.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4, no. 3, part 1 (July), 376-414.
Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
Unemployment,” International Economic Review, 39, no. 2.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010). “Worker Displacement: 2007-2009.” News Release. USDL10-1174. Available at www.bls.gov/news.release/disp.nr0.htm.
Burgard, Sarah A., Brand, Jennie E., and House James S. 2007. “Toward a Better Estimation of
the Effect of Job Loss on Health.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 48(4): 369–
384
Burgess, Simon and Hélène Turon, 2010. “Worker Flows, Job Flows and Unemployment in a
Matching Model,” European Economic Review, 54, no. 3 (April), 393-408.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, 2005. “The Costs of Recessions Revisited: A
Reverse-Liquidationist View,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, no. 2 (April), 313-341.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Melvin Stephens. 2004. “Disability, Job Displacement and Divorce."
Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2): 489-522.
Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Family Income of Unemployment Insurance Recipients
(March).
Costain, J. and M. Reiter, 2008, “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the Calibration
of matching Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32(4), 1120-1155.
Couch, Kenneth A. and Dana W. Placzek. 2010. “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
Revisited.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 572-589.
Davis, Steven J., 2005. Comment on “Job Loss, Job Finding and Unemployment in the U.S.
Economy over the Past Fifty Years” by Robert Hall, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman and John Haltiwanger, 2006. “The Flow Approach to Labor
Markets: New Data Sources and Micro-Macro Linkages,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives.

	  

52	  

Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger, 2011. “Labor Market Flows in
the Cross Section and Over Time.” NBER Working Paper 17294. Forthcoming, Journal
of Monetary Economics, 59, no. 1 (January 2012).
Davis, S.J., Faberman, R.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Rucker, I., 2010. Adjusted estimates of worker
flows and job openings in JOLTS. In: Abraham, K. , Harper, M., Spletzer, J.R. (Eds.),
Labor in the New Economy, University of Chicago Press, 187-216.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1990. “Gross Job Creation and Destruction:
Microeconomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, 5, pages 123-168.
Den Haan, Wouter, Garey Ramey and Joel Watson (2000) “Job Destruction and the Experiences
of Displaced Workers,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 52, 87128
Eliason, M., and D. Storrie. (2009). “Does Job Loss Shorten Life?” Journal of Human
Resources, 44 (2), 277Elsby, Michael, Ryan Michaels and Gary Solon. 2009. “The Ins and Out of Cyclical
Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 84-110.
Eyigungor, Burcu, 2010. “Specific Capital and Vintage Effects on the Dynamics of
Unemployment and Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 100, no. 3, 1214-1237.
Farber, Henry, 1999. “Alternative and Part-Time Employment Arrangements as a Response to
Job Loss”, Journal of Labor Economics, 17, no. 4, part 2 (October): S142-S16.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan (2001). “Aggregate Productivity Growth:
Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence,” in New Directions in Productivity Analysis,
edited by Edward Dean, Michael Harper and Charles Hulten, University of Chicago
Press.
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer, 2002. “What Can Economists Learn from Happiness
Research?” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, no 2 (June), 402-435.
Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy 117(1), 38-86.
Grout, Paul A., 1984. “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts,”
Econometrica, 52 (March), 449-460.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.”
The American Economic Review, 87(1): 192–205.
Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium
Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited.” American Economic Review, 98(4), 16921706.
Hall, Robert E., 1995. “Lost Jobs,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 221-273.
Hall, Robert E., 2005, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American
Economic Review, 95(1), 50-65.
Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom, 2008, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
Wage Bargain,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1653-1674.
Hertweck, Matthias S., 2010. “Endogenous On-the-Job Search and Frictional Wage Dispersion,”
WWZ Discussion Paper 2010/02.
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell and Giovanni L. Violante, 2010. “Frictional Wage Dispersion in
Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” 10 August.
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709

	  

53	  

Jovanovic, Boyan, 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political
Economy, 87, no. 5, 972-990.
Kahn, Lisa, 2010. “The Long-Term labor Market Consequence of Graduating College in a Bad
Economy,” Labor Economics 17, no. 2, 303-316.
Kennan, John, 2009. “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctuations,”
Review of Economic Studies, 77, no. 2, 633-664.
Kletzer, Lori. 1989. “Returns to Seniority After Permanent Job Loss.” American Economic
Review 79(3): 536-543.
Kodrzycki, Yolanda K. 2007. “Using Unexpected Recalls to Examine the Long-Term Earnings
Effects of Job Displacement.” Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper, W07-2.
Kilponen, Juha and Juuso Vanhala, 2011, “The Sensitivity of Job Destruction to Vintage and
Tenure Effects,” Bank of Finland Discussion Paper No. 1080, revised.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, 1998. “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
Journal of Political Economy, 106, no. 3 (June), 514-550.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok and James X. Sullivan, 2010, “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences,” NBER Working Paper
No. 15181.
Mortensen, Dale and Eva Nagypal, 2007. “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(3): 327-347.
Mortensen, Dale and Christopher Pissarides, 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61 (July), 397-415.
Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence From Displaced Workers.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 13(4): 653-77.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Andrew Heisz and Till von Wachter, 2010. “Short- and Long-Term Career
Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” forthcoming in American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. "The Intergenerational Effects
of Worker Displacement." Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455-483.
Pissarides, Christopher, 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the
Answer?” Econometrica, 77, no. 5, 1339-1369.
Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson. 2008. “Human Capital Specificity: Evidence from the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984–2000.” Journal
of Labor Economics, 26(3): 387–420.
Polivka, Anne E. and Stephen M. Miller, 1998, “The CPS after the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens,” in John Haltiwanger, Marilyn E. Manser and Robert Topel, editors.
The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin, 2002. “Equilibrium Wage Dispersoin with Worker
and Employer Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 70, no. 6 (November), 2295-2350.
Ramey, Garey, 2008. “Exogenous vs. Endogenous Separations,” working paper, October.
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle and Mark Votruba.(2009). “The Effect of Plant Downsizing on
Disability Pension Utilization.” Journal of European Economic Association, 7(4): 754785.
Robin, Jean-Marc, 2011. “On the Dynamics of Unemployment and Wage Distributions,”
Econometrica, 79, no. 5 (September), 1327-1355.
Ruhm, Christopher. 1991. “Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements.” American
Economic Review, 81: 319-323.

	  

54	  

Rupp, Kalman and David Stapleton. 1995. “Determinants of the Growth in the Social Security
Administration’s Disability Programs: An Overview.” Social Security Bulletin, 58(4): 4370.
Schmieder, Johannes and Till von Wachter. 2010. “Does Wage Persistence Matter for
Employment Fluctuations? Evidence from Displaced Workers“ American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 1-21
Schmieder, Johannes, Till von Wachter and Stefan Bender. 2009. “The Effects of
Unemployment Insurance on Labor Supply and Search Outcomes: Regression
Discontinuity Estimates from Germany.” Columbia University, Department of
Economics Discussion Paper Series DP0910-08.
Schoeni, Robert and Michael Dardia. 2003. "Estimates of Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
Using California Administrative Data." PSC Research Report No. 03-543.
Shimer, Robert, 2004. “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 2 (2-3), 469-479.
Shimer, Robert, 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
American Economic Review 95(1): 25-49.
Shimer, Robert, 2007. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment.” NBER Working Paper
13421.
Shimer, Robert, 2010. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Silva, Jose Ignacio and Manuel Toledo, 2009. “Labor Turnover Costs and the Behavior of
Vacancies and Unemployment,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13, S1, 76-96.
Stephens, Melvin Jr., 2004. “Job Loss Expectations, Realizations, and Household Consumption
Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, no.1 (February), 253-269.
Stevens, Ann Huff. 1997. “Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple
Job Losses.” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(1, Part 1): 165-188
Stevens, Ann and Jesamyn Schaller. 2009. “Short-run Effects of Parental Job Loss on Children’s
Academic Achievement.” NBER Working Paper 15480.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
using Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol.124 (3): 1265-1306.
Topel, Robert. 1990. “Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs of Worker
Displacement.” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy. Autumn 1990, 33, 181-214.
von Wachter, Till (2010). “Long-Term Unemployment: Causes, Consequences and Solutions,”
Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress, 29 April.
von Wachter, Till and Elizabeth Weber Handwerker. 2009. “Variation in the Cost of Job Loss by
Worker Skill: Evidence Using Matched Data from California, 1991-2000.” Mimeo,
Columbia University.
von Wachter, Till, Elizabeth Weber Handwerker and Andrew Hildreth. 2008. “Estimating the
'True' Cost of Job Loss: Evidence Using Matched Data from California 1991-2000.”
Center for Economic Studies Working Paper 09-14.
von Wachter, Till, Jae Song and Joyce Manchester. 2011. “Long-Term Earnings Losses due to
Mass-Layoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal
Administrative Data from 1974 to 2008.” Mimeo, Columbia University.
Wightman, Patrick, 2009. The Effect of Parental Job Loss on Children. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Chicago, Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies.

	  

55	  

Supplemental	  Material	  for	  Online	  Appendix	  
	  
A. 	  	  Additional	  Empirical	  Results	  
	  
	  
Figure	  A1:	  Annual	  Earnings	  Losses	  By	  Age	  at	  Displacement,	  Men	  with	  at	  Least	  3	  Years	  
of	  Job	  Tenure	  Displaced	  in	  Mass-­‐Layoff	  Events.	  
Panel 2: Workers Displaced at age 31-40

-25

-25

-20

-20

-15

-15

-10

-10

-5

-5

0

0

Panel 1: Workers Displaced at age 21-30

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4
6
8
10
12
Year Before/After Layoff
Expansion

14

16

18

20

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Recession

4
6
8
10
12
Year Before/After Layoff
Expansion

16

18

20

16

18

20

Recession

Panel 4: Workers Displaced at age 51-60

-25

-25

-20

-20

-15

-15

-10

-10

-5

-5

0

0

Panel 3: Workers Displaced at age 41-50

14

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4
6
8
10
12
Year Before/After Layoff
Expansion

14

16

18

20

Recession

-4

-2

0

2

4
6
8
10
12
Year Before/After Layoff
Expansion

	  
	  
Note:	  See	  notes	  to	  Figure	  5A	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  
	  
	  

	  

-6

56	  

14

Recession

	  

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

Figure	  A3:	  Present	  Value	  Earnings	  Losses	  By	  Age	  at	  Displacement,	  Expressed	  as	  a	  
Multiple	  of	  Average	  Annual	  Pre-­‐Displacement	  Earnings	  in	  the	  Four	  Years	  Prior	  to	  
Displacement,	  Men	  with	  at	  Least	  3	  Years	  of	  Job	  Tenure	  Displaced	  in	  Mass-­‐Layoff	  
Events.	  

25-29

30-34

35-39
Age at Displacement

Relative Loss, Expansion

	  
Note:	  See	  notes	  to	  Tables	  1	  and	  2	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

57	  

40-44

45-49

Relative Loss, Recession

	  

Figure	  A.3.	  Perceived	  Likelihood	  of	  Job	  Loss	  or	  Layoff	  in	  the	  Next	  12	  Months,	  
All	  Available	  Years	  in	  the	  General	  Social	  Survey	  from	  1977	  to	  2010	  
	  

Employed	  Adults	  

"Fairly"	  or	  "Very	  likely"	  to	  lose	  job	  

Percent	  
16	  
15	  
14	  
13	  
12	  
11	  

Slope=1.14	  (s.e.=.20)	  
Intercept=3.95	  (s.e.=1.33)	  
R²	  =	  0.639	  

10	  
9	  
8	  
7	  
3	  

4	  

5	  

6	  

7	  

8	  

9	  

10	  

Civilian	  Unemployment	  Rate,	  January	  to	  	  May	  of	  Same	  Year	  

	  
	  
Notes:	  
1. See	  notes	  to	  Figure	  8	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  	  
2. This	  figure	  considers	  samples	  of	  workers	  18-­‐64	  years	  of	  age,	  whereas	  Figure	  8	  
considers	  samples	  restricted	  to	  prime	  age	  workers	  25-­‐54	  years	  of	  age.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

58	  

"Not	  Easy"	  to	  Find	  a	  Job	  with	  
Same	  Income	  and	  Fringe	  BeneZits	  

Figure	  A.4.	  Perceived	  Difficulty	  of	  Job	  Finding,	  All	  Available	  Years	  in	  the	  General	  
Social	  Survey	  from	  1977	  to	  2010	  
	  

Employed	  Adults	  

60	  
55	  
50	  
45	  
40	  

Slope=3.61	  (s.e.=.47)	  
Intercept=17.48	  (s.e.=3.14)	  
R²	  =	  0.764	  

35	  
30	  
25	  
3	  

4	  

5	  

6	  

7	  

8	  

9	  

Civilian	  Unemployment	  Rate,	  January	  to	  May	  of	  Same	  Year	  

	  

10	  

	  

Notes:	  
1. See	  notes	  to	  Figure	  9	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  	  
2. This	  figure	  considers	  samples	  of	  workers	  18-­‐64	  years	  of	  age,	  whereas	  Figure	  9	  
considers	  samples	  restricted	  to	  prime	  age	  workers	  25-­‐54	  years	  of	  age.	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

59	  

B. 	  Model	  Simulations	  and	  Calculations	  
	  

1.	  	  Model	  of	  Hall	  and	  Milgrom	  (Table	  4)	  
	  

Following	  Hall	  and	  Milgrom	  (2008),	  define	  the	  asset	  value	  of	  unemployment	  as	  

Ui = z +

1
& ! i, i' "#" (#i )(Wi' + Vi' ) + (1! " (#i ))Ui' $%, 	  
1+ r i'

where:	  
§

z 	  is	  the	  income	  value	  of	  leisure	  and	  other	  nonmarket	  activity,	  inclusive	  of	  
unemployment	  benefits	  

§

r	  is	  the	  daily	  rate	  of	  interest	  

§

! (" i ) is	  the	  daily	  job-­‐finding	  probability	  for	  unemployed	  workers	  in	  aggregate	  state	  
i,	  a	  function	  of	  the	  vacancy-­‐unemployment	  ratio	   ! 	  

§

! i, i' 	  is	  the	  daily	  probability	  of	  transitioning	  from	  state	  i	  to	  state	   i' ,	  and	  

§

Wi is	  the	  worker’s	  value	  of	  the	  wage	  bargain	  in	  state	  i.	  

The	  asset	  value	  of	  employment,	  net	  of	  the	  value	  of	  the	  wage	  bargain,	  is	  given	  by	  

Vi =

1
" ! i, i' [(1 ! s)Vi' + sUi' ],
1 + r i'
	  

where	  s	  is	  the	  daily	  rate	  at	  which	  workers	  separate	  from	  jobs.	  	  
Let	   wi be	  the	  annuity	  value	  of	  the	  wage	  bargain	  for	  an	  employed	  worker	  in	  
aggregate	  state	  i.	  	  This	  annuity	  value	  solves	  the	  system	  of	  equations,	  

Wi = wi +

1! s
" ! i, i'Wi', for i = 1,..., 5.
1+ r i'
	  

In	  matrix	  notation,	  we	  can	  write	  the	  vector	  of	  annuity	  values	  as	  

	  

60	  

) "1! s% ,
w = +I ! $
' ( . W.
* # 1 + r & - 	  
	  

For	  Panel	  A	  in	  Table	  4,	  we	  work	  directly	  with	  value	  functions	  and	  calculate	  the	  

percentage	  loss	  in	  present	  value	  income	  due	  to	  job	  loss	  in	  aggregate	  state	  i	  as	  

" W + V !Ui %
Inc _ Lossi = 100 $ i i
'. 	  
# Wi + Vi &
Each	  entry	  in	  Panel	  A	  reports	  the	  range	  of	  these	  loss	  values	  across	  the	  5	  aggregate	  states	  
for	  the	  indicated	  model	  and	  calibration.	  	  
	  

The	  remaining	  panels	  rely	  on	  simulated	  aggregate	  and	  individual-­‐level	  outcomes	  for	  

each	  model.	  	  Panel	  A	  tells	  us	  that	  mean	  present	  value	  income	  losses	  differ	  very	  little	  across	  
aggregate	  states	  for	  a	  given	  model	  and	  calibration.	  	  Partly	  for	  this	  reason,	  and	  partly	  for	  the	  
sake	  of	  brevity,	  we	  start	  all	  simulations	  in	  the	  middle	  aggregate	  state.	  
The	  simulations	  for	  the	  income	  loss	  calculations	  proceed	  as	  follows:	  
1. Set	  the	  initial	  aggregate	  state	  to	  i=3,	  the	  middle	  state.	  
2. Draw	  1,000	  aggregate	  daily	  paths	  using	  the	  transition	  matrix	   !. 	  Let	  each	  aggregate	  
path	  proceed	  for	  5,000	  days,	  which	  corresponds	  to	  20	  years	  at	  250	  days	  per	  year.	  	  
The	  evolution	  of	  the	  aggregate	  state	  along	  a	  given	  aggregate	  path	  determines	  the	  
evolution	  of	  the	  daily	  job-­‐finding	  probability	   ! (" i ) .	  
3. On	  each	  aggregate	  path,	  track	  realized	  income	  flows	  for	  5,000	  persons	  who	  become	  
unemployed	  on	  day	  1.	  	  After	  day	  1,	  persons	  transition	  between	  unemployment	  and	  
employment	  according	  to	  the	  probabilities	   ! (" i ) and	  s.	  	  An	  individual’s	  realized	  
income	  flows	  are	  given	  by	  

	  

61	  

! wi,t , if employed at t in state i;
Flowi,t = "
	  
# z, if unemployed.
4. At	  the	  terminal	  date	  T=5,000,	  assign	  each	  individual	  the	  asset	  value	  of	  his	  
employment	  status,	  either	   Wi + Vi 	  if	  employed	  or	   Ui if	  unemployed.	  
5. Compute	  the	  day-­‐1	  present	  value	  of	  the	  realized	  income	  path	  for	  persons	  who	  lose	  
jobs	  on	  day	  1	  as	  
T
! 1 $
!
U(Income, Day 1) = z + ' #
&%
"
t=1 1 + r

t(1

T

! 1 $
flowi,t + #
A , 	  
" 1 + r &% i, T

where	   Ai, T 	  is	  the	  terminal	  asset	  value	  of	  the	  individual’s	  employment	  status.	  	  

!
Day 1) 	  for	  each	  
6. The	  foregoing	  simulations	  produce	  5,000	  values	  of	   U(Income,
aggregate	  path.	  	  The	  corresponding	  realized	  present	  value	  income	  losses	  due	  to	  job	  
loss,	  expressed	  as	  a	  percentage	  of	  the	  asset	  value	  of	  employment,	  are	  given	  by	  
!
" W + V ! U(Income,
Day 1) %
R _ Inc _ Loss = 100 $
' , 	  
W +V
#
&

where	  the	  asset	  values	  are	  evaluated	  at	  the	  initial	  aggregate	  state	  i=3.	  
	  	  	  	  

The	  realized	  income	  loss	  calculations	  in	  Table	  4	  report	  summary	  statistics	  on	  the	  

individual-­‐level	  values	  of	  R_Inc_Loss	  for	  all	  aggregate	  paths	  (Panel	  B)	  and	  subsets	  of	  
aggregate	  paths	  (Panels	  C	  to	  D).	  	  These	  panels	  also	  report	  mean	  values	  taken	  over	  
aggregate	  paths	  for	  the	  unemployment	  rate	  and	  the	  monthly	  job-­‐finding	  rate.	  	  
The	  simulations	  for	  the	  earnings	  loss	  calculations	  proceed	  as	  follows:	  	  Steps	  1	  and	  2	  
are	  the	  same	  as	  above.	  	  Step	  3	  is	  also	  the	  same,	  except	  that	  z=0.	  	  In	  Step	  4,	  we	  set	  the	  
terminal	  asset	  value	  to	  0	  to	  focus	  on	  20-­‐year	  earnings	  horizons.	  	  We	  modify	  Step	  5	  to	  obtain	  
	  

	  

62	  

T
! 1 $
!
U(Earnings,
Day 1) = 0 + ( #
&%
"
t=1 1 + r

t'1

flowi,t (z = 0),

	  

where flowi,t (z = 0) 	  is	  the	  realized	  path	  of	  earnings	  for	  the	  individual	  in	  question.	  
Along	  each	  aggregate	  path,	  we	  also	  simulate	  the	  earnings	  paths	  for	  1,000	  persons	  
who	  remain	  employed	  on	  day	  1.	  	  Following	  the	  same	  approach	  as	  for	  day-­‐1	  job	  losers,	  we	  
calculate	  the	  present	  value	  of	  their	  earnings	  over	  a	  20-­‐year	  horizon,	  
T
! 1 $
!
E(Earnings, Day 1) = wi + ( #
&%
"
t=1 1 + r

t'1

flowi,t (z = 0), 	  

where,	  again,	   flowi,t (z = 0) 	  is	  the	  realized	  earnings	  path	  for	  the	  individual	  in	  question.	  	  We	  
then	  compute	  the	  mean	  over	  employed	  persons	  on	  Day	  1	  to	  obtain	   E(Earnings, Day 1) 	  for	  
each	  aggregate	  path.	  	  	  Thus,	  we	  have	  one	  value	  of	   E(Earnings, Day 1) and	  5,000	  values	  of	  

!
U(Earnings,
Day 1) for	  each	  aggregate	  path.	  
Lastly,	  we	  compute	  a	  realized	  present	  value	  earnings	  loss	  measure	  for	  each	  
individual	  in	  a	  manner	  analogous	  to	  step	  6	  above,	  obtaining	  
!
" E(Earnings, Day 1) ! U(Earnings,
Day 1) %
R _ Earn _ Loss = 100 $
' . 	  
E(Earnings, Day 1)
#
&

Table	  4	  reports	  statistics	  for	  the	  distribution	  of	  individual-­‐level	  values	  of	  R_Earn_Loss	  for	  all	  
aggregate	  paths	  (Panel	  B)	  and	  subsets	  of	  aggregate	  paths	  (Panels	  C	  and	  D).	  	  	  

2.	  	  Model	  of	  Burgess	  and	  Turon	  (Table	  5)	  
	  

As	  before,	  we	  calculate	  present	  value	  income	  losses	  due	  to	  job	  loss	  as	  a	  percent	  of	  

employment	  asset	  values.	  	  We	  also	  calculate	  present	  value	  earnings	  losses	  over	  a	  20-­‐year	  
horizon,	  expressed	  as	  a	  percent	  of	  present	  value	  earnings	  over	  20	  years.	  	  	  

	  

63	  

Before	  describing	  the	  simulation	  details,	  it	  will	  be	  helpful	  to	  define	  the	  objects	  we	  
calculate.	  	  Let	   f p (! ) 	  denote	  the	  density	  function	  of	  filled	  jobs	  in	  aggregate	  productivity	  
state	  p,	  where	   ! 	  is	  the	  idiosyncratic	  productivity	  value,	  and	  let	   F p 	  be	  the	  corresponding	  
distribution	  function.	  	  Following	  Burgess	  and	  Turon,	  we	  ignore	  the	  short-­‐term	  dynamics	  of	  

f p (! ) 	  for	  a	  given	  aggregate	  productivity	  state	  and,	  in	  solving	  the	  model,	  calculate	  the	  
“stationary”	  distribution	  of	  filled	  jobs	  that	  prevails	  when	  aggregate	  productivity	  remains	  
constant	  for	  a	  period	  of	  time.	  	  Employers	  and	  workers	  know	  the	  stochastic	  processes	  
governing	  aggregate	  and	  idiosyncratic	  shocks	  and	  how	  the	  distribution	   F p shifts	  in	  
response	  to	  aggregate	  productivity.	  	  They	  account	  for	  the	  stochastic	  elements	  of	  the	  
environment	  when	  making	  choices	  about	  job	  creation,	  recruitment,	  search	  and	  wages.	  	  
Burgess	  and	  Turon	  show	  that	  wages	  can	  be	  expressed	  as	  a	  function	  of	  p	  and	   ! .	  
Let	   E p (! ; z,T ) 	  denote	  the	  present	  value	  of	  expected	  future	  income	  or	  earnings	  flows	  
for	  a	  worker	  currently	  employed	  in	  a	  job	  with	  idiosyncratic	  productivity	   ! 	  when	  the	  
aggregate	  state	  is	  p.	  	  Evaluating E p (! ; z,T ) 	  at	  z	  =	  income	  value	  of	  leisure	  and	  T= ! 	  yields	  the	  
expected	  present	  value	  of	  income.	  	  Evaluating	  at	  z=0	  and	  T=80	  quarters	  yields	  the	  expected	  
present	  value	  of	  earnings	  over	  a	  20-­‐year	  horizon.	  	  Similarly,	   U p (z,T ) is	  the	  present	  value	  of	  
expected	  future	  income	  or	  earnings	  for	  an	  unemployed	  worker	  in	  aggregate	  state	  p.	  
Panel	  A	  in	  Table	  5	  reports	  present	  value	  loss	  measures	  in	  the	  Good,	  Middle	  and	  Bad	  
aggregate	  states.	  	  Specifically,	  

Panel A:

& {"# E

p

}

(! ; z,T ) !U p (z,T )$% / E p (! ; z,T ) f p (! )d! , 	  

where	  p	  indexes	  the	  aggregate	  state,	  and	  we	  evaluate	  z	  and	  T	  to	  recover	  the	  present	  value	  
loss	  of	  income	  or	  earnings,	  as	  discussed	  above.	  	  For	  the	  income	  loss	  calculations,	  the	  
	  

64	  

relevant E p (! ) 	  and	   U p 	  objects	  are	  value	  functions.	  	  For	  the	  earnings	  loss	  calculations,	  we	  
construct	  the	  relevant	   E p (! ) 	  and	   U p 	  objects	  by	  simulating	  aggregate	  and	  individual-­‐level	  
earnings	  paths	  as	  described	  below.	  	  	  The	  Panel	  A	  calculation	  can	  be	  interpreted	  as	  the	  
present	  value	  loss	  due	  to	  job	  loss	  relative	  to	  the	  worker’s	  pre-­‐displacement	  situation	  (own	  
past)	  and	  relative	  to	  the	  situation	  for	  workers	  who	  remain	  employed	  in	  a	  job	  with	  the	  same	  
value	  of	   ! 	  as	  the	  pre-­‐displacement	  job	  (control	  group).	  	  These	  two	  benchmarks	  –	  own	  past	  
and	  control	  group	  –	  yield	  the	  same	  loss	  calculation	  in	  this	  case.	  	  	  	  
	  

Rows	  C	  through	  N	  in	  Table	  5	  report	  present	  value	  income	  and	  earnings	  losses	  for	  

workers	  who	  lose	  jobs	  in	  the	  wake	  of	  a	  negative	  shock	  to	  aggregate	  productivity.	  	  Job	  
destruction	  and	  job	  loss	  now	  arise	  because	  of	  (sufficiently)	  negative	  idiosyncratic	  
productivity	  shocks,	  as	  in	  Panel	  A,	  and	  because	  the	  negative	  aggregate	  shock	  generates	  a	  
burst	  of	  job	  destruction	  at	  the	  lower	  end	  of	  the	  match	  productivity	  distribution.	  	  We	  
describe	  the	  present	  value	  calculations	  for	  the	  Good(G)	  to	  Middle(M)	  transition;	  i.e.,	  in	  the	  
wake	  of	  a	  shock	  that	  shifts	  aggregate	  productivity	  from	  Good	  to	  Middle.	  	  Analogous	  
calculations	  hold	  for	  the	  GoodàBad	  and	  MiddleàBad	  transitions.	  	  The	  present	  value	  loss	  
expressions	  for	  the	  GoodàMiddle	  transition	  are	  given	  by	  

Panel C and I:

& {"# E

G

}

(! ; z,T ) !U M (z,T )$% / E G (! ; z,T ) f G (! )d! ,

Panel D and J: !" F G ( R(M ))#$

%1

& {!" E

R(M )

G

	  

}

(! ; z,T ) %U M (z,T )#$ E G (! ; z,T ) f G (! )d! , and

R(G )

Panel F and L:

& {"# E

M

}

(! ; z,T ) !U M (z,T )$% / E M (! ; z,T ) f M (! )d! ,

	  

where	   R(p) 	  is	  the	  job	  destruction	  threshold	  in	  aggregate	  productivity	  state	  p.	  	  	  

	  

65	  

	  

The	  expression	  for	  Panels	  C	  and	  I	  gives	  the	  mean	  PV	  loss	  in	  the	  Middle	  aggregate	  
state	  relative	  to	  own	  past	  PV	  positions	  in	  the	  Good	  state	  for	  workers	  who	  lose	  jobs	  due	  to	  
idiosyncratic	  shocks.	  	  The	  expression	  for	  Panels	  D	  and	  J	  gives	  the	  mean	  PV	  loss	  for	  workers	  
who	  become	  unemployed	  in	  the	  burst	  of	  job	  destruction	  triggered	  by	  the	  aggregate	  
productivity	  transition	  from	  Good	  to	  Middle.	  	  This	  negative	  aggregate	  shock	  destroys	  all	  
jobs	  with	   ! ![R(G), R(M )]. 	  Panels	  D	  and	  J	  express	  the	  PV	  loss	  relative	  to	  the	  worker’s	  own	  
past	  situation	  in	  the	  Good	  aggregate	  state.	  	  The	  expressions	  for	  Panels	  F	  and	  L	  give	  the	  
mean	  PV	  loss	  for	  job-­‐losing	  workers	  relative	  to	  control	  groups	  of	  workers	  who	  remain	  
employed	  in	  the	  new	  Middle	  state.	  	  	  The	  loss	  expression	  in	  the	  GoodàMiddle	  transition	  for	  
Panels	  F	  and	  L	  is	  identical	  to	  the	  loss	  expression	  in	  the	  Middle	  state	  for	  Panel	  A.1	  Because	  
all	  workers	  with	   ! ![R(G), R(M )] 	  lose	  jobs	  when	  the	  economy	  transitions	  from	  Good	  to	  
Middle,	  Panels	  G	  and	  M	  report	  zero	  losses	  for	  these	  workers	  relative	  to	  controls.	  	  Finally,	  
Panels	  E,	  H,	  K	  and	  N	  report	  inflow-­‐weighted	  averages	  of	  PV	  earnings	  losses	  due	  to	  the	  two	  
types	  of	  job	  destruction	  shocks	  –	  negative	  aggregate	  shocks	  and	  sufficiently	  negative	  
idiosyncratic	  shocks.	  	  At	  the	  quarterly	  frequency	  and	  chosen	  calibration,	  idiosyncratic	  
shocks	  drive	  most	  of	  the	  job-­‐loss	  events.	  	  
The	  simulations	  for	  the	  earnings	  loss	  calculations	  proceed	  as	  follows:	  
1. Set	  the	  initial	  aggregate	  state	  to	  Good,	  Middle	  or	  Bad.	  
2. Draw	  2,000	  aggregate	  paths	  using	  the	  transition	  matrix	  for	  p.	  	  Let	  each	  aggregate	  
path	  proceed	  for	  80	  quarters	  (20	  years).	  	  Calculate	  the	  implied	  paths	  for	  the	  
distribution	  function	   F p (! ), wage	  function	   w( p, ! ), and	  job-­‐finding	  probability.	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  We	  integrate	  with	  respect	  to	   f M (! ) in	  Panels	  F	  and	  L	  rather	  than	   f G (! ), but	  that	  matters	  
little	  for	  the	  results.	  
	  

66	  

3. Partition	   [!! , ! ], the	  range	  of	  possible	  productivity	  values,	  into	  200	  subintervals	  of	  
equal	  length.	  	  In	  the	  first	  quarter	  of	  each	  aggregate	  path,	  choose	  1,000	  unemployed	  
persons	  and	  100	  employed	  persons	  per	  subinterval	  in	  the	  support	  of	   F p (! ) .	  	  The	  
support	  of	   F p (! ) covers	  at	  least	  150	  subintervals	  for	  each	  aggregate	  state.	  	  	  
4. Follow	  the	  initially	  employed	  and	  initially	  unemployed	  persons	  forward	  in	  time	  for	  
the	  80-­‐quarter	  duration	  of	  each	  aggregate	  path.	  	  Track	  each	  person’s	  realized	  
earnings	  path	  given	  optimal	  search	  and	  allowing	  for	  the	  stochastic	  arrival	  of	  job	  
opportunities	  when	  searching	  and	  idiosyncratic	  productivity	  shocks	  when	  
employed.	  	  Track	  and	  store	  each	  person’s	  realized	  earnings	  path,	  where	  earnings	  
equal	   w( p, ! ) 	  when	  employed	  and	  0	  when	  unemployed.	  
5. Consider	  all	  simulated	  individual	  outcomes	  along	  a	  given	  aggregate	  simulation	  path.	  	  
Calculate	  the	  realized	  PV	  of	  earnings	  for	  each	  initially	  unemployed	  and	  each	  initially	  
employed	  person	  living	  on	  that	  aggregate	  path.	  	  Compute	  the	  mean	  PV	  over	  initially	  
unemployed	  persons	  to	  obtain	   U p (0,80) and	  the	  mean	  by	  subinterval	  to	  obtain

E p (! ;0,80). Plug	  these	  objects	  into	  the	  integral	  expressions	  above	  to	  obtain	  the	  
	  
desired	  PV	  earnings	  loss	  expression	  for	  the	  given	  aggregate	  path.	  	  
6. Repeat	  Step	  5	  for	  all	  aggregate	  paths	  and	  compute	  the	  simple	  mean	  of	  the	  PV	  loss	  
expressions	  to	  obtain	  the	  results	  reported	  in	  Table	  5.	  
As	  remarked	  in	  the	  main	  text,	  the	  calibration	  used	  for	  Table	  5	  departs	  from	  that	  of	  
Burgess	  and	  Turon	  to	  obtain	  job-­‐finding	  rates	  in	  line	  with	  U.S.	  experience	  in	  recent	  
decades.	  	  For	  comparison	  purposes,	  Table	  B1	  below	  reports	  results	  for	  a	  version	  of	  Table	  5	  
based	  on	  the	  calibration	  of	  Burgess	  and	  Turon.	  	  As	  indicated	  by	  the	  entries	  in	  Panel	  B,	  the	  

	  

67	  

Burgess-­‐Turon	  calibration	  involves	  much	  lower	  job-­‐finding	  rates	  than	  the	  ones	  considered	  
in	  Table	  5.	  	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  PV	  income	  and	  earnings	  losses	  associated	  with	  job	  loss	  are	  
substantially	  larger	  in	  the	  Burgess-­‐Turon	  calibration.	  
Section	  5.C	  in	  the	  main	  text	  also	  reports	  the	  average	  difference	  between	  the	  pre-­‐
displacement	  wage	  and	  the	  wage	  on	  the	  first	  post-­‐displacement	  job	  for	  persons	  who	  lose	  
jobs	  due	  to	  idiosyncratic	  shocks.	  	  We	  calculate	  this	  statistic	  as	  follows.	  	  For	  initially	  
unemployed	  persons	  in	  Step	  4	  above,	  store	  the	  wage	  in	  their	  first	  post-­‐displacement	  job.	  	  
Compute	  the	  mean	  of	  this	  wage	  over	  all	  aggregate	  and	  individual-­‐level	  paths,	  and	  call	  it	   w1p . 	  
The	  wage-­‐change	  statistic	  we	  report	  in	  the	  text	  is	   1 ! & "# w1p / w( p, ! )$% f p (! )d! . 	  	  	  
	  

Figure	  B1	  shows	  the	  wage	  function,	  the	  density	  of	  all	  filled	  jobs,	  and	  the	  density	  of	  

first	  jobs	  for	  workers	  who	  exit	  unemployment	  after	  losing	  their	  jobs	  in	  the	  model	  of	  
Burgess	  and	  Turon.	  	  The	  figure	  is	  constructed	  for	  the	  Good	  aggregate	  state	  using	  the	  same	  
calibration	  as	  Table	  5	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  	  Wages	  in	  filled	  jobs	  vary	  from	  about	  0.79	  to	  1.16.	  	  
As	  seen	  by	  a	  comparison	  between	  the	  dashed	  and	  solid	  red	  lines,	  the	  distribution	  of	  filled	  
jobs	  for	  recent	  job	  losers	  is	  more	  concentrated	  at	  the	  low	  end	  of	  the	  wage	  distribution	  than	  
the	  distribution	  of	  all	  filled	  jobs.	  	  This	  comparison	  illustrates	  the	  job	  ladder	  in	  the	  model:	  	  
Following	  a	  job	  loss	  event,	  newly	  reemployed	  workers	  tend	  to	  start	  near	  the	  bottom	  of	  the	  
job	  ladder	  and	  to	  move	  up	  the	  ladder	  over	  time	  through	  search	  on	  the	  job.	  
	  

	  

68	  

Table	  B1.	  Present	  Value	  Losses	  Due	  to	  Job	  Loss	  in	  the	  Model	  of	  Burgess	  and	  Turon	  
with	  their	  Calibration	  
	  
Present	  Value	  Losses,	  Percent	  of	  Employment	  Asset	  Value	  for	  Income	  Losses	  and	  	  
Percent	  of	  Present	  Value	  Earnings	  Over	  a	  20-­‐Year	  Horizon	  for	  Earnings	  Losses	  
	  
	  
Aggregate	  State	  
Good	  
Middle	  
Bad	  
A.	  Mean	  PV	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  
Income	  
0.62	  
0.58	  
0.53	  
Shocks	  that	  Result	  in	  Job	  Loss	  
Earnings	  
4.38	  
4.68	  
4.98	  
B.	  Quarterly	  (Monthly)	  Job	  Finding	  Rate	  
39.4	  (15.4)	   35.3	  (13.5)	   31.5	  (11.9)	  
	  
Present	  Value	  Income	  Losses	  
Aggregate	  State	   Goodà	   Middleà	  
Goodà	  
	  Transition	   Middle	  
Bad	  
Bad	  
C.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  Shocks	  that	  
0.84	  
0.77	  
1.04	  
Result	  in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Own	  Past	  
	  
D.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Aggregate	  Shock	  that	  Results	  
0.23	  
0.21	  
0.43	  
in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Own	  Past	  
E.	  Inflow-­‐Weighted	  Average	  of	  Rows	  C	  and	  D	  
0.78	  
0.72	  
0.94	  
F.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  Shocks	  that	  
0.58	  
0.53	  
0.53	  
Result	  in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Control	  Group	  
G.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Aggregate	  Shock	  that	  Results	  
0	  
0	  
0	  
in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Control	  Group	  
H.	  Inflow-­‐Weighted	  Average	  of	  Rows	  F	  and	  G	  
0.52	  
0.48	  
0.44	  
	  
Present	  Value	  Earnings	  Losses	  
I.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  Shocks	  that	  
5.44	  
5.80	  
6.09	  
Result	  in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Own	  Past	  
J.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Aggregate	  Shock	  that	  Results	  
4.48	  
5.10	  
5.23	  
in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Own	  Past	  
K.	  Inflow-­‐Weighted	  Average	  of	  Rows	  I	  and	  J	  
5.34	  
5.73	  
5.95	  
L.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  Shocks	  that	  
4.68	  
4.98	  
4.98	  
Result	  in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Control	  Group	  
M.	  Mean	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Aggregate	  Shock	  that	  Results	  
0	  
0	  
0	  
in	  Job	  Loss,	  Comparison	  to	  Control	  Group	  
N.	  Inflow-­‐Weighted	  Average	  of	  Rows	  L	  and	  M	  
4.21	  
4.51	  
4.14	  
	  
	  
Average	  Relative	  Wage	  Loss	  Due	  to	  Idiosyncratic	  
5.17	  
4.00	  
4.58	  
Shocks	  That	  Result	  in	  Job	  Loss	  
	  
Notes:	  The	  calculations	  in	  this	  table	  follow	  those	  of	  Table	  5	  in	  the	  main	  text.	  	  Here,	  we	  use	  
the	  calibration	  of	  Burgess	  and	  Turon,	  which	  involves	  substantially	  smaller	  job-­‐finding	  
rates.	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

69	  

Figure	  B1.	  	  Wage	  Function	  and	  Density	  of	  Filled	  Jobs	  in	  the	  Model	  of	  Burgess	  and	  
Turon	  for	  the	  Table	  5	  Calibration	  
	  

	  
Notes:	  
1. The	  bold	  black	  line	  shows	  the	  wage	  as	  a	  function	  of	  the	  idiosyncratic	  productivity	  
value, ! ,	  in	  the	  Good	  aggregate	  state.	  	  	  
2. The	  solid	  red	  line	  shows	  the	  density	  function	  of	  filled	  jobs	  in	  the	  Good	  aggregate	  
state.	  
3. The	  dashed	  line	  shows	  the	  density	  function	  of	  first	  post-­‐displacement	  jobs	  for	  
workers	  leaving	  unemployment	  after	  losing	  their	  former	  jobs.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

70	  

	  

