                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     GAINS AND GAPS: CHANGING INEQUALITY IN U.S. COLLEGE ENTRY AND
                             COMPLETION

                                           Martha J. Bailey
                                          Susan M. Dynarski

                                        Working Paper 17633
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17633


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




A version of this paper is published under the title, “Inequality in Postsecondary Education,” in Whither
Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children, edited by
Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. We are grateful for research assistance from Emily Beam,
Sayeh Nikpay, Nathaniel Schwartz, and Francie Streich. Rebecca Blank, Greg Duncan, Mike McPherson,
Richard Murnane, and participants in the conferences on Social Inequality and Educational Disadvantage
provided valuable comments. The Russell Sage Foundation generously provided funding for this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Martha J. Bailey and Susan M. Dynarski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in U.S. College Entry and Completion
Martha J. Bailey and Susan M. Dynarski
NBER Working Paper No. 17633
December 2011
JEL No. I21,I23,I24,J1,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

We describe changes over time in inequality in postsecondary education using nearly seventy years
of data from the U.S. Census and the 1979 and 1997 National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth. We
find growing gaps between children from high- and low-income families in college entry, persistence,
and graduation. Rates of college completion increased by only four percentage points for low-income
cohorts born around 1980 relative to cohorts born in the early 1960s, but by 18 percentage points for
corresponding cohorts who grew up in high-income families. Among men, inequality in educational
attainment has increased slightly since the early 1980s. But among women, inequality in educational
attainment has risen sharply, driven by increases in the education of the daughters of high-income
parents. Sex differences in educational attainment, which were small or nonexistent thirty years ago,
are now substantial, with women outpacing men in every demographic group. The female advantage
in educational attainment is largest in the top quartile of the income distribution. These sex differences
present a formidable challenge to standard explanations for rising inequality in educational attainment.


Martha J. Bailey
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu

Susan M. Dynarski
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu
I.     Introduction

Postsecondary education is a key path to upward mobility in the United States. For this reason,

understanding recent trends in college going and college graduation for children from different

family backgrounds is critical to understanding how increases in family income inequality affect

the life chances of children born into low-income families. In this paper we document changes

over time in inequality in educational attainment by family income, and examine the extent to

which trends vary by gender. We focus in particular on the thirty years since 1980, in which we

find growing income gaps in college entry, persistence, and completion.

       We find increasing advantages for children growing up in high-income families. On all

three attainment dimensions we track – college entry, persistence and completion – cohorts born

between 1979 and 1982 attained more than cohorts born between 1961 and 1964. However, the

attainment advantages for the latter cohorts were larger for children raised in high- as opposed to

low-income families. A new and puzzling finding is that these increases in educational inequality

are driven largely by women. Among men, inequality in educational attainment by family

income has increased much less than it has among women. For example, the gap between the

top and bottom quartiles in college entry increased by fifteen percentage points among women

but by seven percentage points among men. This difference is driven by sharp increases in the

education of daughters of high-income parents.

       Sex differences in educational attainment, which were small or nonexistent thirty years

ago, are now substantial, with women outpacing men in every income group. The female

advantage in educational attainment is largest in the top quartile of the income distribution.

These findings present a formidable challenge to standard explanations for rising inequality in

educational attainment. Girls and boys are raised in the same families, attend the same



                                                 1
elementary and secondary schools, and face the same college prices. Given that inequality has

risen primarily among women, widening inequality in parental income, changes in school quality

and organization, and rising tuition prices are candidate explanations for increases in the

inequality in educational attainment if and only if these shocks differentially affect the

educational attainment of men and women. An alternative (and potentially complementary)

explanation is that men and women operate in segregated labor markets and asymmetric

marriage markets and, therefore, face different returns to human capital. Since current

inequalities between men and women in educational attainment were foreshadowed seventy

years ago, policymakers and researchers may want to look beyond current events and trends to

understand today’s educational inequality.

       From a policy and research perspective, our main findings indicate that we cannot focus

solely on the college entry margin if we wish to understand the sources of, and remedies for,

inequality in postsecondary attainment. Differences in high school completion between children

from low-income families and those from high-income families explain half of the gap in college

entry. However, among those who enter college, children from low-income families are much

less likely to get a degree. Inequality in college persistence, therefore, produces inequality in

college completion, even if college-entry rates were equal (which they are not).


II.    Historical Trends in College Entry and Completion

To provide context for our examination of trends in college going and college completion by

family income, we begin by documenting changes in educational attainment between 1940 and

2007. We focus on trends in three outcomes. We define the college entry rate as the share of

each birth cohort that has any college experience by age nineteen or is in school at age nineteen;

this experience could consist of less than one year of course work. The share of a cohort that



                                                  2
completes a bachelor’s degree (B.A.) by age twenty-five is referred to as the college completion

rate.1 The college completion rate divided by the entry rate provides a measure of the share of

college entrants who go on to graduate, which we refer to as the college persistence rate.

        Our data sources are the U.S. decennial censuses from 1940 to 2000 and the American

Community Surveys (ACS) for 2006 and 2007 (Ruggles et al. 2009). We focus on the native-

born population. The census and ACS have two key advantages over other data sources. First,

they provide a sixty-seven-year perspective on college entry and completion of young people.

Second, they cover a broader population than, in particular, the Current Population Survey

(CPS), by including residents of dormitories, barracks, and prisons. This is especially important

when measuring differences across demographic groups in educational attainment, since young

men, especially black men, are disproportionately likely to live in barracks and prisons. Although

we can track black-white differences in educational attainment for the entire period under

analysis, we can only provide reliable statistics for Hispanics as of 1980, when the census began

to explicitly ask about “Hispanic origin” on the enumeration form. In any long-term analysis,

changes in variable definitions can make it difficult to distinguish real changes in behavior from

changes in measurement. These measurement issues are discussed in more detail in the data

appendix.


College Entry and Completion since 1940
        Rates of college entry and completion increased dramatically over the last seventy years.

As illustrated in Figure 1 (top line), from 1940 to 2007 (cohorts born between 1921 and 1988),

college entry increased by roughly 50 percentage points—an average of 7.6 percentage points



1
  There is a growing divergence between completion rates at ages twenty-five and thirty-five, reflecting
the increasing tendency of youths to leave college and return later to complete their B.A.s (Turner 2004).
This trend is especially pronounced among women.


                                                    3
per decade. College completion by age twenty-five among cohorts born between 1915 and 1983

more than quadrupled.2 Whereas only 6 to 7 percent of those born in 1915 graduated from

college, 28 percent of those born in 1975 would graduate by age twenty-five.3 A key question for

this paper is whether the trends in college entry and completion illustrated in Figure 1 pertain to

children from low-income families as well as to children from high-income families. It is to this

question that we now turn.

        For this analysis, we use detailed longitudinal data from the NLSY79 and NLSY97

(National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997) and focus on educational attainment by

family income quartiles for recent birth cohorts. These data sets allow us to examine the link

between parental income and children’s educational attainment, and how it has changed over

time. We focus on two cohorts: those born in 1961 through 1964 (NLSY79, early cohort) and

those born in 1979 through 1982 (NLSY97, later cohort). On-time graduation from high school

for these cohorts would have been in 1979 through 1982 and 1997 through 2000, respectively.

The sample is limited to respondents for whom we have information about grade attainment at

both age nineteen and age twenty-five.4

        Figure 2 shows the college entry rates for the two cohorts, plotted separately by

household-income quartile, and Figure 3 shows the analogous college completion rates.



2
  The post-1980 censuses and the ACS record whether a person has “some college” or completed a
degree, but earlier censuses ask only about highest grade completed. To the extent that earlier censuses
overstate college completion, this change in definition will tend to understate changes in college
completion for the affected cohorts.
3
  In unreported results, we find that the March Current Population Survey (CPS) matches the census
closely: the CPS understates college completion by age twenty-five by less than one and a half percentage
points; graduation by age thirty-five is identical for the 1955 cohort forward. The NLSY, however,
appears to overstate college completion slightly: graduation rates by age twenty-five are three percentage
points higher for the 1965 cohort in the NLSY79 and six percentage points for the 1982 cohort in the
NLSY97.
4
  In NLSY79, 89 percent of those providing grade-attainment information at age nineteen also do so at
twenty-five. For NLSY97, the figure is 95 percent.


                                                    4
Household income is measured at the time of each baseline survey, when children were fifteen to

eighteen years old. One pattern evident in the figures is that, for both cohorts, higher family

income is associated with a greater probability that a child will enter and will graduate from

college. A second pattern evident in Figures 2 and 3 is that the college entry rate and the college

completion rate rose between the two periods. However, the increases were highly uneven, with

gains largest at the top of the income distribution and smallest at the bottom.5 Specifically, the

top two quartiles boosted their college entry rates by about twenty-two percentage points, to 80

percent in the top quartile and 60 percent in the next highest quartile. In the bottom quartile, the

college entry rate rose just ten percentage points, from 19 to 29 percent. A result is that the gap

in the college entry rate between the bottom- and top-income quartiles increased from thirty-nine

to fifty-one percentage points. The story is similar for college completion, with the top-income

quartile gaining an astounding eighteen percentage points but the bottom quartile nudging up

only slightly to nine from five percent. The product of this uneven growth was increased

inequality in college outcomes during a period in which educational attainments became

increasingly strong determinants of subsequent earnings.

          Together these facts about college entry and completion provide insight into income

differences in college persistence (Figure 4). For both cohorts, the persistence rate rises with

income, with those in the top quartile more than twice as likely to graduate as those in the bottom

quartile. Persistence rates rose slightly (six percentage points) in the bottom and top two

quartiles, and just one percentage points in the second quartile. The relationship between income

and persistence, therefore, remained quite strong. This pattern implies that equal increases in

college entry will generate highly unequal increases in college completion.



5
    Belley and Lochner (2007) reach a similar conclusion in their analysis of these data.


                                                       5
Sex Differences in Inequality in College Entry and Completion
A striking aspect of the increase in inequality in college outcomes by income group is that it is

primarily a female phenomenon. In college entry, persistence, and completion, women in the

top-income quartile have pulled away from the rest of population. In the later cohort, an

astounding 85 percent of women in the top quartile entered college. The gap between the top-

and bottom-income quartiles in college entry rose by fifteen percentage points among women.

The comparable increase for men is seven percentage points. The pattern in completion is

similar, with the gap between the top and bottom quartiles rising by seventeen percentage points

among women and eleven percentage points among men.

       Figure 5 plots the difference between males and females in college completion rates by

family income quartile for the two cohorts. In the early cohort, there are few differences

between the sexes: there is a slight female advantage of two percentage points in the top quartile

and a slight disadvantage of two to three percentage points in the bottom three quartiles. Within

the later cohort, a female advantage opened in every quartile, with the largest in the top. In the

top quartile, the female advantage opened to thirteen percentage points, whereas in the bottom it

was just three percentage points.

       The evidence from the two NLSY cohorts reveals two striking patterns. The first is that

inequality in college outcomes by family income increased dramatically in recent decades. The

second is that the increase in inequality is largely driven by the increase in college enrollment

and completion among women from higher-income families. The female advantage in college

graduation rose substantially in the top quartile, to thirteen percentage points (from two). A

female disadvantage of two percentage points in the bottom quartile switched to an advantage of

two percentage points. The patterns in the NLSY data sets raise two questions: When did the




                                                  6
female advantage in achieving college outcomes begin? Is the answer different for different

racial/ethnic groups? To answer these questions we return to evidence from the census.

        Figure 6 shows the female advantage in college entry and college completion for cohorts

born between 1915 and 1985. One striking pattern is that the female advantage is not a new

phenomenon. In fact, the advantage in college entry is present for all cohorts born after 1950

and grew in magnitude over the last half of the twentieth century. For the most recent cohorts

that have reached college-going age, the share of women who enroll in college (71 percent) is ten

percentage points greater than the share of men who do so (61 percent). The female advantage in

college completion has trended similarly, although it has lagged behind college entry. For

cohorts born after 1965, the percentage of women who graduated college by the age of twenty-

five is greater than the comparable figure for men. For the most recent cohorts, the four-year

college graduation rate for women (32 percent) is ten points higher than the comparable rate for

males (22 percent).6

        Figure 7 shows the trends in the female advantage in college completion for the major

racial and ethnic groups.7 Notice that the female advantage in college completion began much

earlier for blacks than for non-Hispanic whites. In fact, for all cohorts born after 1915, the

college graduation rate for black women was higher than that for black men. This female

advantage in college completion among blacks was modest (less than three percentage points)

for cohorts born before 1970, but has grown markedly since then, reaching nine percentage




6
  For more details on the recent sex-based gaps in college outcomes, see Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko
(2006).
7
  Although we can track black-white differences in educational attainment for the entire period under
analysis, for Hispanics we can provide reliable statistics only as of 1980, when the census began to
explicitly ask about “Hispanic origin” on the enumeration form.


                                                    7
points for cohorts born in the early 1980s. This pattern reflects the extraordinarily low college

graduation rate for African- American men – only 11 percent for cohorts born in the early 1980s.

        The female advantage in college completion is a more recent phenomenon for white

Americans than for black Americans. Among cohorts born in the first half of the twentieth

century, the college graduation rate among white men was higher than that of white women.

Only for cohorts born after 1960 was the pattern reversed.8 The Census data allow us to identify

Hispanics as of 1980, so we are able to show completion trends for this group as of the 1955

birth cohort. We find that the female advantage in college completion has grown markedly in

recent decades for Hispanic Americans. Among Hispanics born in the early 1980s, the college

completion rate of women (17 percent) is six percentage points higher than that of men. The

female advantage has grown most sharply among non-Hispanic whites, however with the gap

reaching more than ten percentage points for cohorts born in the early 1980s. The trend in the

female advantage for Hispanic Americans is similar in recent decades to that for non-Hispanic

white Americans, although the rate of increase in the female advantage is more modest.


III.    Some Potential Explanations for Increased Educational Inequality

        In this section, we discuss some possible explanations for the rise in educational

inequality that we have documented in previous pages.




8
  The reversal would have taken place a decade earlier if the Vietnam War had not resulted in a temporary
jump in the college entry rate for males.


                                                   8
Inequality in High School Graduation
If students do not complete high school, they are unlikely to enter college and have little chance

of earning a B.A.9 In this sense, differences across groups in high school completion rates may

“explain” some of the gaps we observe in college entry and completion. We do not mean

“explain” in a causal sense. The same social and economic forces that drive the decisions to

complete high school may well affect decisions to enter college. That is, unobserved factors may

drive both educational outcomes. In the short term, however, the stock of high school dropouts

acts as a constraint on the ability of policy to increase college entry and completion: a policy to

improve remedial education in college or expand financial aid will almost certainly have a near-

zero effect on the schooling of a high school dropout. In the long term, by contrast, it is plausible

that a more generous financial aid policy would increase high school graduation (for example, by

increasing the option value of a high school degree). In this section, we calculate how much of

the inequality in college entry can be “explained” by inequality in high school completion.

       Inequality across income groups in high school completion was relatively stable between

the two NLSY cohorts (results not shown). High school graduation rose for all income groups..

The share graduating high school rose by eight percentage points in the lowest-income quartile

(from 55 to 63 percent) and by ten percentage points in the next income quartile (from 71 to 81

percent). The gap in high school graduation rates between the top and bottom quartiles shrank

very slightly, from thirty-four to thirty-three percentage points. This would tend to slightly

reduce inequality in college entry and completion.




9
 In the NLSY, about 5 percent of those with no high school degree show some postsecondary experience,
and near zero have a B.A. It is possible to attend community college and many certificate programs
without a high school degree, and this may explain the 5 percent figure.


                                                  9
       Offsetting this is that the share of high school graduates going on to college rose

dramatically, so the “penalty” for dropping out of high school also rose dramatically. Consider

traditional high school graduates (who earn a standard diploma rather than a GED). In the early

cohort, 52 percent of traditional high school graduates went to college, while in the later cohort

the figure was 70 percent. The gap in traditional high school completion between the bottom and

top quartiles was forty percentage points for the early cohort and thirty-seven percentage points

for the later cohort. For the early cohort, the gap in high school graduation, therefore, “explains”

20.3 (= 0.39 × 0.52) percentage points of the gap of thirty-six percentage points in college entry.

For the later cohort, the high school graduation gap explains 25.9 (= 0.37 × 0.70) percentage

points of the gap of fifty-one percentage points in college entry. Differences in high school

graduation therefore go a long way toward explaining differences in college entry.

       Further, the “quality” of high school degrees in the bottom-income quartile is lower than

that in the top. Students can complete high school in two ways: by earning a traditional diploma

or by passing a test that earns them the General Educational Development credential (GED). For

both cohorts, 7 percent of those in the bottom-income quartile have only a GED, compared with

2 to 3 percent in the top. Those who complete high school with a GED are less likely to go on to

college than those with a traditional diploma (Cameron and Heckman 1993), and virtually no one

in these data sets with a GED completes college. However, the income gap in GED receipt did

not increase between the two NLSY cohorts. The GED could, therefore, explain rising inequality

in college entry and completion only if the “penalty” associated with GED receipt grew worse

over time—which it did. In the earlier NLSY cohort, 22 percent of GED holders went on to

college, compared to 51 percent of those with a traditional high school diploma. But for the later




                                                 10
cohort, the share of GED holders going to college dropped by nearly half (to 12 percent) while

the share of traditional high school graduates entering college rose to 70 percent.

       How much can inequality in GED receipt explain rising inequality in college entry and

completion? A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests “not much.” For the early cohort, GED

recipients are thirty percentage points less likely than traditional high school graduates to enter

college (22 versus 52 percent). For the later cohort, the difference is fifty-eight percentage points

(12 versus 70 percent). We can multiply the difference between quartiles in GED receipt by the

GED “penalty” to get an estimate of how much of the gap in college entry is explained by

differences in GED receipt. For the NLSY79 cohort, the GED explains 1.4 (= .047 × .30)

percentage points of the thirty-nine–percentage-point difference in college entry between the top

and bottom quartile. For the NLSY97 cohort, the GED explains 2.4 (= .042 × .58) points of the

fifty-one-percentage-point difference. Mechanically, then, the GED does not appear to explain

much of the rise in or level of inequality in college entry.


Inequality in Cognitive Skills
In the same sense that differences in high school graduation can “explain” gaps in college entry

and completion, gaps in cognitive skills could also have explanatory power. To examine this

question we regress a binary indicator for the outcomes of interest (college entry or college

completion) on income dummies, and examine how our estimated income gaps change when we

add a measure of cognitive skills to the regression. In the NLSY, our measure of cognitive skills

for both cohorts is the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT). To control for AFQT, we add a

set of AFQT quartile dummies to the regressions. We run regressions for men and women.

       We offer the same caveats as earlier: this is not a causal analysis. Evidence indicates that

the AFQT is malleable (Cascio and Lewis 2006), and it is likely to be affected by many of the



                                                 11
conditions that have a direct effect on college entry and completion. AFQT gaps can potentially

be addressed with early childhood interventions or improved elementary schools. But a young

person who arrives at college age with very low cognitive scores is unlikely, for example, to be

induced by financial aid into college, so the skills acquired as of that age act as a constraint on

the effectiveness of college-access policies.

       For the early cohort, the gap in college entry between the bottom- and top-income

quartile drops from thirty-nine to fourteen percentage points once we control for AFQT, while

the gap in college completion drops from thirty-one to fourteen percentage points.10 For the later

cohort, the gap in college entry between the bottom- and top-income quartile drops from fifty-

one to twenty-six percentage points once we control for AFQT, while the gap in college

completion drops from forty-five to twenty-two percentage points. These regressions indicate

that differences in cognitive ability explain a smaller share of the income gap for the later cohort

than for the early cohort. Belley and Lochner (2007) reach a similar conclusion in their analysis

of AFQT, income, and postsecondary attainment. In short, inequality by family income in

postsecondary attainment has grown in recent decades. Even among those who had the same

measured cognitive skills as teenagers, inequality in college entry and completion across income

groups is greater today than it was two decades ago. These finds are consistent with two themes

in this volume.


Explaining Growing Sex Differences in Inequality
Increasing college costs, disintegrating families, and decreasing school quality have been

proposed as factors contributing to the increase in inequality in college outcomes between



10
  These specifications include the black and Hispanic dummies, so the stated income gaps do not
correspond to those in the graphs. Pedro Carneiro and James J. Heckman (2002) and David Ellwood and
Thomas J. Kane (2000) explore the relationship between AFQT, income, and college attainment.


                                                 12
children from low-income families and those from high-income families. Yet all of these social

concerns affect both girls and boys. Over the sixty-seven years we have documented, sex

differences in educational attainment and inequality have reversed sign. Women are more likely

enter and complete college today than men are, and inequality in educational attainment is

greater among women than men. The reverse was true earlier in the twentieth century: women

were less likely to enter and complete college. These findings are consistent with two main

explanations: (1) Men and women may respond differently to the same family or school

circumstances. (2) Differences in circumstances across women and men of the same family

income and race have shaped inequality in educational attainment for some time. The social

science literature provides evidence that both explanations may be at work.

       Gender asymmetry in primary and secondary education and in single-parent families

provides two important potential explanations of why men and women respond differently to the

same family or school circumstances. The first explanation relates to the fact that the bulk of

primary and secondary schoolteachers are women. Through both “passive” (teachers provide

role models to demographically similar students, or the gender or race of teachers prompts

different responses from students) and “active” teacher effects (teachers’ unintended biases

affect their interactions and assessments of students), boys and girls may experience and respond

to the same classroom setting quite differently. The literature examining these effects has tended

to focus on being assigned to a teacher of a similar race on the performance of students (Griffin

and London 1979; Beady and Hansell 1981; Ferguson 1998; Ehrenberg, Goldhaber, and Brewer

1995), but Thomas S. Dee (2005) shows that both racial and gender effects are important. Using

the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (1988), Dee (2005) uses a teacher fixed-effects




                                                13
model to shows that both other race and other sex teachers are significantly more likely to rate

students as disruptive and inattentive.

       A second potential explanation relates to the fact that the bulk of single-parent

households are headed by women and that more children in single-parent families live with their

mothers. The absence of a male role model may have a differential effect on boys (see

Hetherington, Bridges, and Insabella 1998 for a review of this literature). Consistent with this

claim, Jacob (2002) shows that college attendance was significantly lower among boys (but not

girls) in single-parent households after conditioning on a rich set of covariates. Buchmann and

DiPrete (2006) also provide supportive evidence using the Current Population Study: for birth

cohorts born since 1965, sons attain less education than their sisters when the father is absent.

       Complementing these forces is that the returns to higher education may have created

different incentives for boys and girls to continue their education. These different incentives

may arise through marriage markets (Goldin 1992; Mare 1991; Oppenheimer 1988; Lewis and

Oppenheimer 2000; Schwartz and Mare 2005), labor markets (Murphy and Welch 1989; Charles

and Luoh 2003), and the interaction of both with norms about household work (Chiappori,

Iyigun, and Weiss 2009).

       Using the sum of spouses’ earnings, Goldin (1997) estimates that the return to college

rose from roughly 5 to 10 percent between cohorts born before World War I (from 1900 to 1919)

to those born after World War II (from 1946 to 1965). Although the earnings-only mean returns

show no consistent indication of being higher for women than men from 1963 to 2000, DiPrete

and Buchmann (2006) show that the returns to college over this period rose faster for women

than men when using measures that include returns through spousal income (via marriage-market




                                                 14
educational homagamy and marriage stability) as family size.11 These trends are reinforced by

the fact that marriage rates have fallen sharply among the less-educated during the last thirty

years (Qian and Preston 1993; Watson and McLanahan 2009) as the fraction of women heading

single-parent households has risen (Bianchi 1999; Ellwood and Jencks 2004; McLanahan 2004).

Among those marrying, the propensities of the more educated to divorce relative to the less

educated has also fallen since 1980. Although it is too early to draw strong conclusions from

these associations, this evidence is consistent with higher and more rapidly increasing marriage

market returns to college for women.

        On the labor-market side, the returns to college rose quickly for both men and women.

Several studies suggest that the returns to college have increased faster for women (Murphy and

Welch 1992), especially among African-American women relative to African-American men

(Kane 1994). This may be due in part to the greater returns to a high school education among

men, as skilled-blue collar professions have remained less feminized (England and Farkas 1986;

Reskin and Roose 1990). This is also consistent with descriptive evidence in Jacob (2002) that

boys in the NELS are more likely to explain that they will not need more education for their jobs

as a reason for not attending college. In addition, Charles and Luoh (2003) point out that own

earnings variability rose more quickly with schooling for men than women, which implies that

education may be a less volatile investment for women. Finally, Chiappori, Iyigun, and Weiss

(2009) present a theoretical model that shows how rising labor-market returns to schooling,




11
   They use both a standard of living and insurance against deprivation measure. Standard of living is
measured as the natural log of the sum of own and family income divided by the square root of family
size. Insurance against deprivation is measured as being roughly at a middle-class standard of living:
family income in pre-tax dollars of at least $16,000 for one person, $23,000 two people, $28,000 for
family of three, and $32,000 for a family of four


                                                   15
falling time required in home production, and changing norms about the division of labor in the

household may interact to produce greater returns to education for women.


IV.       Conclusion

Our analysis shows substantial increases in college entry and college completion across income

groups and across men and women. These increases reflect long-term improvements in college

preparedness and increased access to postsecondary institutions. More and better high schools

coupled with increasing returns to graduating led to a doubling of high school graduates from

1940 to 2007: 43 percent for the cohort of 1921 completed twelve years, compared to 89 percent

of the cohort of 1988.12 This opened the door to college for more youths.

          Several lessons for researchers and policy makers emerge from our analysis. First, we

have shown that inequality in high school graduation explains roughly half of income inequality

in college entry. The fact that inequality in college entry can be “explained” by inequality in high

school graduation has a very practical implication. Interventions that operate mainly on the

college-entry margin—such as scholarships, college outreach campaigns, and mentoring—can

only alter the college-entry decisions of those who are able to respond. Those who have already

dropped out of high school, in body or spirit, cannot benefit from these interventions.

          Second, we have shown that inequality in college persistence explains a substantial share

of inequality in college completion. These differences in persistence may be driven by financial,

academic, and social factors. Identifying these factors and coming up with effective policy

responses should be a major research focus given that it is clear that inducing more low-income

youth into college will not, by itself, serve to close income gaps in educational attainment. It is




12
     GED recipients are counted as high school graduates in the figures reported in this paragraph.


                                                      16
troubling that persistence rates among men dropped by about ten percentage points in the bottom

two income quartiles while rising by more than ten percentage points among women in those

same quartiles. Even if rates of college entry were miraculously equalized across income groups,

existing differences in persistence would still produce large gaps in college completion.

       Third, inequality in educational attainment has risen more sharply among women than

among men. This is driven by rapid increases among women from upper-income families, who

have pulled away from other women, and all men, in their educational attainment. This suggests

that we look to institutions and factors that differentially affect women and men, especially those

in the upper-income quartiles, if we want to understand the sources of increased inequality in

educational attainment. Unpromising candidates are rising tuition costs and changing family

structures, since these do not differ across the sexes. More promising candidates include

differential interactions of boys and girls in K–12 classrooms or with a female parent or different

labor- and marriage-market returns to college for men and women.

       But these explanations focus on the modern era, and our time series suggest that recent

changes in college entry and completion are part of a long-term historical pattern—they are not a

new phenomenon. The recent reversal of the gender gap in postsecondary education was

foreshadowed seventy years ago by a female advantage in high school education. Women have

been more likely than men to complete high school since at least the 1940s. According to the

census, 25 percent more women than men completed high school for the birth cohort of 1921.

For white women, the corresponding figure is 24 percent, but black women were 67 percent

more likely than black men to graduate from high school. By the 1960s, the gender gap in high

school completion had narrowed to six percent, where it has remained. The fact that women were

more likely to complete high school in an era where divorce rates were very low, childbearing




                                                17
rates were higher, and the labor-market prospects for women were poorer leads us to question

the common current presumption that women’s recent achievements reflect modern demographic

developments. In addition, black women’s lead of ten percentage points in college entry over

black men in 1940 suggests that the recent gap between black women and men may not reflect

current policies or conditions but is the legacy of something much older.




                                               18
                                        Data Appendix

Census and ACS: Sample
       We use the U.S. decennial censuses from 1940 to 2000 and the American Community
Surveys (ACS) for 2006 and 2007 (Ruggles et al. 2009). Our census sample includes residents of
“group quarters” such as dormitories, barracks, and prisons. We include only native-born U.S.
residents, so that we can clearly distinguish the effect of social and economic conditions in the
United States from shifts in immigration. We use the census weights in our calculations.


Census and ACS: Variable Definitions
        From 1940 to 1980, the census obtained information about the highest grade of school a
person had attended and completed, allowing us to identify those who have entered college, even
if they completed no years of college. By contrast, the post-1980 censuses and the ACS record
whether a person has “some college” or completed a degree. We define a college entrant as
someone who at age nineteen has attended college or is enrolled in college (1940–80 censuses)
or has “some college” or is enrolled in college (1990–2000 census and ACS). We define a
college completer as someone who at age twenty-five has completed sixteen years of schooling
(1940–80 censuses) or who has completed a BA or higher (1990–2000 census and ACS).
        The coding of race has changed across census years. Until 1970, race coding depended
upon an enumerator’s visual inspection and recording of each person’s race. From 1970 forward,
race was reported by someone in the household. As the meaning of race has changed to include
ethnicity, more recent censuses allow coding of mixed race. These changes are especially
important as they relate to historical descriptions of outcomes among “Hispanic/Latinos,” which
is not considered a race by the Census Bureau. Beginning in 1980, the census explicitly asked
about “Hispanic origin” on the enumeration form and did not recode “Hispanic/Latino” and
“other race” responses as white. Nevertheless, even sophisticated attempts to impute changes in
the “Hispanic origin” population before 1980 may miss many members of this group (Gratton
and Gutmann 2000). There is no simple way to deal with this important data limitation. Our
compromise is to present series for whites and blacks (which include Hispanics of those races)
until 1970, and present separate series for non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, and
Hispanics for the 1980–2000 census and the ACS.


NLSY: Sample
        We focus on NLSY79 cohorts born 1961–64 and NLSY97 cohorts born 1979–82. We
limit the sample to native-born respondents who responded to questions about their completed
education at both age nineteen and twenty-five. We use the baseline survey weights to generate
our means.


NLSY: Variable Definitions
      A person is coded as a college entrant if they were enrolled in college at any survey
between baseline and age nineteen. A person is coded as a college completer if they had
completed a BA by age twenty-five.


                                               19
                                         References
Beady, Charles H. and Hansell, Stephen. 1981. “Teacher Race and Expectations for Student

       Achievement.” American Educational Research Journal 18(2): 191–206.

Belley, Philippe, and Lance Lochner. 2007. “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability

       in Determining Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital 1(1): 37–89.

Bianchi, Susan M. 1999. “Feminization and Juvenilization of Poverty: Trends, Relative Risks,

       Causes and Consequences.” Annual Review of Sociology 25:307-33.

Buchmann, Claudia and Thomas A. DiPrete. 2006. “The Growing Female Advantage in Higher

       Education: The Role of Parental Resources and Academic Achievement?” American

       Sociological Review 71 (4): 515-541.

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. 1993. “The Nonequivalence of High School

       Equivalents.” Journal of Labor Economics 11(1): 1–47.

Caneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman. 2002. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-

       Secondary Schooling.” Economic Journal 112(482): 705–34.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The

       Unintended Legacy of the Vietnam War.” American Economic Review 91(2): 97–102.

Cascio, Elizabeth, and Ethan Lewis. 2006. “Schooling and the AFQT: Evidence from School

       Entry Laws.” Journal of Human Resources 41(2): 294–318.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Ming-Ching Luoh. 2003. “Gender Differences in Completed

       Schooling.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(3): 559–77.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss. 2009. “Investment in Schooling and

       the Marriage Market.” American Economic Review 99(5): 1689–713.

Dee, Thomas. S. 2005. “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity, or Gender Matter?”

       American Economic Review, 95(2): 158–165.


                                              20
Ehrenberg, Ronald G.; Goldhaber, Dan D. and Brewer, Dominic J. 1995. “Do Teachers’ Race,

       Gender and Ethnicity Matter? Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal

       Study of 1988.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3): 547–61.

Ellwood, David T. and Christopher Jencks. 2004. “The Uneven Spread of Single-Parent

       Families: What Do We Know? Where Do We Look for Answers?” In K. Neckerman, ed.

       Social Inequality. (New York: Russell Sage Foundation).

Ellwood, David, and Thomas J. Kane. 2000. “Who Is Getting a College Education?” In Sheldon

       Danziger and Jane Waldfogel, eds., Securing the Future: Investing in Children from Birth

       to College, 283–323. (New York: Russell Sage).

England, Paula and George Farkas. 1986. Households, Employment and Gender: A Social,

       Economic and Demographic View. (New York: Aldine).

Ferguson, Ronald F. 1998. “Teachers’ Perceptions and Expectations and the Black–White Test

       Score Gap,” In C. Jencks and M. Phillips, eds., 217–317, The Black–White Test Score

       Gap. (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press).

Goldin, Claudia. 1992. “The Meaning of College in the Lives of American Women: The Past

       100 Years.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

Goldin, Claudia.1997. “Career and Family: College Women Look to the Past.” In F.D. Blau and

       R.G. Ehrenberg, eds., Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace. (New York: Russell

       Sage Foundation).

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of American

       College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic

       Perspectives 20(4): 133–56.




                                              21
Gratton, Brian, and Myron Gutmann. 2000. “Hispanics in the United States, 1850–1990:

       Estimates of Population Size and National Origin.” Historical Methods 33(3): 137–53.

Griffin, Albert R. and London, Clement B. G. 1979. “Student Relations among Inner-City

       Teachers: A Comparative Study by Teacher Race.” Education, 101(2): 139–47.

Hetherington, E. Mavis, Margaret Bridges, and Glendessa M. Insabella. 1998. “What Matters?

       What Does Not? Five Perspectives on the Association between Marital Transitions and

       Children’s Adjustment.” American Psychologist, 53 (2): 167–184.

Jacob, Brian. 2002. “Where the Boys Aren’t: Non-Cognitive Skills, Returns to School and the

       Gender Gap in Higher Education.” Economics of Education Review 21(6): 589-598.

Kane, Thomas. 1994. “College entry by blacks since 1970: The role of college costs, family

       background and the returns to education.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (5): 878–

       911.

Lewis, Susan K. and Valerie K. Oppenheimer. 2000. “Educational Assortative Mating Across

       Marriage Markets: Non-Hispanic Whites in the United States.” Demography 37(1):29-40.

Mare, Robert D. 1991. “Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating.” American

       Sociological Review 56(1):15-32.

McLanahan, Sara S. 2004. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring Under the Second

       Demographic Transition.” Demography 41(4):607-27.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch. 1992. “The Structure of Wages.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 107: 215-236.

Oppenheimer, Valerie K. 1988. “A Theory of Marriage Timing.” American Journal of Sociology

       94: 563-91.




                                              22
Qian, Zhenchao and Sam H. Preston.1993. “Changes in American Marriage, 1972 to 1987:

       Availability and Forces of Attraction by Age and Education.” American Sociological

       Review 58: 482-95.

Reskin, B. and P. Roose. 1990. Job Queues, Gender Queues: Explaining Women’s Inroads into

       Male Occupations. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press).

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia

       Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2009. Integrated Public Use Microdata

       Series: Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population

       Center.

Schwartz, Christine R. and Robert D. Mare. 2005. “Trends in Educational Assortative Mating

       From 1940 to 2003.” Demography 42(4):621-46.

Turner, Sarah. 2004. “Going to College and Finishing College: Explaining Different Educational

       Outcomes.” In C. Hoxby, ed., College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to

       Go, and How to Pay for It. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Watson, Tara, and Sara McLanahan. 2009. “Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income,
       Identity, and Marital Status,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       14773, March.




                                              23
                                       Figure 1: Trends in College Entry and Completion

                           1.00
                                             Some college completed, or currently in school

                                             College completed

                           0.75
                                                                                                                  0.65
Fraction of Birth Cohort




                                                                                                                         0.66
                                                                                                 0.58      0.58


                           0.50
                                                                             0.43      0.41


                                                                 0.27                                      0.27
                           0.25                        0.22                                                       0.27
                                             0.16                                                   0.28
                                                                                0.20      0.22
                                      0.06      0.07                0.17
                                                          0.10
                           0.00
                               1900      1920
                                        1940            1960        1980            2000
                                            Year of Birth
Source: Authors’ calculations based on U.S. Census and American Community Survey (Ruggles
et al. 2009).




                                                                        24
                                               Figure 2: Fraction of Students Entering College, by Income Quartile and Birth Year


                                        1.00
                                                                 1961-1964 birth cohorts
                                                                 1979-1982 birth cohorts
                                                                                                                       .80
                                        0.75
            Fraction Entering College




                                                                                                    .60

                                                                                .47
                                        0.50                                                                             .58

                                                        .29
                                                                                                          .38
                                        0.25                                       .32

                                                           .19

                                        0.00
                                                   Lowest Quartile            2nd Quartile        3rd Quartile       Top Quartile


Source: Author’s calculation based on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 and 1997 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
                                                    Statistics, 2010a, 2010b).




                                                                                             25
                                            Figure 3: Fraction of Students Completing College, by Income Quartile and Year of Birth


                                           0.75
                                                              1961-1964 birth cohorts
                                                              1979-1982 birth cohorts


                                                                                                                      .54
             Fraction Completing College




                                           0.50



                                                                                                  .32

                                                                             .21                                        .36
                                           0.25

                                                        .09
                                                                                                        .17

                                                                                .14
                                                      .05
                                           0.00
                                                    Lowest Quartile       2nd Quartile          3rd Quartile         Top Quartile


Source: Author’s calculation based on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 and 1997 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
                                                    Statistics, 2010a, 2010b).




                                                                                         26
                                               Figure 4: Fraction of Students Persisting in College, by Income Quartile and Birth Year


                                            0.75
                                                                           1961-1964 birth cohorts
                                                                                                                          .68
                                                                           1979-1982 birth cohorts

                                                                                                                                .61
                                                                                                       .52
           Fraction Persisting in College




                                            0.50                               .44

                                                                                                             .46
                                                                                     .43
                                                        .32


                                            0.25       .26




                                            0.00
                                                     Lowest Quartile         2nd Quartile            3rd Quartile        Top Quartile

Source: Author’s calculation based on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 and 1997 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
                                                    Statistics, 2010a, 2010b).




                                                                                            27
                                         Figure 5: Female Advantage in Completing College, by Income Quartile and Year of Birth

                                        0.20
                                                            Female advantage 1961-64 birth
                                                            cohorts
                                                            Female advantage 1979-82 birth
                                                            cohorts                                                   .13
         Female Advantage in fraction




                                                                               .10
                                        0.10
            Completing College




                                                                                                  .05
                                                      .03


                                        0.00                                                                          .02


                                                      -.02                                       -.02
                                                                              -.03



                                   -0.10
                                                Lowest quartile           2nd quartile        3rd quartile        Top quartile


Source: Author’s calculation based on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 and 1997 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
                                                    Statistics, 2010a, 2010b).




                                                                                         28
                                       Figure 6: Female Advantage in College Entry and Completion, by Age

                           0.15


                                              College entry           College completion                        .11
                             0.1                                                                                      .10   .10
                                                                                                        .08

                                                                                                 .06           .07
  Female - Male Fraction




                           0.05


                                               .01

                              0
                                                               -.02                                    .00
                                                                             -.02              -.01
                                       -.02
                                                     -.03                               -.04
                           -0.05                                               -.04
                                                                      -.06



                            -0.1
                                1910                        1930                  1950                  1970                1990
                                                                                Birth year

Source: Authors’ calculations based on U.S. Census and American Community Survey (Ruggles et al. 2009).


                                                                               29
                                                   Figure 7: Female Advantage in Completing College, by Race and Birth Year


                                           0.20
Female - Male Fraction Compleing College               White           Black          Hispanic




                                                                                                                              0.11

                                           0.10
                                                                                                                    0.07
                                                                                                                              0.09
                                                                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                  0.03
                                                                               0.02                       0.02
                                                               0.01                      0.01
                                                   0.00                                                      0.01
                                           0.00

                                                                                                  -0.01
                                                   -0.02
                                                               -0.04
                                                                                         -0.05
                                                                           -0.07
                                           -0.10
                                                   1915        1925        1935          1945     1955    1965      1975      1981


       Source: Authors’ calculations based on U.S. Census and American Community Survey (Ruggles et al. 2009).




                                                                                             30
