NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES TRADE GLOBALIZATION INDUCE OR INHIBIT CORPORATE TRANSPARENCY?
UNBUNDLING THE GROWTH POTENTIAL AND PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION
CHANNELS
Hui Tong
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 17631
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17631

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Hui Tong and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Does Trade Globalization Induce or Inhibit Corporate Transparency? Unbundling the Growth
Potential and Product Market Competition Channels
Hui Tong and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 17631
December 2011
JEL No. F10,G30
ABSTRACT
How does increasing globalization affect corporate transparency? Freer trade represents different facets
and in theory has ambiguous effects on corporate transparency. On the one hand, by exposing firms
to more product market competition, it could discourage discretionary disclosure. On the other hand,
by opening up foreign markets and enhancing firms’ growth opportunities, it may promote more transparency.
Rather than simply estimating a net effect, this paper pursues an approach that allows separate estimation
of the two potentially opposing channels. We employ three different measures of corporate transparency
and track their evolutions for 4061 firms in 49 countries during 1992-2005. By using detailed product-level
tariff schedules for these countries, we construct a measure of growth opportunities enabled by foreign
tariff liberalizations at the sector-country-year level, and a second measure of globalization-induced
product market competition based on a country’s own tariff liberalization (again at the sector–country-year
level). We find strong evidence that higher growth opportunities engendered by globalization promotes
corporate transparency, especially in industries that depend heavily on external financing. At the same
time, we find somewhat weaker evidence that greater product market competition engendered by globalization
discourages corporate transparency. The results demonstrate the importance of disentangling the multiple
and potentially conflicting effects of globalization.

Hui Tong
Research Department
IMF Washington DC
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
htong@imf.org
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

World trade has been growing faster than world GDP during the last three decades. The
strong growth of cross-border trade results from multiple sources. Some of the reductions in
trade barriers come from multi-lateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the World Trade
Organization/GATT. A recent example of them is the termination of import quotas by the United
States, Canada and European Union in 1995 under the Multi-fiber Agreement and Textile and
Clothing agreement. Some trade liberalizations come from regional free trade agreements. Two
prominent examples are the formation of the North America Free Trade Area and the
enlargement of the European Union. But many other countries have formed regional trade blocs
and are in the process of negotiating one. Finally, the world trade also expands as a result of
many unilateral trade reforms. Unilateral tariff cuts by China, Columbia, and India are examples
in the last category. Because the rapid pace of trade globalization has significantly altered the
business landscape that firms operate in, it is useful and important to understand how rising
globalization affects corporate transparency.
The question would have been trivial if trade globalization has a clearly defined unidirectional effect. However, in theory, freer trade in goods and services represents multiple facets
and can have potentially conflicting effects on corporate transparency. On one hand, it generates
more product market competition for firms (when home country’s barriers to imports are
reduced). On the other hand, it also generates more growth opportunities (when partner
countries’ trade barriers are reduced).
The effect of greater product market competition on corporate transparency is itself
ambiguous. For example, the recent theoretical work by Carlin, Davies and Iannaccone (2010)
show that, under fairly general conditions, greater competition in the product market leads to less

1

discretionary disclosure.1 This view has been shared by a long list of earlier studies, such as
Verrecchia (1983), Clinch and Verrecchia (1997) and Board (2009). But some other studies
reach the opposite conclusion that more product market competition may lead to more disclosure
(e.g. Darrough and Stoughton (1990), Wagenhofer (1990) and Feltham and Xie (1992)). 2 .
Finally, Dye and Sridhar (1995) suggest that product market competition may either increase or
decrease disclosure depending on whether the information the firm receives is firm-specific or
industry-wide.
Greater trade globalization also enhances firms’ growth opportunities by reducing
barriers to exports to foreign markets. The effect of greater growth opportunities on corporate
transparency is less controversial. The literature generally concludes that the effect is positive
(Khanna, Palepu and Srinivasan, 2004; and many others).
Rather than estimating a single net effect of trade liberalization on corporate
transparency, we estimate separate effects from greater product market competition (identified
by reductions in home country trade barriers) and those from greater growth opportunities
(identified by reductions in export barriers to foreign markets). On the effects of product market
competition, we show evidence that is consistent with the model of Carlin, Davies and
Iannaccone (2010): more competition leads to less corporate transparency. On the effects of
export growth potential, we show evidence that strongly suggests that more foreign trade
liberalization leads to more firm transparency, especially in industries that depend heavily on
1

Their argument is that competition frequently resembles a tournament, where CEOs who receive higher public
praise receive positively skewed rewards. However, greater product market competition often translates into lower
likelihood for CEOs to win the tournament. Hence, they may have less incentive to engage in discretionary
disclosure.

2

Darrough and Stoughton (1990) argue that the competition through the threat of product market entry encourages
voluntary disclosure of the incumbent, particularly when the entry cost for the potential entrant is low.

2

external financing. These different results suggest that it is important to unbundle the different
channels of globalization.
We employ three different and complementary measures of corporate transparency and
track their evolutions for 4061 firms in 49 countries during 1992-2005. By using detailed
product-level tariff schedules for these countries, we construct a measure of growth opportunities
enabled by foreign tariff liberalizations at the sector-country-year level, and a second measure of
globalization-induced product market competition based on a country’s own tariff liberalization
(again at the sector–country-year level).
In empirical work, product market competition is often measured by an industry
concentration ratio, such as by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). However, because the
concentration ratio is an endogenous outcome variable, its connection with the degree of
competition is ambiguous. As Demsetz (1973) points out, in the absence of barriers to entry,
“concentration of an industry’s output in a few firms could only derive from their superiority in
producing and marketing products.” Baumol (1982) and Schmalensee (1989) hold the same view
that a high concentration ratio does not necessarily reflect a low degree of competition.
Guadalupe and Perez-Gonzalez (2011) point out, “the general merchandise industry is highly
concentrated around industry leaders, such as Wal-Mart and Target, and at the same time
extremely competitive.” The key take-away point is that a direct measure of barriers to entry is
preferred to an indirect measure such as industry concentration ratio.
In the empirical literature, growth potential is often measured by a market-to-book ratio.
There are two key drawbacks with this measure. First, the ratio is endogenous. It is easy to think
up a story that features reverse causality: a firm may choose to improve its corporate
transparency for reasons unrelated to any change in growth potential, but such improvement

3

should nonetheless help that firm to obtain more external financing and therefore to realize more
growth. The market-to-book ratio rises as a result. In other words, one may observe a positive
association between the two, but the direction of causality can go from transparency to growth.
Aside from reverse causality, both market-to-book ratio and a firm’s transparency outcome could
also be driven by a common third factor.
Khanna, Palepu and Srinivasan (2004), Cahan, Rahman and Perera (2005) recognized
that growth potential (or a firm’s investment opportunities) may be endogenous and used lagged
sales or similar measures to mitigate the endogeneity concerns. They recognized that the lagged
variables can still be endogenous and the procedure does not fully establish the direction of
causality. Durnev and Kim (2005) went one step further and attempted to correct the endogeneity
concerns with a three-stage least squared regression. The primary excluded regressors in the
equation for growth potential (or “valuation”) are industry fixed effects, which are still not ideal.
It is not clear that the industry fixed effects satisfy the exclusion criteria in this context. They are
very frank about the limitations of their approach and warned readers accordingly “identifying
truly exogenous parameters is difficult; therefore the results presented below must be interpreted
with caution” (Durnev and Kim, 2005, p1484). Second, even at a conceptual level, the link
between a firm’s market-to-book ratio and its growth opportunity is weak (Erickson and Whited,
2000; and Alti, 2003). As an important implication of the second drawback, what we need is not
merely an instrumental variable for market-to-book ratio, but a separate measure that can
reasonably be linked to growth potential and is exogenous with regard to corporate transparency.
One of the contributions of this paper is to develop a methodology that (a) identifies an
exogenous source of variation in firms’ growth potential, namely, changes in foreign trade
barriers (due to changes in foreign government policies), and (b) interacts this shock with a

4

particular dimension of firm heterogeneity in terms of their intrinsic dependence on external
finance. This framework sharpens our ability to identify the causal effect of growth opportunity
on corporate transparency. Foreign trade liberalization represents an unambiguously favorable
shock to a firm because it raises the firm’s future profitability, but is exogenous to a firm’s
disclosure behavior. For example, a Philippine garment company is unlikely to be able to
influence the tariff schedules or their changes in other countries3. By focusing on this exogenous
source of growth potential, and examining possibly differential effects of this shock on firms
with different degrees of reliance on external finance, we can sort out the causal effect of growth
potential on firms’ corporate transparency.
Foreign trade liberalization can be an important source of improving growth potential for
firms around the world. Trade globalization has been taking place at a rapid speed during the last
three decades, through three channels. First, many developing countries have experienced a
change of attitude towards trade openness, and have undertaken unilateral liberalization by
cutting tariffs and non-tariff trade barriers. China and India are among the most prominent
examples in this area, but are by no means the only ones. Firms located in countries that trade
heavily with China and India have benefited from improved market access. Second, regional
trade agreements have spread like wildfire over the last ten years. NAFTA, ASEAN Free Trade
Area, the widening European Union to include many former Communist countries, and the
Singapore-US Free Trade Area are all examples. Third, multilateral trade liberalization under the
umbrella of the GATT and the WTO is also making progress, although it may be less significant
3

To increase our confidence that foreign tariff schedules are exogenous, we exclude from our sample those
exporting firms from the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom which might be successful in lobbying for
tariff changes abroad. As a further robustness check, we also exclude firms from two largest emerging markets,
China and India, from the regression sample. This is probably more conservative than necessary as the literature on
the determination of national tariffs focuses almost exclusively on countries’ internal political economy.

5

compared with unilateral liberalization or regional trade agreements. The conclusion of the
Uruguay Round in the mid-1990s was the last major success on the multilateral front. Another
benefit of using foreign tariff schedules to construct a measure of trade potential is that tariff
rates are available at a highly disaggregated level. There are over 5,000 products by the
Harmonious System 6-digit classification. Even after some aggregation to match other variables,
this sector classification is still much finer than is typical in the empirical finance or
macroeconomic literature, and is standardized across all countries.
Corporate transparency conceptually refers to availability of firm-specific information to
outside investors. Following Bushman, Piotroski and Smith (2004), it includes the effects of
“corporate reporting, private information acquisition and information dissemination.” In order to
capture this broad concept, we do not rely on any single indicator and instead employ three
different measures that hopefully complement each other.
The first is an outcome-based metric, namely, the average accuracy of earnings forecasts
by stock analysts (conditional on other factors such as firm size that may also affect forecasting
accuracy). The basic idea is that, other things equal, better corporate transparency should allow
analysts to make accurate forecast. The same variable has been used in the earlier literature to
gauge corporate transparency (e.g., Lang, Lins and Miller (2003) and Lang and Maffett (2011)).
As Lang and Maffett (2011) put it: “The accuracy of their (analyst) forecasts is likely also a
function of the transparency of the firm’s information environment, including both the effects of
their private information acquisition as well as firms’ disclosure policies”. Since a key to the
validity of this measure is to hold other things equal, we control for variables that could directly
affect accuracy of earnings forecasts such as firm size, ADR listing, and earnings volatility. Our
second and third measures are the degree of earnings management and the number of disclosed

6

accounting items, respectively. These two measures look at the “input” side of transparency, or
actions taken by the firms, and serve as useful complements to earnings forecast accuracy. For
example, this can alleviate concerns that an improved earnings forecast might be the result of
greater earnings management instead of a true improvement in the quality of transparency. As it
turns out, trade globalization both reduces earnings management and increases the number of
disclosed accounting items, especially by those firms that are dependent on external financing.

I. Putting the Paper in the Context of the Literature
A number of other channels have been identified in the literature to affect corporate
transparency, and corporate governance more generally. They include country level differences
in investor protection, financial development and regulation on financial accounting (See, for
example, Leuz et al., 2003; De Nicolo et al., 2008; Aggarwal et al., 2009). We control them in
two ways. First, we add these channels and their interactions with a sector-level dependence on
external finance as control variables. Second, we control them in a more general way by
including time-varying country fixed effects (i.e., country-year pair dummies). The time-varying
country fixed effects allow us to absorb not only typical instruments for creditor or shareholder
rights protection such as legal origins, but also changes in government policies with regard to
mandatory disclosure, the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards, domestic
financial liberalization and international financial integration.
The literature has also suggested that those firms that are cross-listed in a major foreign
stock exchange, or otherwise need to tap into the international capital market may exhibit better
disclosure. To control for this, we include a firm-level time-varying indicator variable for firmyears that cross-list in the United States. In addition, we control for time-invariant firm features

7

with firm fixed effects. We find that while cross-listing in the U.S. is associated more corporate
transparency, which is consistent with the findings of Lang et al (2003), this effect disappears
when cross listing is considered together trade opportunity, firm size and other factors.
Reassuringly, the effect trade globalization on corporate transparency is not affected by the
inclusion of ADR listings. (As our trade liberalization measure is at the sector-country-year
level, and we identify the impact of trade liberalization on corporate transparency through crosssector cross-time heterogeneity within a country.
Our key finding is that trade globalization has caused firms to undertake steps to become
more transparent. This can be seen most clearly in terms of an increase in the number of
disclosed items and in a reduction in earnings management, especially in sectors in which firms
have a greater intrinsic need for external financing. This effect is also reflected in improved
earnings forecast accuracy by analysts.
Our findings are consistent with the notion that more corporate transparency reduces
capital cost (Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan, 2001; and Francis, Nanda and Olsson, 2008).
They are also consistent with the earlier finding that firms tend to improve the quality of
financial reporting before issuing equities or debts (see Lang and Lundholm (1993)). Our
contribution is to be able to pin down the direction of causality.
Our paper is also related to the literature on firm-level choice of corporate governance
versus country-level regulation on corporate governance. The question arises as whether
companies will choose their governance above their country’s regulatory requirements, and
whether the choice matters for corporate valuation, and/or the ability to raise external finance

8

(Immordino and Pagano, 2008; and Tong (2008)).4 An important question still needed to be
addressed is whether a desire to raise external financing, such as that may arise from a positive
shock to a firm’s growth potential, could motivate the firm to improve internal governance
provisions. This paper is a contribution to this literature as well.
Our paper also connects with the literature on globalization and corporate governance.
There has been a relatively large literature on financial globalization and corporate governance
(see Kose et al. (2009) for a survey). But the literature linking trade globalization with corporate
governance is still scarce, although there are more studies associating trade globalization with
economic growth and stock valuation.5 One exception is Khanna, Kogan and Palepu (2006), who
find that bilateral trade linkage between two countries promotes convergence of their de jure
corporate governance. But Khanna et al. (2006) have not addressed the mechanism underlying
the convergence. In this paper, we aim to fill the gap in the literature by examining a specific
channel through which trade globalization could affect corporate governance. That is, trade
globalization, as a source of growth opportunity, could affect the demand for external finance
and hence corporate transparency.

4

Actual firm-level internal governance has been linked positively with valuation, after controlling for country-level
standards, according to Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), and Aggarwal et al. (2007). Moreover, these effects are
more pronounced for firms that depend on external financing (Bruno and Claessens (2007)).

5

For example, Sachs and Warner’s (1995) find that trade liberalization is closely tied to future growth, and Henry
(2000) finds that trade liberalization increases equity price.

9

II. Methodology and Data
We now explain both the econometric specification and the construction of the key
variables.

II.A. Econometric Model
We employ the following basic specification:
(1)

Transparencyijt
 1TradeOpportunityijt   2TradeOpportunityijt * ExternalFinancingDemand i
  OwnTariff ijt   OtherControlVariablesijt  FirmFixedEffectsi  YearFixedEffectst   ijt

where i, j and t stand for stock i in country j at time t. The firm fixed effects are more general
than either sector or country fixed effects, since the latter two are linear combinations of the firm
fixed effects. For example, country-level differences in the protection of shareholder or creditor
rights or financial development are controlled for by these fixed effects. Year fixed effects are
meant to capture trends and cyclical factors that are common to all firms. In some robustness
checks, we will also include time-varying country fixed effects to absorb factors such as
changing government policies toward international financial integration or domestic financial
liberalization. We will explain “Trade Opportunity” and “Trade Opportunity*External
Financing Demand” in more detail in the following subsections. We note here that the measure
of intrinsic demand for external finance is sector-specific but time-invariant. As such, it is part of
the firm fixed effects. In other words, the regression is run as if the demand for external finance

10

is included as a regressor. Other control variables include firm size (year-end market
capitalization in US dollars) which will be listed and defined below.
The coefficient on the interaction between “Trade Opportunity*External Financing
Demand” captures the effect of greater growth opportunity. Under the hypothesis that a positive
growth shock leads to an improvement in transparency for firms with a high dependence on
external finance, we expect coefficient β2>0. The interaction term between foreign trade
opportunity and firms’ intrinsic demand for external financing is crucial for our story. Otherwise,
we cannot rule out the possibility of a direct connection between exports and forecasting
accuracy without involving voluntary reforms on corporate transparency. The sign of this direct
connection, β1, is ambiguous, however. On one hand, if foreign demand is more stable than
domestic demand, greater foreign trade could lead to a reduction in forecasting error (β1>0). On
the other hand, greater reliance on foreign trade also increases a firm' exposure to foreign factors
such as exchange rate volatility, foreign political risk, regulatory intervention, and civil strife.
They may increase a firm’s earnings volatility and reduce the forecast accuracy (β1<0). Indeed,
Goldberg and Heflin (1995) and Duru and Reeb (2002) provide some evidence suggesting
greater international sales could raise earnings volatility. In this paper, in addition to examining
any direct connection between foreign trade opportunity and corporate transparency, we explore
differences between firms that rely more or less on external financing. This provides a stronger
check on the hypothesis that at least some of the improvement in corporate transparency is
motivated by firms’ desire to raise more external financing in order to take advantage of new
trading opportunities.
The coefficient on “OwnTariff” directly measures the effect of greater product market
competition. In particular, a lower domestic tariff rate in the sector that a firm operates represents

11

more competition from foreign firms in the same sector. If more product market competition
(e.g., lower own tariffs) leads to less transparency, λ would be positive. If more product
competition encourages transparency, λ would be negative.

II.B. Using changes in tariff rates to measure trade globalization
To measure the two different aspects of globalization, we use foreign tariff reductions as
an exogenous measure of expanding growth opportunity, and reductions in domestic tariff (in the
sector that a firm operates) as a measure of changes in product market competition.
We first retrieve MFN tariff data for Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 4-digit
products from the Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS) database, maintained by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). If tariff data is missing
for a particular importing country in a particular year, we use the most recent values (i.e, values
at t-1, t1, t-2, t+2, …) on the ground that major tariff changes take place infrequently in any
given country). In a small number of cases where the tariff rate for a SIC 4-digit sector is not
available, we use the tariff for the corresponding 3-digit sector instead. We control for the major
free-trade agreements: the European Union and the North American Free Trade Area, where
bilateral tariffs typically fell to zero after the agreements took effect.
We identify the main business line (at the SIC 4-digit level) of a listed company based
primarily on the information given in the WORLDSCOPE dataset but supplemented by
information in the COMPUSTAT Global dataset if the first source is not available.
Figure 1 plots the histogram of the average tariffs for all manufacturing sectors in sample
countries between 1992 and 2005. The tariff data are winsorized at the top 1% of the distribution;
the figure indicates that 1% of the product line/exporting country pairs (represented by the spike

12

on the far right of the diagram) face a tariff rate of 28% or higher. Figure 2 plots the histogram
for changes in average tariffs for sector-country pairs. As one can see, a majority of firms faced a
decline in both home and foreign tariffs during this period, but some experienced an increase in
tariffs.
While deciding home country tariff rates is relatively straightforward, computing
weighted average of foreign tariff is more involved. For every business line in every exporting
country i in a given year, we calculate the average tariff across all trading partners, weighted by
each trading partner’s share in country’s i’s exports of that particular sector. This measure of
export potential is thus specific to sector, year, and exporting country. For ease of interpretation,
in subsequent regressions, trade opportunity for a firm in a given year is defined as the negative
value of the average tariff it faces across foreign markets. Thus, a reduction in foreign tariff rates
translates into a positive increase in trade opportunity.
There is no comprehensive data set on non-tariff barriers across countries and over time,
which is as detailed as the tariff rates. Nonetheless, tariff rates and non-tariff equivalents are
likely to be positively correlated as they are promoted by the same protectionist lobbies. This is
supported by the empirical findings in Lee and Swagel (1997), who found a positive association
between these variables for 27 industries in 41 countries in 1988. Furthermore, they argue that
this pattern – that tariff and non-tariff barriers are complements - is consistent with the political
economy theory of trade protection. As an implication of this idea, a 5% reduction in tariff rates
observed in the data may in fact correspond to a much bigger reduction in overall trade barriers.
It is useful to note that applied tariff rates can go up as well as down, even for member
countries of the GATT/WTO. This is because GATT/WTO obligations place only an upper
ceiling on tariff rates (i.e. bound rates). In most developing countries, applied tariff rates are

13

substantially lower than bound rates, leaving plenty of room for maneuver. Indeed, in the data,
we observe many instances in which applied tariff rates were revised upward. Take Mexico as an
example. After it signed the North America Free Trade Agreement with the United States and
Canada in 1994, it raised its tariff rates on products in 150 out of 443 SIC 4-digit sectors on
imports coming from non-NAFTA countries. In 22 of these sectors, tariff hikes were larger than
15%. For instance, the tariffs for men’s coats, footwear cut stock, cheese, cigarettes, and corn
were increased by 15%, 20%, 30%, 47%, and 62%, respectively. Variations in tariff rates across
products, countries, and years are useful for our empirical examination.

II.C. Three Measures of Corporate Transparency
Because the notion of corporate transparency – or availability of firm specific
information to outside investors – cannot be measured precisely and straightforwardly, we do not
rely on any single measure and employ three measures instead. While we view forecasting
accuracy as a “sufficient statistic” for the quality of transparency, the input-based measures are
useful complements because they are more directly related to actions taken by the firms. On the
other hand, surely some of the information disclosure is not captured by earnings management.
And the number of disclosed accounting items does not capture the quality of disclosed items. In
that sense, an overall outcome-based measure such as earnings forecast accuracy can provide
information not captured by the two input-based measures. In any case, we consider a particular
inference to be more reliable when all three measures give similar answers.
Our first measure of corporate transparency is accuracy of analysts’ earnings forecast.
This has been used to proxy for financial information environment in the accounting literature,
e.g. Lang and Lundholm (1996), Lang, Lins and Miller (2003), Bailey et al. (2003), and Heflin et

14

al. (2003), and Lang and Maffett (2011). According to Lang, Lins and Miller (2003), their notion
of information environment is similar to the concept of “corporate transparency” in Bushman et
al. (2004), which is also our definition of corporate transparency. Hence we use forecast
accuracy to proxy corporate transparency. The rationale is that more frequent and accurate
disclosure should lead to a more accurate forecast by analysts, as argued in Lang, Lins and Miller
(2003). Note that trade globalization may also affect the volatility of earnings and hence forecast
accuracy. Therefore as in Lang, Lins and Miller (2003), we will explicitly control for earnings
volatility in our analysis, which strengthens forecast accuracy as a proxy of corporate
transparency.
For a given firm in a given year, we use the most recent earnings forecast by each analyst
before the end of a firm’s accounting year to compute the consensus (mean) forecast, and
compare it with the firm’s realized earnings. More precisely, the earnings’ forecast accuracy for
a given company in a given year is defined by:

Accuracyit  

(2)

Mean forecastit  Actualit
Actualit

The measure of forecast accuracy varies both across firms and over time. The variables
are constructed from the Institutional Brokers Estimates System (IBES) database, which contains
analyst-by-analyst estimates for 18,000 companies in 60 countries. The available information
includes company name, data type indicator (e.g. earnings per share), forecast period indicator,
broker and analyst code, estimate date, estimate value, actual reported value, and so on. The
database compiles information from more than 7,000 financial analysts from over 1,000
institutions.
This measure by construction is bounded by zero from above. A higher value corresponds
to more forecasting accuracy. For some companies, some analysts provide multiple-horizon
15

forecasts (e.g., over both 1-year and 2-year horizons). We choose to focus on the one-year
horizon as it has the broadest coverage over firms and years. The mean and standard deviation
are -0.86 and 2.75, respectively. The median value, which is less affected by outliers on the left
tail, is -0.18. Figure 3 plots a histogram of the forecasting accuracy for all firms over all years,
winsorized at both the bottom and the top 1%.
Our second measure is restraint on earnings management as in Lang and Maffett
(2011). One particular channel through which a corporate financial release becomes less than
fully informative is earnings management – a financial maneuver by a firm to make its reported
earnings look more desirable (less volatile) than it actually is. In particular, a firm may
strategically increase or decrease accruals to conceal the true fluctuations in its profits. Our
second measure of corporate transparency is the extent to which a firm engages in earnings
management. We will investigate if more product market competition and an improved growth
opportunity would induce firms to do more or less earnings management.
To capture the extent to which a firm engages in the practice of earnings management,
Land and Lang (2002), Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki. (2003), and Lang, Ready, and Wilson (2006)
use the correlation between cash flows (before any accounting adjustments) and profits (after
accounting adjustments). We follow their methodology. To be precise, accruals (AS) for firm i in
country j at time t are calculated as:

AS ijt  ( CAijt  Cashijt )  ( CLijt  STDijt )  Depijt

(3)
where



denotes changes, CA is current assets, Cash is cash and cash equivalents, CL is current

liabilities, STD is short-term debt and the current portion of long-term debt, and Dep is

16

depreciation and amortization. Operating cash flow (OCF) is derived by subtracting accruals
from operating income (OI):

OCFijt  OI ijt  AS ijt

(4)

We scale AS and OCF by firm’s total asset (TA), and denote the resulting ratios by OCFA and
ASA, respectively. The accounting literature cited above uses the following equation (or some
variation) to examine the severity of earnings management:

(5)

ASAijt     OCFAijt   ControlVariablesijt   ijt

A more negative β is interpreted as more aggressive earnings management. We build on this and
further specify

(6)

  0  1TradeOpportunityijt  2 TradeOpportunityijt * RZi  3 RZi

where RZ is the Rajan-Zingales index for intrinsic demand for external finance. We also expand
the list of control variables in Equation (5) to include change of trade opportunity, its
multiplication with RZ, and a sequence of country-year pair dummies. If a positive growth shock
reduces earnings management for firms that rely relatively heavily on external finance, we would
expect β2>0.
The correlation between

 ASA and  OCFA is negative naturally, resulting from the

accrual accounting. But it will be even more negative if managers make accruals choices to
smooth earnings. For instance, in bad times, managers may pre-book future revenues or delay the
reporting of current costs to conceal poor current performance. But in good times, mangers may
17

do the reverse so as to create a reserve for the future. Hence accruals buffer cash flow shocks and
generate a negative correlation between changes in accruals and cash flows. The calculation
makes use of balance sheet data, which are retrieved from the Worldscope for the period from
1992-2005. [As noted earlier, US firms are excluded from the sample.] We end up with 5500
firms in 44 countries with 39376 observations in total.
Our third measure of corporate transparency is a simple count of disclosed accounting
items (out of a list of 221). Our empirical model for the number of disclosed accounting items is

(7)

DisclosedItemsijt  1TradeOpportunity   2TradeOpptijt * RZ i   OwnTariff ijt

  ControlVariablesijt  FirmFixedEffectsi  YearFixedEffectst   ijt

The list of control variables includes firm size, the number of listed stocks in a country, or
country-year pair dummies.
During the sample, there has been widespread international voluntary adoption of IFRS
rules that generally mandates a greater number of disclosed account items. In addition, growing
stock market liberalizations, more widespread adoption and better enforcement of insider trading
laws may affect the incentives for firms to disclose information and may also affect the
information environment in other ways that could affect an analyst’s forecasting accuracy. These
could generate trends in the number of disclosed items. The country-year pair dummies capture
country-specific trends (as well as other variations common to a particular country-year
combination).

18

These accounting items are from a list reported in the COMPUSTAT Global database
related to firms’ balance sheets, incomes and cash flows.6 The number of disclosed items ranges
from 42 to 187 over the sample period, with the mean at 151 and the median at 150. This
measure implicitly assumes that all disclosed items are equally important to investors, which
obviously is not true. At the same time, the errors from this assumption are unlikely to be
correlated with a firm’s growth opportunity. In any case, we regard this measure as an additional
check. Our sample covers around 6200 firms in 49 countries.

II.D. Intrinsic Dependence on External Financing
Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we define a firm’s intrinsic demand for external
financing by:

(8)

Dependence on external finance =

[capital expenditures - cash flow]
,
capital expenditures

where Cash flow = cash flow from operations + decreases in inventories + decreases in
receivables + increases in payables. All the numbers are based on US firms, which are judged
least likely to suffer from financing constraint relative to firms in other countries due to a
relatively high level of financial development in the United States. As a result, the measure is
exogenous to non-US firms (and we exclude US firms from our regressions). The original Rajan
and Zingales index (1998) covers only 40 (mainly SIC 2-digit) sectors. Since we work with tariff
data, which uses a substantially more refined sector classification, we expand the number of
6

There are nominally 225 items in total, but 4 items have never been reported by any firm in the dataset.

19

sectors to around four hundred 4-digit SIC sectors. (If we exclude non-tradable sectors such as
utilities, we are still left with 234 sectors).
To calculate the demand for external financing for US firms, we take the following steps:
First, every firm is sorted into one of the 4-digit SIC sectors. Second, for each firm, the median
value of the dependence ratio is computed over the period of 1990-2005. Third, for each SIC 4digit sector that contains at least 5 firms, the median value then is chosen to be the index of
demand for external financing in that sector. For a few SIC 4-digit sectors in which there are
fewer than 5 US firms, we pool firms from the United Kingdom, Canada and Japan and then
implement a similar calculation. To minimize the influence of outliers in subsequent analysis, we
winsorize this measure at both the top and bottom 1%.
The mean value of the indicator of demand for external financing is 0.53, with a standard
deviation of 2.93. A histogram of the indicator is plotted in Figure 4. As our hypothesis stresses
the interaction between foreign trade liberalization and a firm’s dependence on external
financing, a histogram of the interaction of the two variables is presented in Figure 5.

II.E. Other Control Variables
“Earnings change” is defined as the absolute value of the percentage change in realized
earnings per share (in dollar terms) from the previous year. It is included to account for the
possibility that when earnings variation is large, forecasting is likely to be more difficult. For
example, international expansion increases a firm's exposure to foreign factors (i.e. political risk,
regulatory intervention, and civil strife) that may increase that firm’s earnings volatility and
make it more difficult to forecast its earnings, as its operation becomes more complicated (this is

20

noted by Goldberg and Heflin, 1995; and Duru and Reeb, 2002). Realized change in earnings
from the previous year is a proxy for such shocks.
“Negative earnings” is a dummy that equals one when a firm has negative earnings in
the current period and zero, otherwise. This dummy is included to allow for asymmetry in a
firm’s disclosure or earnings management, depending on whether the news is good or bad.
Specifically, with bad news looming, a firm may postpone disclosure (e.g. Kothari, Shu, and
Wysocki 2005), and thereby impair analysts’ ability to make accurate forecasts. For a somewhat
different reason, negative earnings may cause the number of analysts to shrink, especially if bad
news persists. Analysts’ payoffs are often linked to the value of stock traded which could be
lessened by consistently bad earnings news.
“Analyst number” is the number of analysts covering a firm. When foreign trade
liberalization occurs, domestic firms may become more active in raising capital, which in turn
may attract more analysts to cover the firm. The increased demand for information may generate
a reduction in forecasting errors, which needs to be separated by a reduction in forecasting errors
due to better disclosure by the firm. To control for market demand for information at the firm
level, we use analyst coverage in each accounting year, which is also calculated from the IBES
dataset. In the sample, the mean and median numbers of analysts covering a firm are 8.6 and 6,
respectively (with a standard deviation of 8). A histogram of analyst coverage is presented in
Figure 6.
The “number of listed stocks” is meant to capture the maturity of a stock market. A
greater number of listed stocks may also imply a stronger competition among firms for external
funding, which may pressure them to improve transparency.

21

As shown by the histograms, the forecast accuracy, the earnings surprise, the index for
intrinsic demand for external financing, and trade opportunity all have long tails, indicating the
presence of outliers. To reduce the impact of the extreme values, we winsorize all these variables
at the 1% level.

II.F. A Note on Sample Construction
The underlying sample is all manufacturing firms in the IBES database during the period
of 1992-2005. We exclude firms in service sectors (such as banks) because we do not have the
tariff data required to compute their export potential. As we use firm-level information from the
United States to compute intrinsic demand for external finance, our regression sample must
exclude firms from the United States in order to ensure that the measure for intrinsic demand for
external financing is exogenous with respect to firms included in the regressions. For a small
number of SIC-4 digit manufacturing sectors, there are fewer than five firms per sector even after
we pool data from the four large industrial countries. To ensure that the measure for dependence
on external finance is reliable, we exclude firms in these sectors from the regressions. All in all,
our regression sample consists of 4061 unique manufacturing firms in 49 countries, or a total of
24,146 firm-year observations. Appendix I lists the number of firms in each country.
Some countries, such as Sri Lanka and Slovenia, have fewer than five manufacturing firms
in our sample. We include them to reflect the broadness of country coverage. All the key results
still carry through when we drop these countries (not reported to save space). A given regression
may have a smaller sample due to missing values in some included regressors. Table 1 reports

22

summary statistics for the key variables.7

III. Statistical Results
III.A Some Preliminaries
The goal of our statistical analysis is to examine the relationship between a firm’s
transparency and greater trade globalization. Before we conduct this analysis, let us first
document two patterns in the data. First, a firm’s export growth is related to changes in foreign
tariffs on its principal product. Second, a firm’s investment responds to export opportunity.
Neither is surprising, but it is useful to have them confirmed in the data.
We start with an association between firm-level export growth, and reductions in foreign
tariffs in the SIC 4-digit sector that characterizes the firm’s main line of business. The
Worldscope database has information on export sales, but only for 513 firms in 17 countries.
With these firms, a simple OLS regression is performed, of export growth from 1995 to 2005 on
increase in trade opportunity (or reduction in the weighted average of foreign tariff rates) during
the same period, controlling for country fixed effects. The slope coefficient on increase in trade
opportunity is 0.041 with a standard error of 0.019 and a t-statistic of 2.14. This implies that, on
average, a 10% reduction in the weighted average of foreign tariff rates is associated with a 40%
increase in firms’ export growth, and the relationship is statistically significant at the 1% level.
Figure 7 presents a partial scatter plot of export expansion onto tariff reduction, conditional on
country fixed effects. This confirms the regression result that reductions in foreign tariff rates are
linked to firms’ export expansion.

7

Due to data availability, we have a larger coverage of firms when we examine earnings management and the
number of disclosed accounting items. The exact coverage is mentioned in the relevant subsections.

23

Next, we verify a link between firm-level investment (in percent of physical capital) and
firm-level exports from 1995 to 2005. For 686 firms in 24 countries, the Worldscope database
has data on both variables that span the eleven-year period. A simple OLS regression of change
in investment on change in exports (conditional on country fixed effects) yields a slope
coefficient (on export growth) of 0.296 with a standard error of 0.026 and a t-statistic of 11.3. In
other words, a 10% increase in exports is associated with a 3% increase in the investment rate,
on average, and the relationship is statistically significant at the 1% level. Figure 8 presents a
partial scatter plot of investment rate on export growth, conditional on country fixed effects. The
positive association between the two is visually strong.
To summarize, falling foreign tariffs tend to promote export expansion; and growth in
exports tends to be associated with an increase in investment rate 8 . Neither relationship is
particularly surprising, but they lay a foundation for our central task of investigating the
connection between changes in foreign tariffs and corporate transparency.

III.B. Benchmark Results
We now turn to the relationship between a firm’s growth opportunity and the quality of
its information environment. The baseline result is reported in the first column of Table 2.
Standard errors are clustered by country, year and sector.
The coefficient on trade opportunity is 0.013 and is statistically significant at the 5
percent level. A reduction in the average foreign tariff by 5 percentage points (approximately one
standard deviation of the actual tariff rates in the sample) is associated with an improvement in

8

We are not able to perform such checks for all firms since the information on exports and investment is missing for
most of them.

24

forecasting accuracy by 0.065 for firms with low intrinsic demand for external financing. While
this estimate is statistically significant, it is relatively modest in quantitative terms. The
coefficient on the interaction between intrinsic demand for external financing and trade
opportunity is 0.003 and is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. For a sector whose
intrinsic demand for external financing is one standard deviation above the mean (or
2.93+0.53=3.46 according to Table 1), the effect of the same improvement in growth opportunity
leads to an improvement in forecasting accuracy by (0.003x3.46+0.013)*5=0.12. So the effect is
twice as large for firms in a sector with a high intrinsic demand for external financing as in a
sector with a low intrinsic demand for external financing. Evaluated at the median value of
forecasting accuracy (-0.18), this represents a 67% percent improvement. Therefore, the effect of
an increase in growth opportunity on corporate transparency is not only statistically significant,
but also economically important, especially for firms that depend heavily on external financing.
We now turn to the control variables. Firm size has a negative coefficient. Ex ante, one
would think that firm size could have two opposing effects on forecasting accuracy. On the one
hand, larger firms tend to have more complex operations, which raise the difficulty in forecasting.
On the other hand, larger firms may engage in multiple lines of business, which may have natural
hedging or risk-sharing properties that tend to reduce earnings volatility. The negative coefficient
on firm size suggests that the first effect dominates.
More analyst coverage can also increase forecast accuracy. When foreign tariffs drop,
firms may become more active in raising capital. Hence more analysts may begin covering them,
which may reduce forecasting errors. This analyst-driven story is different from a voluntary
improvement in the transparency by firms. We hence include analyst coverage directly in the
regression to control for this demand-driven possibility so that we can isolate voluntary

25

improvement in corporate transparency. The finding that improved trade opportunity increases
forecast accuracy—even after controlling for analyst coverage —suggests that a reduction in
forecasting errors is not just due to firms’ greater visibility.
Note, however, that the literature sometimes uses analyst coverage directly as a measure
of corporate transparency (e.g. Durnev and Kim, 2005, Lang and Maffett (2011)). In a separate
regression using analyst coverage as the dependent variable (not reported to save space), we find
that an improvement in growth opportunity tends to lead to a rise in analyst coverage, especially
for firms with a large intrinsic demand for external financing. We might think that the overall
effect of trade opportunity on forecast accuracy is the sum of a direct effect (as estimated in
Table 2) and an indirect effect through its impact on analyst coverage. We take the conservative
route of ignoring this indirect channel.
Other control variables have expected signs. A greater earnings surprise increases
forecasting errors: If earnings change significantly from year to year, they become more difficult
for analysts to forecast. The dummy for negative earnings (loss) produces a negative coefficient:
when a firm is losing money, its management may have an incentive to hide losses, reducing the
accuracy of forecasts. Also, the greater the number of listed stocks on a market, the more
accurate the forecast, potentially due to stronger competition among firms for external financing.
In Column 2 of Table 2, we add a country’s own tariff protection (MFN tariff rate at the 4
digit sector level) as a regressor. A decline in a country’s own tariff rates weakens the protection
for domestic firms from foreign competition. The effect of product market competition on
corporate transparency is itself ambiguous at least in theory. For example, Carlin et al (2010)
predict that greater competition in the product market leads to less discretionary disclosure, while

26

Darrough and Stoughton (1990) predict the opposite. 9 In our estimation, the regression in
Column 2 produces a point estimate of 0.008 for Own Tariff, which is significant at the 5% level.
This is consistent with the idea that an improved protection from foreign competition increases
firm transparency, in line with the prediction of Carlin et al (2010). However, when we add an
interaction term between own tariff and the demand for external finance, we do not find a
statistically significant effect (not reported to save space).
Foreign tariff changes are likely to be a better measure of an exogenous change in a
firm’s growth opportunity than domestic tariffs. For example, domestic tariffs are more likely to
be endogenous as they are subject to domestic firms’ lobbying, and those firms with weak
growth opportunities may lobby particularly hard for a higher domestic tariff protection. For
these firms, a higher domestic tariff could signal weaker growth opportunities elsewhere.
Therefore, we place more importance on inferences drawn from coefficients associated with
foreign tariffs. Reassuringly, the interaction term between growth opportunities as measured by
foreign tariffs and the index for intrinsic demand for external finance remains positive (with a
point estimate of 0.0028) and statistically significant at the 10% level.

III.C. Robustness and Sensitivity Checks
First, we experiment with a refined measure of intrinsic demand for external financing.
The original formula proposed by Rajan and Zingales (Equation (3)) produces a negative number
whenever a majority of US firms in a sector have greater cash flow than capital expenditure. This

9

Carlin et al (2010) that greater product market competition often translates into lower likelihood for CEOs to win
the tournament of public praise, and hence reduces CEO’s incentive to engage in disclosure. But Darrough and
Stoughton (1990) argue that the competition through the threat of product market entry encourages voluntary
disclosure of the incumbent, particularly when the entry cost for the potential entrant is low.

27

is not uncommon in the data, and is true in the original Rajan and Zingales (1998) paper as well.
Nonetheless, one might think that a negative value of demand for external financing may reflect
noise in the data and is not desirable. As a robustness check, we re-assign all negative values of
the index to zero. As a further refinement, we defined a second revised index for external
financing that assigns all negative values to zero, and all values above one to one. By restricting
the index to be between zero and one, it can be interpreted as a measure of the fraction of a
firm’s capital expenditure not financed by internal cash reserve. The revised regression is
reported in the third column of Table 2. The coefficient for growth opportunity (corresponding to
sectors with low intrinsic demand for external financing) becomes smaller and statistically
insignificant. Importantly for our hypothesis, the coefficient on the interaction between growth
opportunity and intrinsic demand for external financing turns out to be much larger than in the
benchmark case. In other words, by introducing the restriction that demand for external financing
ranges between 0 and 1, the contrast between firms with different degrees of dependence on
external financing becomes much starker.
Second, we control for time-varying country-level channels that may also affect corporate
transparency. In particular, we focus on country’s capital account openness and domestic
financial development and their interaction with a firm’s intrinsic demand for external financing.
When a country increases its capital account openness, two opposing effects are likely to take
place. On one hand, if firms wish to compete for newly available international capital, they may
strive to improve corporate transparency. On the other hand, if capital becomes truly abundant
due to a removal of restrictions on inward foreign investment, firms may be less motivated to
undertake reforms to improve transparency. We adopt the Chinn and Ito (2005) index of capital
account openness, which is the principal component from a set of binary dummy variables that

28

codify restrictions on cross-border financial transactions as reported in the IMF’s Annual Report
on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. The new regression is reported in the
fourth column of Table 2. Greater capital account openness is found to be weakly associated with
poorer forecast accuracy. This is consistent with the interpretation that increased availability of
capital from abroad makes firms less willing to improve their transparency. More importantly,
the key results on growth opportunity and demand for external financing in our baseline model
are not altered. In Column 5, we further control for domestic financial development and its
interaction with external financing demand. We measure domestic financial development by the
ratio of domestic private credit over GDP as in Rajan and Zingales (1998). The interaction
between a country’s domestic financial development and a firm’s external financing demand is
not significant. Moreover, adding domestic financial development does not alter the results for
trade opportunity and its interaction with a firm’s intrinsic demand for external financing.
Third, as there might be other changes in a country beyond capital openness, we
introduce time-varying country fixed effects (or country-year pair dummies) to control for
potential omitted time-varying factors at the country level.10 These new fixed effects, however,
are likely to bias down the estimated effect of growth opportunity. The reason is that countryyear pair dummies also capture the overall improvement of a country’s trade opportunity. For
example, when China reduced its tariffs on a broad range of products in preparation for its WTO
accession, many of its trading partners, such as Japan, enjoyed an increase in growth opportunity
across almost all sectors. Because this aspect of the improvement in growth opportunities for
Japanese firms is captured by country-year fixed effects, the coefficient on the growth
opportunity and its interaction with demand for external financing capture only part of the total
10

Time-invariant country factors have already been captured by firm fixed effects.

29

effects. In any case, the estimation results with country-year fixed effects are reported in Column
6 of Table 2. The interaction term has a coefficient of 0.03, around 75% of that in Column 3.
Reassuringly, it is still significant at the 5% level.
Finally, in the last column of Table 2, we allow firms that have an ADR (or cross-listed
in the U.S. stock market) to have different corporate transparency. The idea is that those firms
which choose to tap into international capital market may also choose to be more transparent.
Since there have been an increase in cross-listed stocks, there may be an improvement in
corporate transparency. The correlation with foreign trade liberalization could be incidental. To
control for this, we form a time-varying firm-specific indicator variable for firms-years that have
an ADR based on data from Bank of New York. The indicator is time-varying because different
firms may be listed in different years. If the ADR indicator is entered into the regression on its
own, it is positive and significant (not reported to save space), which is consistent with the
findings in Lang et al (2003). If it is included as an additional regressor (reported in the last
column of Table 2), it is not significantly different from zero. Reassuringly, the result on the
effect of trade opportunity on corporate transparency remains positive and significant.
Since forecasting accuracy is non-positive by construction, we have also tried a Tobit
specification. A serious drawback of this specification is that we cannot include firm fixed
effects. We implement a Tobit version of the baseline equation (similar to Column 1 in Table 2)
with firm random effects but no fixed effects. The coefficient β2 on the interaction term between
trade opportunity and demand for external finance continues to be positive and statistically
significant (with a coefficient of 0.002 and a standard error of 0.001), thus consistent with the
results in Table 2. A check of the data reveals that less than half of 1% of the observations on
forecasting accuracy are at zero, suggesting that data censoring is not likely a major concern.

30

III.D. Alternative Measure of Quality of Corporate Transparency and Alternative Samples
Our measure of forecasting accuracy used so far does not penalize dispersion in forecasts
made by different analysts. To see how important this is, we use an alternative definition of
forecasting accuracy, namely, the average of the square of the percentage deviation of individual
forecasts from the subsequent realized earnings:

(9)

1 N Forecast p  Actual
Accuracy   
N p 1
Actual

2

Here N is the number of analysts for a stock and forecast p is the last forecast value by analyst p
before the end of the firm’s accounting year. This measure treats a higher dispersion in forecasts,
all else being equal, as a reflection of lower-quality transparency. We revisit Table 2 with this
new definition of the left-hand-side variable. We redo all the regressions in Table 2 with the new
measure of quality of transparency (not reported to save space).11 The point estimates suggest
that the direct effect of an increase in trade opportunity on firms’ transparency is modest if firms
have a low intrinsic demand for external financing. The effect becomes stronger when firms have
a high demand for external financing.
We also restrict the sample to where firms have at least five years of coverage by the
IBES. This restriction helps to distinguish between firms that have been covered by an analyst
for a relatively long period of time and those that have been newly added to the analysts’ radar
11

For example, in the same regression model as in Column 1 of Table 2, while the coefficient on trade opportunity
is 0.022 (with standard error=0.008), that on the interaction between trade opportunity and external finance
dependence is 0.004 (with standard error =0.002).

31

screen. The restriction reduces the number of firms by around 20% from 4061 to 3255, and the
number of observations by around 5%. Still, we find similar results for our key variables in both
the magnitude and the significance levels. For example, compared with Column 3 of Table 2 (RZ
index between 0 and 1), the restricted sample gives a coefficient of 0.009 (p-value=0.2) for trade
opportunity and a coefficient of 0.04 (p-value=0.006) for trade opportunity interacted with the
Rajan-Zingales index.
Here we look at different weighting in constructing the trade opportunity. Earlier, we use
the contemporary trade shares by trading partners as the weights to construct the average tariff
for a given sector/country combination. This weighting scheme, although not uncommon (as in
the construction of effective exchange rates), may generate some bias due to the potential
contemporary impact from tariff on trade. To control for this problem, we fix the trade weights
at the beginning of the sample - the year of 1992. Consequently, the trade weights are invariant
to the tariff changes in later years. The regression results are presented in Table 3. There, the
impacts of trade opportunity on forecast accuracy increase significantly compared with those in
Table 2. For example, in the first column, the interaction term of trade opportunity and the index
for demand for external financing has a coefficient of 0.0056 (double that of 0.0029 in Table 2),
while still with a comparable standard error of 0.002. The point estimate of trade opportunity
itself is also much larger at 0.03 (compared with 0.013 in Table 2).
We perform a long-differencing regression to examine whether and how changes in
forecasting accuracy across firms from 1992 to 2005 are related to changes in trade opportunity
faced by these firms. To reduce noise associated with year to year fluctuations in earnings
forecast, we use the average of the initial three years (1992-1994) as the initial values for all
variables, and the average of the last three years (2003-2005) as the final values. As this requires

32

a firm to be present in the IBES database both at the beginning and at the end of the sample
period, the sample size is reduced (to 497 firms).
The regression results are reported in Table 4. The coefficient on the growth opportunity
is 0.03, significant at the 5% level. More interestingly, the coefficient on the interaction between
demand for external financing and trade opportunity is 0.04 and also significant at the 5% level
(Column 1). Therefore, our basic story holds in the medium term as well: As a firm’s growth
opportunity improves due to foreign tariff cuts, it tends to improve the quality of transparency,
resulting in a more accurate earnings forecast by analysts. This effect gets stronger for firms that
have a high intrinsic demand for external financing for their growth needs. In column 2, we
apply the alternative definition of forecasting accuracy and find similar (in fact, stronger) results.
We now turn to an alternative way of implementing the long-differencing regression
specification. We classify all firms into six buckets based on two dimensions. First, three slices
of the firms are cut based on the changes in their trade opportunity: those that have experienced a
decline in trade opportunity, those for which the increase in trade opportunity is between 0 to 3.5
(which is the median value of the positive increase in trade opportunity), and those for which the
increase in trade opportunity is 3.5 or more. Second, for each slice, two buckets are created based
on a firm’s dependence on external finance: those firms with little need for external finance
(whose finance dependence index equals zero or negative), and those that are more dependent on
external finance (whose finance dependence index is positive). Six binary dummies are created
to represent these six buckets of the firms, and are used as regressors in the long-differencing
regression. We plot the coefficients for the six dummies in Figure 9, with the benchmark case
being the bucket of firms that do not rely on external financing for growth and have experienced
a deterioration in trade opportunity (i.e., a rise in foreign tariffs). Two solid lines trace out the

33

coefficient estimates for the two types of firms based on their dependence on external financing.
For each, two thin broken lines trace out the 90% confidence band. The results are revealing. For
those firms that are more heavily dependent on external financing, a large positive shock to trade
opportunity leads to a statistically significant improvement in the accuracy of earnings forecast,
whereas a large negative shock to trade opportunity leads to a deterioration in forecast accuracy.
In contrast, for those firms with little need for external financing, the effect of a change in trade
opportunity – be it negative, small positive, or large positive – has no impact on their
transparency as the relevant coefficient estimates are statistically the same as zero. This picture is
consistent with the idea that a combination of a positive growth shock and a need for external
financing motivates firms to improve their financial transparency.
To bolster our confidence that foreign trade liberalization is truly exogenous to the firms
in our sample, we have already excluded the firms from the United States which might be able to
influence foreign tariffs through the US government. As a further robustness check, we drop
from the regression sample all firms from the remaining G-7 countries (United Kingdom,
Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and Itay) plus the two largest emerging market economies,
China and India. The new results are reported in Table 5. The first column reports the benchmark
case (where the index for intrinsic demand for external finance is between 0 and 1), and the
second column adds country-year fixed effects. The interaction of trade opportunity and external
finance dependence still has a positive coefficient, significantly different from zero at the 5%
level (column 1). With the country-year fixed effects included (Column 2), the interaction term is
still significant at the 10% level. In both cases, the point estimates are somewhat larger than the
corresponding column in Table 2. Finally, when we exclude countries with fewer than five
manufacturing firms in our sample, all the key results still carry through.

34

III.E. Earnings Management
The regression results on earnings management are presented in Table 6. Column 1
reports the baseline case (where the index for dependence on external finance is winsorized at
the 1% level). The average correlation between the change in accruals and the change in cash
flow is -0.77 (column 1), consistent with the concept of accruals accounting. The average effect
of improved trade opportunity on the correlation is insignificant at 0.0001(=-0.0017+0.003*0.61,
where 0.61 is the average external finance dependence). But for industries with large external
finance dependence, improved trade opportunity significantly reduces the correlation between
accrual and cash flow. For instance, with an external finance dependence of 5.4 (the top 90%
threshold) and a tariff reduction of 5%, the correlation between accrual and cash flow becomes
weaker [which changes to -0.70 (= -0.77 + (-0.0017+0.003*5.4)*5)].
In Column 2, we further include the change in own tariff, and its interaction with the
change in operational cash flow. The interaction term has a positive coefficient with a p-value of
0.11. Hence there is some weak evidence that higher own tariff is associated with less earnings
management, consistent with the prediction of Carlin et al (2010) that less competition may
improve corporate transparency.12
In Column 3, we repeat the same exercise as in Column 1, but lagging the change in trade
opportunity by one period. Reassuringly, β2 – the coefficient on the triple interaction term of
cash flow change, trade opportunity change and external finance dependence – is still
significantly positive with a similar magnitude. In Column 4, we further filter out noise in the

12

As a robustness check, we also include a triple interaction term of the change in own tariff, the change of
operational cash flow, and external financing demand. This triple interaction term turns out to be insignificant.

35

index for external finance dependence by winsorizing it between 0 and 1. This results in a much
stronger effect of a positive trade shock in reducing earnings management, as the estimate for β2
jumps from 0.0028 to 0.02. Hence we find robust evidence that better growth opportunity
induces less earnings management for those firms that depend heavily on external financing.
In Columns 5 and 6, we control for other channels that may also affect earnings
management, particularly capital openness and domestic financial development. We add their
interaction with

 OCFA and external financing demand. The triple interaction involving capital

openness, OCFAijt * CapitalOpennessijt * RZi , is not significant. The triple term involving
domestic financial development, OCFAijt * DomesticFinDevijt * RZi , has a significantly positive
coefficient of 0.99. That is, as domestic financial market becomes more developed, firms engage
in less earnings management, particularly for firms that have large intrinsic dependence on
external finance. Reassuringly, our earlier results for trade opportunity stay almost the same even
after we control for capital openness and domestic financial development. In Column 7, we
allow the coefficient on

 OCFA (i.e., 0 ) to vary across countries, as different countries may

have different accounting rules and hence different degrees of earnings management to start
with. We use the index for dependence on external finance as in Column 4. The impact of

OCFAijt * TradeOpptijt * RZi is smaller than in Column 4, but still positive and significant at the
5% level.
These results help to alleviate a concern about the first measure of corporate transparency
by forecast accuracy. Forecast errors may artificially decline if managers manipulate earnings to
match analyst forecast rather than truly improving the disclosure. Since firms tend to reduce
earnings management in response to better growth opportunity, our finding of an improvement in
earnings forecast is unlikely to result from more earnings management.
36

III.F. Number of Accounting Items Disclosed
The results on the number of accounting items disclosed are presented in Table 7.13 In
Column 1, we find that trade opportunity is associated with more disclosed items for firms with a
large intrinsic demand for external finance. The interaction term between trade opportunity and
finance dependence has a coefficient of 0.23 (with a standard error of 0.08). Hence, for a firm
whose index of intrinsic demand for external finance is one, a reduction of tariff by 5 percentage
points will increase the number of disclosed items by 1.53 (=(0.076+0.23*1)*5). To put the
estimate in perspective, the mean change in the number of reported accounting items per firmyear is 0.54. With that comparison in mind, the effect of trade opportunity is not trivial.
In Column 2, we add domestic tariff as another regressor. A higher domestic tariff (which
protects domestic firms from foreign competition) is associated with more disclosed items, in
line with the theoretical prediction of Carlin et al (2010). The effect of (external) trade
opportunity is similar to those in Column 1. In Column 3, we add country-year pair dummies.
This helps to control for changes in a country’s accounting requirements, such as a conversion to
the International Accounting Standards. Now the interaction term between trade opportunity and
external finance dependence becomes smaller (with a coefficient of 0.13), but still significant at
the 10% level. In Column 4, we lag the change in trade opportunity by one year, and find that the
coefficient on the interaction term becomes moderately bigger (and significant at the 1% level).
In Column 5, we again allow for country-year pair dummies and find the interaction term still
significant at the 5% level.

13

We winsorize the number of disclosed items at the 1% level, and restrict the index for external finance
dependence to be between 0 and 1.

37

To summarize, this exercise provides some direct evidence that corporate transparency of
a firm responds to changing growth opportunities if the firm depends on external finance for
growth. It also shows that a firm’s response to greater product market competition engendered by
globalization is different from its response to greater growth opportunities engendered by
globalization.

IV. Conclusion
In this paper, we explore whether trade globalization induces or inhibits corporate
transparency. Trade globalization in theory has conflicting effects on corporate transparency. On
the one hand, by exposing firms to more product market competition, it could discourage
corporate disclosure. On the other hand, by opening up foreign markets and enhancing firms’
growth opportunities, it may promote more transparency. Since these channels can have very
different effects, it is important to unbundle them in an empirical strategy. This paper proposes
an approach that disentangles these different channels of trade globalization by making use of
very detailed tariff schedules at the country-product-year level.
We find strong evidence that higher growth opportunities engendered by trade
globalization promote corporate transparency, especially in industries that depend heavily on
external financing. Since our measure of growth potential is exogenous to a given firm, we are
reasonably confident that the correlation we observe reflects a causal effect from growth
potential to corporate transparency.
While a reduction in foreign tariffs represents an improvement in growth potential, a
reduction in a country’s own tariff represents increased competition from foreign firms. We find

38

some evidence that greater product market competition engendered by globalization discourages
corporate transparency.
We hence identify concrete channels through which corporate transparency might be both
promoted and inhibited in response to market forces. While this paper focuses on corporate
transparency, firms may voluntarily improve other aspects of corporate governance. The relevant
empirical literature faces similar challenges: to identify an appropriately exogenous source of
shock to growth potential, and to unbundle the multiple and potentially conflicting effects of
globalization. The methodology proposed in this paper can shed light on these questions as well.
We leave these topics for future research.

39

FIGURE 1: HISTOGRAM OF TARIFF (WINSORIZED)

0

0

5

10

Pe rcent

Pe rcent

10

20

15

30

(MEAN= 5.13, MEDIAN=3.54 , STD DEV=5.32)

FIGURE 2: HISTOGRAM OF THE CHANGE IN TARIFF
FROM 1992 TO 2005
(MEAN=-3.50, MEDIAN=-2.73, STD DEV=4.83)

0

10
20
Trade opportunity, winsorized

-30

30

FIGURE 3. HISTOGRAM OF FORECAST ACCURACY,

-20

-10

tmp1

0

10

20

FIGURE 4. HISTOGRAM OF EXTERNAL FINANCING
DEPENDENCE
(MEAN=0.53, MEDIAN=-0.17, STD DEV=2.93)

0

0

5

10

Pe rcent

Percent
10

20

15

20

30

WINSORIZED
(MEAN=-0.86, MEDIAN=-0.18, STD DEV=2.75)

-3

-2
-1
Forecast accuracy, winsorized

-5

0

40

0
5
10
External Financing Demand, winsored

15

FIGURE 5. HISTOGRAM OF TRADE OPPORTUNITY *
EXTERNAL FINANCING DEMAND
(MEAN=-1.84, MEDIAN=0.15, STD DEV=15.21)

-50

0
Trade opportunity*External Financing demand, winsorized

0

0

5

10

Pe rcent
10

Pe rcent
20

30

15

40

20

FIGURE 6. HISTOGRAM OF ANALYST NUMBER
(WINSORIZED)
(MEAN=8.64, MEDIAN=6, STD DEV=8.22)

50

0

41

10

Analyst number

20

30

-4

-2

e( dlnXP | X )
0

2

4

FIGURE 7: CONDITIONAL SCATTER PLOT OF EXPORT GROWTH AGAINST
(FOREIGN) TARIFF REDUCTION

-10

-5

0
e( dbarr | X )

5

10

15

coef = .04088011, se = .01910346, t = 2.14

-4

-2

e( dlnEQ | X )
0

2

4

FIGURE 8: CONDITIONAL SCATTER PLOT OF NET INVESTMENT AGAINST
EXPORT GROWTH

-4

-2

0
e( dlnXP | X )

coef = .29633084, se = .026214, t = 11.3

42

2

4

Figure 9. Impact of Trade Opportunity on Forecast Accuracy
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5

Negative trade shock

Small positive shock

43

Large positive shock

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Key Variables
Obs

Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Max

Min

Firm-level variables
Forecast Accuracy
Analyst Number
Firm size (log)
Earnings change
Negative earnings
Number of disclosed items

24146
24146
24146
24146
24146
55035

-0.86
8.64
6.22
1.81
0.17
151

-0.18
6.00
5.90
0.44
0.00
150

2.75
8.22
2.28
5.59
0.37
12

0.00
59.00
16.78
46.12
1.00
187

-23.36
1.00
-3.25
0.00
0.00
42

Country-sector-year variables
Trade opportunity
Own tariff

12503
12460

-5.13
5.88

-3.54
2.80

5.32
8.87

0.00
55.00

-27.25
0.00

Sector variables
External financing demand

234

0.61

-0.17

3.40

20.8

-2.85

Note: Forecast accuracy, analyst number, and earnings are constructed from the Institutional Brokers Estimates
System (IBES) database, for 4061 firms in 49 countries from 1992 to 2005. Forecast accuracy is defined as the
negative value of the absolute difference between average earnings forecast and actual earnings, normalized by actual
earnings. Analyst number is the number of analysts covering a firm. Firm size is the year-end market capitalization in
US dollars. “Earnings change” is the absolute value of the percentage change in realized earnings per share (in dollar
terms) from the previous year. Negative earnings is a dummy that equals one when a firm has negative earnings in the
current period and zero, otherwise. The number of disclosed items is constructed from COMPUSTAT Global
database, for 6200 firms in 49 countries from 1992 to 2005. It counts the number of accounting items reported in the
COMPUSTAT Global database related to firms’ balance sheets, incomes and cash flows, for a total of 225 items.
Tariff data is the Most-Favored-Nation tariff for SIC 4-digit products in each country, retrieved from the Trade
Analysis and Information System (TRAINS) database. Trade opportunity for a sector-country-year is defined as the
negative value of the average tariff it faces across foreign markets. Own tariff is the tariff for a given sector in the
country where the firm belongs to. External financing demand is industry’s intrinsic dependence on external finance
for investment based on Rajan and Zingales (1998), measured at the 4-digit US SIC level.

44

Table 2 : The Impact of Trade Opportunity on Forecast Accuracy

Trade opportunity
Trade opportunity
*External Financing demand
Firm size
Earnings change
Negative earnings
Analyst number
Number of list stocks

Baseline

With
Own Tariff

External
Dependence
(0 and 1)

Capital
Account
Openness

Domestic
Financial
Development

Timevarying
Country
Effects

Adding
Crosslisting

0.013**
[0.0062]
0.0029*
[0.0017]
-0.26***
[0.029]
-0.32***
[0.0074]
-0.67***
[0.047]
0.0060*
[0.0035]
-0.026
[0.034]

0.015**
[0.0061]
0.0028*
[0.0017]
-0.26***
[0.029]
-0.32***
[0.0074]
-0.67***
[0.047]
0.0055
[0.0035]
-0.031
[0.034]
0.0080**
[0.0037]

0.0096
[0.0067]
0.039**
[0.016]
-0.26***
[0.029]
-0.32***
[0.0074]
-0.67***
[0.047]
0.0055
[0.0035]
-0.032
[0.034]
0.0078**
[0.0037]

0.0092
[0.0067]
0.036**
[0.016]
-0.26***
[0.029]
-0.32***
[0.0074]
-0.67***
[0.048]
0.0062*
[0.0036]
-0.018
[0.034]
0.0072*
[0.0037]
-0.042
[0.046]
-0.07
[0.088]

0.0099
[0.0068]
0.040**
[0.016]
-0.26***
[0.029]
-0.32***
[0.0077]
-0.68***
[0.047]
0.0058
[0.0035]
-0.0031
[0.034]
0.0068*
[0.0035]

-0.0016
[0.0061]
0.030**
[0.015]
-0.23***
[0.032]
-0.29***
[0.0082]
-0.67***
[0.047]
0.0055
[0.0041]
-0.20
[0.29]
0.0027
[0.0040]

-0.0018
[0.0060]
0.030**
[0.015]
-0.23***
[0.032]
-0.29***
[0.0082]
-0.67***
[0.047]
0.0058
[0.0041]
-0.20
[0.29]
0.0026
[0.0040]

Yes
Yes
Yes
24090
4054
49
0.61

-0.064
[0.095]
Yes
Yes
Yes
24090
4054
49
0.61

Own tariff
Capital openness
Capital openness
*External Financing demand
Domestic financial development

0.006
[0.083]
0.039
[0.19]

Domestic financial development
*External Financing demand
Firm cross-listing dummy
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Country-year fixed effects
Observations
Number of firms
Number of countries
R-squared

Yes
Yes
No
24146
4061
49
0.56

Yes
Yes
No
24090
4054
49
0.56

Yes
Yes
No
24090
4054
49
0.56

Yes
Yes
No
23905
4043
47
0.56

Yes
Yes
No
23380
3918
48
0.56

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively. The standard errors are clustered by
country, year and sector.

45

Table 3: Alternative Definition of Trade Opportunity
Baseline

Own
Tariff

External
Dependence
(0 and 1)

With CountryYear Effects

Trade opportunity

0.030***
[0.009]

0.031***
[0.009]

0.022**
[0.010]

-0.0019
[0.009]

Trade opportunity
*External Financing demand

0.0056**
[0.002]

0.0053**
[0.002]

0.054***
[0.02]

0.063***
[0.02]

Firm size

-0.24***
[0.03]
-0.30***
[0.009]
-0.65***
[0.05]
0.0054
[0.004]
0.0088
[0.04]

-0.24***
[0.03]
-0.30***
[0.009]
-0.65***
[0.05]
0.0053
[0.004]
0.0043
[0.04]
0.0090**
[0.004]

-0.24***
[0.03]
-0.30***
[0.009]
-0.65***
[0.05]
0.0051
[0.004]
0.0043
[0.04]
0.0089**
[0.004]

-0.22***
[0.04]
-0.27***
[0.009]
-0.65***
[0.05]
0.006
[0.004]
-0.45
[0.3]
0.0023
[0.004]

Yes
Yes
No
49
18684
3096
0.53

Yes
Yes
No
49
18684
3096
0.53

Yes
Yes
No
49
18684
3096
0.53

Yes
Yes
Yes
49
18684
3096
0.57

Earnings change
Negative earnings
Analyst number
Number of list stocks
Own tariff
Capital openness
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Country-Year fixed effects
Number of countries
Observations
Number of firms
Within R-squared

Note: The trade weights for calculating trade opportunity come from the beginning of the sample--the year of
1992. Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively. The standard
errors are clustered by country, year and sector.

46

Table 4: Long Difference Regressions (1992-2005):
The Impact of Trade Opportunity on Forecast Accuracy
Baseline

Alternative
Forecast Accuracy

Trade opportunity

0.030**
[0.01]

0.054***
[0.02]

Trade opportunity
*External Financing demand

0.041**
[0.02]

0.067**
[0.03]

Firm size

-0.056*
[0.03]
-0.31***
[0.04]
0.094*
[0.05]
-0.022**
[0.01]

-0.061
[0.05]
-0.48***
[0.06]
0.087
[0.08]
-0.036**
[0.02]

497
0.46

497
0.46

Earnings change
Number of listed stocks
Analyst number

Number of firms
R-squared

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1,
respectively.

47

Table 5 : The Impact of Trade Opportunity on Forecast Accuracy
(With G7, China and India Excluded)
Benchmark

Country-year
fixed effects

Trade opportunity

0.0081
[0.01]

-0.01
[0.010]

Trade opportunity
*External Financing demand

0.059**
[0.03]

0.049*
[0.03]

Firm size

-0.31***
[0.06]
-0.39***
[0.01]
-0.70***
[0.1]
0.0022
[0.006]
0.12
[0.1]
0.0091
[0.006]

-0.27***
[0.06]
-0.33***
[0.02]
-0.68***
[0.1]
0.0061
[0.007]
-0.68**
[0.3]
0.0039
[0.006]

Yes
Yes
No
9202
1633
0.62

Yes
Yes
Yes
9202
1633
0.68

Earnings change
Negative earnings
Analyst number
Number of list stocks
Own tariff

Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Country-year fixed effects
Observations
Number of firms
R-squared

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively.
The standard errors are clustered by country, sector, and year (since average foreign tariff changes
at the level of country, sector, and year).

48

Table 6: Does Growth Opportunity Reduce Earnings Management?
(Dependent Variable = Change of Accruals)
Capital
External
Lagged
With
Baseline
Dependence Openness
Trade
Own
Opportunity (0 and 1)
Tariff
Change of operation cash flow
*Change of trade opportunity

Domestic
Financial
Development

Country
Variation

0.0030**
[0.0015]

0.0031**
[0.0015]

0.0028***
[0.001]

0.021***
[0.0067]

0.021***
[0.0066]

0.020***
[0.0057]

0.013**
[0.0052]

-0.77***
[0.0075]
-0.0017
[0.0030]
0.014***
[0.0022]
0.00021

-0.77***
[0.0077]
-0.0016
[0.0030]
0.014***
[0.0022]
0.00022

-0.76***
[0.0078]
-0.0016
[0.0026]
0.014***
[0.0022]
0.00024

-0.80***
[0.0083]
-0.0045
[0.0028]
0.17***
[0.018]
0.00017

-0.80***
[0.0083]
-0.0044
[0.0028]
0.17***
[0.018]
0.00018

-0.80***
[0.0085]
-0.0043
[0.0028]
0.15***
[0.018]
0.00012

-0.66***
[0.028]
-0.0029
[0.0027]
0.079***
[0.018]
0.00014

[0.00018]
-0.00017*
[0.00010]

[0.00018]
-0.00017*
[0.00010]
0.0057

[0.00019]
0.00011
[0.00013]

[0.00019]
0.00061
[0.00086]

[0.00019]
0.00059
[0.00087]

[0.00019]
0.00062
[0.00085]

[0.00019]
0.00068
[0.00081]

Change of operation cash flow
* Change of financial channel
Change of operation cash flow
*Change of financial channel
*External financing demand

-0.036*
[0.020]
0.024
[0.067]

0.081
[0.096]
0.99***
[0.25]

Change of financial channel
*External financing demand
Country-year fixed effects
Observations
R-squared

-0.002
[0.0078]
Yes
37759
0.63

-0.026
[0.022]
Yes
36925
0.63

*External financing demand
Change of operation cash flow
Change of operation cash flow
*Change of trade opportunity
Change of operation cash flow
*External financing demand
Change of trade opportunity
Change of trade opportunity
*External financing demand
Change of operation cash flow
*Change of own tariff
Change of own tariff

[0.0035]
0.0002
[0.0004]

Yes
39374
0.63

Yes
39325
0.63

Yes
37875
0.63

Yes
37875
0.63

Yes
37875
0.65

Note: Financial Channel in Column 4 refers to international capital openness, while Financial Channel in Column 5 refers to domestic
financial development. Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively. The standard errors are
clustered by country, year and sector. Both the change of accruals and the change of operating cash flow are scaled by firm’s total asset.

49

Table 7: The Impact of Trade Opportunity on Disclosed Accounting Items
Lagged
Trade
Opportunity

Lagged Oppt
& CountryYear Fixed
Effects

External
Finance
Dependence
(0 and 1)

With Own
Tariff

With
Country-Year
Fixed Effects

Trade opportunity

0.076***
[0.02]

0.079***
[0.02]

-0.067***
[0.02]

Trade opportunity
*External financing demand

0.23***
[0.08]

0.23***
[0.08]

0.13*
[0.08]

0.29***
[0.08]

0.17**
[0.09]

Firm size

0.56***
[0.04]
1.45***
[0.1]

0.61***
[0.04]
1.55***
[0.1]
0.12***
[0.01]

0.77***
[0.05]

0.56***
[0.04]
1.54***
[0.1]

0.75***
[0.05]

-0.006
[0.004]

Yes
Yes
No
54984
6234
0.08

Yes
Yes
Yes
54984
6234
0.14

Number of listed stocks
Own tariff

Year fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Country-year fixed effects
Observations
Number of firms
R-squared

Yes
Yes
No
55035
6234
0.08

0.056***
[0.02]

-0.078***
[0.02]

-0.007
[0.004]
Yes
Yes
No
52803
6233
0.08

Yes
Yes
Yes
52747
6232
0.14

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote p<0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively. The standard errors are clustered
by country, year and sector. .

50

References
1. Aggarwal, Reena, Isil Erel, Rene Stulz, and Rohan Williamson (2009), “Differences in
Governance Practice between U.S. and Foreign Firms: Measurement, Causes, and
Consequences,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(8):3131-3169.
2. Alti, Aydogan, 2003, “How Sensitive Is Investment to Cash Flow When Financing Is
Frictionless?” Journal of Finance, 58(2): 707-722.
3. Bailey, Warren, Haitao Li, Connie Mao and Rui Zhong, 2003, “Regulation Fair Disclosure
and Earnings Information: Market, Analyst and Corporate Responses,” Journal of Finance,
58: 2487 - 2514.
4. Board, Oliver, 2009, “Competition and Disclosure,” Journal of Industrial Economics 57:
197-213.
5. Bruno, Valentina, and Stijn Claessens, 2007, “Corporate Governance and Regulation: Can
There Be Too Much of a Good Thing?,” mimeo, World Bank.
6. Bushman, R. M., Piotroski, J. D. and Smith, A. J. 2004, “What Determines Corporate
Transparency?” Journal of Accounting Research, 42: 207–252.
7. Cahan, Steven, Asheq Rahman and Hector Perera, 2005, “Global Diversification and
Corporate Disclosure,” Journal of International Accounting Research, 4 (1): 73-93.
8. Carlin, Bruce, Shaun Davies and Andrew Iannaccone, 2010, “Competing for Attention in
Financial Markets”, NBER Working Paper 16085.
9. Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito, 2006, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1): 163192.
10. Claessens, Stijn and Schmukler, Sergio L., 2007, “International financial integration
through equity markets: Which firms from which countries go global?,” Journal of
International Money and Finance 26(5), pp. 788-813.
11. Clinch, G., and R.E. Verrecchia, 1997, “Competitive Disadvantage and Discretionary
Disclosure in Industries,” Australian Journal of Management 22:125-138.

12. Darrough, Masako N., and Neal M. Stoughton, 1990, “Financial Disclosure Policy in an
Entry Game,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 12: 219-243.
13. De Nicolo, Gianni, Luc Laeven, and Kenichi Ueda, 2008, “Corporate Governance Quality:
Trends and Real Effects,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 17(2), 198-228.

51

14. Demsetz, Harold, 1973, “Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and Public Policy,” Journal of
Law and Economics, 14(1): 36-39.
15. Durnev, Art and E. Han Kim, 2005, “To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal
Environment, and Valuation,” Journal of Finance, 60 (3): 1461-1493.
16. Duru, Augustine, and David Reeb, 2002, “International Diversification and Analysts'
Forecast Accuracy and Bias,” Accounting Review 77 (2): 415-433.
17. Dye, Ronald A., and Sri S. Sridhar, 1995, “Industry-wide Disclosure Dynamics,” Journal
of Accounting Research 33: 157-174.
18. Erickson, Timothy, and Toni Whited, 2000, “Measurement Error and the Relationship
between Investment and Q,” Journal of Political Economy 108: 1027-1057.
19. Feltham, G.A., and J.Z. Xie, 1992, “Voluntary Financial Disclosure in an Entry Game with
Continua of Types,” Contemporary Accounting Research 9: 46-80.
20. Francis, Jennifer, Dhananjay Nanda, Per Olsson, 2008, “Voluntary disclosure, earnings
quality, and cost of capital,” Journal of Accounting Research 46(1): 53-99.
21. Francis, Jere, Inder Khurana and Raynolde Pereira, 2005, “Disclosure Incentives and
Effects on Cost of Capital around the World,” Accounting Review 80(4): 1125-1162.
22. Gebhardt, William, Charles Lee and Swaminathan, B., 2001, “Toward an Implied Cost of
Capital,” Journal of Accounting Research 39, 135-176.
23. Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.
24. Goldberg, Stephen, and Frank Heflin, 1995, “The Association between the Level of
International Diversification and Risk,” Journal of International Financial Management &
Accounting 6: 1–25.
25. Guadalupe, Maria, and Francisco Perez-Gonzales, 2011, “Competition and Private Benefits
of Control,” Columbia University and Stanford University.
26. Heflin, Frank, K.R. Subramanyam and Yuan Zhang, 2003, “Regulation FD and the
Financial Information Environment: Early Evidence,” Accounting Review 78: 1-37.
27. Henry, Peter Blair, 2000, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market
Equity Prices” Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.

28. Immordino, Giovanni, and Marco Pagano, 2008, “Legal Standards, Enforcement and
Corrumption,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7071.

52

29. Khanna, Tarun, Krishna Palepu, and Suraj Srinivasan, 2004, “Disclosure Practices of
Foreign Companies Interacting with U.S. Markets,” Journal of Accounting Research 42
(2): 475–508.
30. Khanna, Tarun, Joe Kogan and Krishna Palepu, 2006, “Globalization and Similarities in
Corporate Governance: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
88(1), pp. 69-90.
31. Khurana, Inder, Raynolde Pereira, and Xiumin Martin, 2006, “Firm Growth and
Disclosure: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41
(2): 357-380.
32. Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009, “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal,” IMF Staff Papers 56, 8–62.
33. Kothari, S.P., Susan Shu, and Peter Wysocki, 2005, “Do Managers Withhold Bad News?”
MIT working paper.
34. Land, Judy, and Mark H. Lang, 2002, “Empirical Evidence on the Evolution of
International Earnings,” Accounting Review 77: 115-133.
35. Lang, Mark, Karl Lins and Darius P. Miller, 2003, “ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy: Does
Cross Listing in the United States Improve a Firm's Information Environment and Increase
Market Value?,” Journal of Accounting Research 41(2), pp. 317-345.
36. Lang, Mark and Russell Lundholm, 1993, “Cross-Sectional Determinants of Analyst
Ratings of Corporate Disclosures”, Journal of Accounting Research 31: 246-271.
37. Lang, Mark, and Russell Lundholm, 1996, “Corporate Disclosure Policy and Analyst
Behavior,” Accounting Review 71: 467-492.
38. Lang, Mark, and Mark Maffett, 2011, “Transparency and Liquidity Uncertainty in Crisis
Periods”, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill working paper.
39. Lang, Mark, Jana Smith Raedy and Wendy Wilson, 2006, “Earnings Management and
Cross Listing: Are Reconciled Earnings Comparable to US Earnings?” Journal of
Accounting and Economics 42: 255-283.
40. Lee, Jong-Wha and Phillip Swagel, 1997, “Trade Barriers and Trade Flows across
Countries and Industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79 (3): 372-82.
41. Leuz, Christian, Dhananjay Nanda, and Peter Wysocki, 2003, “Earnings Management and
Investor Protection: An International Comparison,” Journal of Financial Economics 69:
505–27.

53

42. Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88: 559-586.
43. Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, 1-113.
44. Tong, Hui, 2007. “Disclosure standards and market efficiency: Evidence from analysts'
forecasts,” Journal of International Economics 72: 222-241.
45. Verrecchia, Robert E., 1983, “Discretionary Disclosure,” Journal of Accounting and Economics
5, 1983, pp. 179-194.

46. Wagenhofer, Alfred, 1990, “Voluntary Disclosure with a Strategic Opponent,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics 12: 341-363.

54

Appendix 1. Numbers of Firms in Each Country
Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Russian Federation
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
Total

Number of firms
15
133
38
30
54
273
23
112
3
1
11
51
2
52
166
213
42
118
13
109
48
13
11
58
1107
189
1
110
33
50
20
43
1
10
19
17
9
9
101
7
2
53
42
5
82
84
92
3
383
4061

55

