                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE CONTROL OF POLITICIANS IN NORMAL TIMES AND TIMES OF CRISIS:
          WEALTH ACCUMULATION BY U.S. CONGRESSMEN, 1850-1880

                                          Pablo Querubin
                                        James M. Snyder, Jr.

                                        Working Paper 17634
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17634


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Pablo Querubin and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Control of Politicians in Normal Times and Times of Crisis: Wealth Accumulation by
U.S. Congressmen, 1850-1880
Pablo Querubin and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 17634
December 2011
JEL No. D72,D78

                                            ABSTRACT

We employ a regression discontinuity design based on close elections to estimate the rents from a
seat in the U.S. congress between 1850-1880. Using census data, we compare wealth accumulation
among those who won or lost their first race by a small margin. We find evidence of significant returns
for the first half of the 1860s, during the Civil War, but not for other periods. We hypothesize that
increased opportunities from the sudden spike in government spending during the war and the decrease
in control by the media and other monitors might have made it easier for incumbent congressmen to
collect rents.


Pablo Querubin
Harvard Academy
1727 Cambridge Street, Room E106
Cambridge, MA 02138
Website: http://econ-www.mit.edu/grad/querubin
pquerubin@wcfia.harvard.edu

James M. Snyder, Jr.
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS
Knafel Building Room 413
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jsnyder@gov.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
A central role of political institutions is to control politicians and prevent the abuse of power
for personal gain. This idea goes back to political theorists such as David Hume and James
Madison who emphasized the role of Constitutions in guaranteeing that rulers behave and
govern in the public – and not only their private – interest.1 More recently, an extensive
literature in political economy has addressed the conflicts of interest between elected repre-
sentatives and their constituencies. The main concern is that elected representatives, once
in office, may use their political power to further their own interests and not those of the
electorate. For example, politicians may redistribute resources to themselves or may favor
certain interest groups in return for bribes or campaign contributions. Seminal contributions
such as Barro (1973), Ferejohn (1986), Buchanan (1989) and Banks and Sundaram (1993,
1998) explicitly modeled this agency problem and explored the role of elections and other
political institutions in providing incentives and regulating the behavior of politicians.2
   The most common view among scholars is that democratic political institutions – in-
cluding free and fair elections, checks and balances, constraints on the executive, and a free
and independent media – provide the most promising environment for keeping incumbents
accountable to their constituencies and for preventing the abuse of power.3 As Besley (2006)
notes, the most renowned kleptocratic regimes have occurred in non-democratic systems.
Existing empirical evidence from cross-country regressions also suggests that corruption is
more prevalent in less developed countries with weaker political institutions (see for ex-
ample Mauro, 1995). However, even democratic political institutions may fail to prevent
rent-seeking in some situations. For example, the absence of actual political competition
may reduce the disciplining role of elections. Similarly, as Besley (2006, p. 37) states, “real
accountability requires that those who hold politicians to account have sufficient information
– for example about the politician’s action – to make the system work.” A major empirical
question in this context is understanding the environments or conditions under which demo-
    1
     In the Federalist Papers (No. 57) Madison stated that the aim of every political Constitution should be
to “take the most effectual precautions for keeping [rulers] virtuous while they continue to hold their public
trust.”
   2
     See also, Harrington (1993), Persson and Tabellini (2000), Fearon (1999), Berganza (2000), Hindriks
and Belleflamme (2001), Le Borgne and Lockwood (2001, 2006), Smart and Sturm (2003, 2004), Besley
(2006), and Padro i Miquel (2007), as well as Stigler (1971), Peltzman (1976), Denzau and Munger (1986),
Austen-Smith (1987), Baron (1994), and Grossman and Helpman (1994, 1996, 2001).
   3
     In a recent paper Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2010) explore theoretically the flexibility of institutions
under democratic regimes. In their model, perfect democracy ensures that the most competent government
possible emerges.



                                                      1
cratic political institutions will be more or less effective at controlling politicians behavior,
creating a wedge between formal and actual accountability.
   One possible way to study the degree to which democratic political institutions prevent
the abuse of power for personal gain is to establish the extent of systematic rent-seeking
by politicians.4 Unfortunately, the study of rent extraction faces substantial empirical chal-
lenges, because it is often difficult to detect or measure the accumulation of rents by politi-
cians in a systematic way. One way to assess the magnitude of political rents is to track
the wealth of politicians. To the degree that rents are large, we should observe politicians
accumulating substantially more wealth while in office than they would have otherwise.
    In this paper we use historical census data from the U.S. to address these questions and
estimate the magnitude of political rents for members of the U.S. House of Representatives
during the period 1850-1880. We compare wealth accumulation by members of the U.S.
House of Representatives relative to candidates who ran but lost the election. To address
selection and endogeneity concerns that arise from comparing wealth accumulation of elec-
tion winners and losers, we employ a regression discontinuity design (RDD) based on close
elections. That is, we compare wealth accumulation in the decades between 1850 and 1880
among those who won or lost their first congressional race by a small margin. This allows
us to estimate the causal effect of serving in congress on wealth accumulation during this
period.5 The outcome of close elections provides us with quasi-random assignment of polit-
ical power. It therefore allows us to isolate the effect of serving in Congress from the effect
of other characteristics of these individuals – such as talent, connections, or charisma – that
are correlated with serving in congress and wealth accumulation.
    There are several reasons why the U.S. during this period provides an ideal setting for
exploring some of these ideas. First, the U.S. census recorded wealth in 1850, 1860, and
1870, and we have found the individual census records for a large sample of candidates. We
also collected information on the number of domestic servants in each candidate’s household
as reported in the 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880 censuses as other proxies for wealth. We study
the number of servants because wealth was self-reported, so there could be concerns about
misreporting (we address this in more detail in the data appendix). Second, the U.S. was, by
   4
     Rent-seeking or wealth accumulation is only one way in which, in the absence of constraints, politicians
may abuse from political power. For example, some politicians may use political power to persecute their
enemies or to further their own ideological agenda.
   5
     Regression discontinuity designs were first introduced by Thistlethwaite and Campbell (1960). See Hahn,
Todd and Van der Klaauw (2001) and Imbens and Lemieux (2008) for a general discussion of regression
discontinuity designs, and Lee (2008) for a concrete application to close elections.



                                                     2
most accounts, a consolidated democracy by this time. Its average polity score during this
period was 8.8 – exceeded only by New Zealand and Switzerland – and it had the maximum
possible score in most of its components. If democratic institutions succeed at regulating
the behavior of politicians, then the U.S. is a natural setting to explore this hypothesis.
Most importantly, this period exhibits important variation in the political environment that
will allows us to hypothesize about the environments under which rent-seeking may be more
prevalent.
       Throughout the paper we focus on “free” states where slavery was prohibited, because
prior to emancipation slaves were counted as part of personal wealth. Thus, it is difficult to
compare wealth figures before and after the abolition of slavery for former slave owners.
   Our results can be summarized as follows. We find no evidence of abnormal wealth
accumulation by congressmen who served during the 1850s, during the second half of the
1860s, or during the 1870’s. This is a remarkable result and strikes in contrast with evidence
for other countries. One plausible interpretation is that U.S. political institutions during
“normal times” were effective at controlling politicians and preventing the abuse of power
for personal gain. However, we do find evidence of significant rent-seeking for congressmen
who served during the first half of the 1860s, which coincided with the Civil War. Those
who won their first election by a narrow margin and served during the 37th-39th Congresses
(1861-1866) accumulated, on average, about 40% more wealth between 1860 and 1870 than
candidates who lost the election and did not serve. For the average congressman this corre-
sponds to about $20,000 in additional wealth – nearly $1,000,000 in present values.6
    We hypothesize that increased rent-seeking during the Civil War years was caused by
increased opportunities for enrichment from office and by decreased control and oversight
by voters, the media and state institutions during this period. The increase in opportunities
is illustrated in Figure 1A, that shows the evolution of nominal spending by the Federal
government between 1850 and 1880. There was a dramatic spike in nominal government
spending during the Civil War years, from about $60 million just before the outbreak of the
   6
    The main patterns can be seen even in the simplest summary statistics. For those who ran during the
Civil War but lost their first race for congress by a small margin, median wealth increased from $22,000 in
1860 to $39,000 in 1870. Median wealth for those who won their first race by a small margin and served
during the Civil War increased from $22,000 in 1860 to $55,000 in 1870. The additional $16,000 in wealth
accumulation for winners relative to losers during the Civil War correspond to approximately $800,0000 in
present values. For the non-war years, median wealth for those who lost their first race by a small margin,
increased from $14,000 in 1860 to $35,000 in 1870. Amongst those who won their first race and served during
the non-war years, median wealth increased from $16,500 in 1860 to $30,000 in 1870. During this period,
winners actually did slightly worse relative to losers.



                                                    3
war to almost $1,200 million at the highest point during the war – an increase of almost
2,000%. This was driven by the need to mobilize, equip, feed, and move armies on a scale
never before seen in U.S. history. The sudden spike in government spending might have made
it easier for incumbent congressmen (and other politicians) to collect rents. For example,
they could channel contracts towards firms in which they had an interest, or collect side-
payments or legal fees from contractors in exchange for favorable treatment. Procurement
was especially frantic and disorganized during the first half of the war, as an army of almost
700,000 men was built essentially from scratch (see Wilson, 2006a). The potential decrease
in control and oversight are illustrated in Figure 1B, which shows reporting on corruption by
local newspapers during this period. Remarkably, reporting on corruption decreased during
the Civil War years, and started increasing again in 1866 right after the end of the war.
A plausible interpretation of this pattern is that the the war battles and other political
events during this period distracted the media from covering the dealings of politicians.
Something similar may have happened to voters and other state institutions who, focused
on the immediate events of the war, may have decreased their oversight over the allocation
of expenditure by members of congress and other politicians. This interaction of increased
opportunities for self-enrichment and reduced control by the media and the voters, may
explain the higher levels of rent seeking during the first half of the 1860s that we observe.
   Other findings support the hypothesis that the abnormal wealth accumulation by con-
gressmen during this period reflected rent-seeking associated with the war. First, we find
that wealth accumulation was particularly significant by congressmen who represented states
that played an important role providing supplies during the war. Second, we find that con-
gressmen who served during the Civil War in committees that were responsible for most
military appropriations became richer than other members of congress and candidates who
ran but never served. This, together with additional anecdotal evidence gives us further
confidence in our interpretation.
   Our results can be interpreted more broadly and suggest that rent-seeking may be more
prevalent in episodes of crisis such as natural disasters, wars or other types of political and
economic turmoil. During these periods government expenditure often increases substan-
tially, increasing the amount of resources on which politicians might prey. At the same time
control and oversight by the media and other state institutions may be less effective than in
normal times.
   We also report estimates from an alternative empirical strategy that relies solely on
winners, not on the comparison of winners and losers. This is based on a simple “before-


                                              4
and-after” design first introduced in Querubin and Snyder (2009). For example, we compare
the accumulation of wealth between 1860 and 1870 for representatives first elected during
the five years just before 1870 with those first elected during the five years just after 1870.
The first group had access to congressional rents that would appear in their 1870 wealth,
while the second group did not. The estimates from this approach reveal a remarkably
similar pattern to the one obtained when using the RDD, despite the different samples and
methodologies. This gives us further confidence in our results. Finally, an extensive data
appendix provides additional evidence that the wealth data reported in the census is reliable
for the purposes of our study.
    In addition to the literature on political agency, our paper is related to other strands
of research. The literature on political selection – discussed in section 3 – is important for
motivating our empirical strategy.7
       Our paper also contributes to a small but recently growing literature on estimating the
value of political connections. Several papers have established the unusual economic returns
of individuals and firms with political connections in countries with relatively weak political
institutions. See for example, Acemoglu et.al. (2008) for the case of Colombia, Ferguson
and Voth (2008) for Nazi Germany, Fisman (2001) for the Indonesian case, and Johnson
and Mitton (2003) for Malaysia. Finally, in the context of a more strongly institutional-
ized democracy, Eggers and Hainmueller (2009) collect probate records of candidates to the
British parliament in the period 1950-1970, and use an RDD to estimate the effect of holding
a seat in parliament on wealth at death. They find significant positive effects for Conserva-
tive MPs but not for Labour MPs.8 The lack of returns to a seat in congress in the U.S. that
we report for the non-war years, stands in contrast to this literature and provides suggestive
evidence of the strength and effectiveness of American political institutions in controlling
politicians during “normal times.”
    Other papers have explored the value of political connections in the U.S. in the current
era.9 These papers confirm the absence of returns from political connections in the U.S.
during “normal times” that we report.10 Perhaps more closely related to our paper, Acemoglu
   7
     See Besley (2005, 2006) for an overview of the literature on political selection.
   8
     However, the data sources in Eggers and Hainmueller (2009) do not allow them to control for initial
wealth, an important determinant of wealth accumulation.
   9
     Lenz and Lim (2009) use reported assets of U.S. members of congress, matched with a sample from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and find that members of congress do not have higher asset returns than
their matched counterparts. Similarly, Fisman et. al. (2006) do not find any evidence of abnormal returns
to firms connected to Vice-President Cheney around his nomination or other health-related episodes.
  10
     Using different methodologies, Groseclose and Milyo (1999) and Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005)



                                                   5
et.al. (2010) find that in the context of the recent financial crisis, financial firms connected to
Timothy Geithner, experience an abnormal return of 15% after his nomination as Treasury
Secretary. This is consistent with the broader interpretation of our results; namely, the
potential weakening of political institutions and increase in the value of political connections
during times of crisis.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief description on
the historical and political background during the period of our study. Section 3 addresses
the main methodological challenges associated to estimating the rents from congress and de-
scribes our econometric approach. Section 4 describes the different data sources and provides
some descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents the main results of the paper and provides
evidence consistent with our interpretation of rent extraction during the Civil War. In Sec-
tion 6 we report the estimates from our “before-and-after” analysis. Section 7 concludes.
An extensive data appendix describes the data sources in great detail and provides evidence
for the reliability of census wealth data for the purposes of our study.


2     Historical and Political Background
In the second half of the 19th century, several features of the U.S. might have served to
check corruption and allow the state, the voters and the media to control politicians against
the abuse of power. First, the political system introduced checks and balances to prevent
the concentration of power. Political power was diffusely distributed, at least as measured
by taxes and spending. Except during the Civil War, the federal government raised far less
in taxes and spent far less than state and local governments overall. State governments
probably also did more in terms of economic regulation. Even though comprehensive civil
service reform had not been introduced by this time, Federal statutes and local legislation
also prohibited the bribery of public officials. Voters also had mechanisms to keep politicians
accountable. Throughout much of this period the political competition between the two
major parties was fierce. And, while electoral fraud existed at some level, election outcomes
were “fair” in the sense that both parties had a reasonable chance of winning a large share
of the offices in most states. For example, in about half of the congressional races during
the time period of our study, the winning candidate won with less than 55% of the vote.
At least in theory, in such a competitive environment voters could easily have voted the
estimate the returns to a career in the U.S. Congress. These papers cannot distinguish between the monetary
returns to office and other non-pecuniary benefits, such as “ego rents.” Also, they can only estimate the
returns of a seat in congress at the intensive margin, because they have no data on those who run and lost.


                                                    6
most highly corrupt candidates out of office. Finally, the media was expanding substantially
during this period. By 1860 there were approximately 2,000 local newspapers in circulation
and by 1870 this number had almost doubled (see Rowell, 1869). This would have allowed
the voters to learn about the dealings of politicians and learn about uncovered corruption
scandals. For example, the bribery scandal of Tammany Hall’s “Boss Tweed” was uncovered
by newspapers in 1871.
   Several scholars have written about corruption during this period. However, most ac-
counts of political corruption focus on the pre-war years and the post-war years. A few
scholars argue that corruption was rampant during the 1850s. Summers (1987, p. 14)
writes, “In every way the decade before the Civil War was corrupt. The 1850s were as
depraved as any other age, and, at least from the evidence available to historians, far more
debauched than the 1840s.”11 Writing about the events of 1857, Stampp (1990, p. 30)
notes, “Corruption was not a new phenomenon in American politics... but corruption had
become distressingly common in this period of accelerating commercialization and industrial
growth.”12 For the post-war years, most historians probably consider the years of Ulysses S.
Grant’s presidency, from 1869-1877, to be the most corrupt in U.S. history. This period has
been dubbed “the era of good stealings.”13
    Interestingly, less has been written about political corruption during the Civil War. This
is perhaps not surprising given the overwhelming importance and scale of the war itself.
Compared to the war – the massive mobilization and casualties, campaigns and battles,
strategies and tactics, actions by military leaders, and so on – corruption by politicians was
a relatively minor affair that did not receive much attention by the media or historians. A
  11
      Summers goes on to argue that corruption was a factor leading to secession. In particular, it helped
bolster the arguments of both abolitionists and Southern Rights men. The former argued that corruption
enabled the “Slave Power” to dominate the national government. It achieved its goals, especially the exten-
sion of slavery into the territories, by bribing weak and venal northerner politicians. The latter argued that
“only disunion could keep the South from being infected with Northern corruption, just as revolution had
freed the colonists from the contagion of British practice in 1776” (Summers, 1987, p. 290).
   12
      He explains the growth as follows (p. 28): “Most of the financial corruption resulted from the temptations
dangled before politicians by land speculators, railroad promoters, government contractors, and seekers after
bank charters or street railway franchises. Often the politicians were themselves investors in western lands,
town properties, railroad projects, or banking enterprises, and the distinction between the public good and
private interests could easily become blurred in their minds.”
   13
      The list of scandals includes Black Friday (Gold Panic), the Whiskey Ring, the Star Route Postal Ring,
the New York Custom House Ring, the Trading Post Ring, the Delano Affair, and the Credit Mobilier
scandal. In his discussion of the scandals of the Grant administration, Josephson (1938, p. 127) argues, “It
is high time that we cease to think of the spoilations of the General Grant Era as ‘accidental’ phenomena, as
regrettable lapses into moral frailty.... We must turn rather to examine the systematic, rational, organized
nature of the plundering which was carried on at the time.” For a revisionist view, see Summers (1993).



                                                       7
notable exception is Wilson (2006b, p.45) for whom:

            the apogee of the spoils system occurred during the Civil War, when party
         leaders took advantage of the war emergency to reward party supporters with
         reckless abandon... The economic mobilization of the Union to defeat the Con-
         federacy – by far the largest government spending project in the United States
         during the 19th Century – was nothing more than an outsized pork-barrel project
         for a party machine.

       There is also anecdotal evidence on corruption during this period. The case of Simon
Cameron, Lincoln’s first Secretary of War who was dismissed in part for showing too much
favoritism in awarding military contracts, is the most well-known. Also, some biographies
describe cases where congressmen, senators and other politicians profited from the war – e.g.,
Oakes Ames and his family obtained lucrative contracts to supply shovels, swords and other
equipment to the Union army, and Thurlow Weed engaged in a variety of money-making
schemes. But most of the literature, both by contemporary observers and historians, focuses
on private war profiteering by businessmen, and the general problems of military contracting
on a massive new scale.14 This emphasis probably makes sense, since this is where the bulk
of the wartime profits were.
   Despite the claims about political corruption during the 19th Century, there is no sys-
tematic evidence regarding how widespread and pervasive the corruption actually was. In
fact, our evidence suggests that corruption may not have been as widespread during the
1850’s and 1870’s as many historians claim. The anecdotes cited by contemporary observers
and historians for this period, may have been isolated incidents and may actually constitute
most of the actual cases of corruption.
  14
    See, e.g., Nagle (1999), Wilson (2006a), and Keeney (2007). For example, Keeney (2007, p. 16) notes
that “profiteering and fraud were hallmarks of government business during the Civil War. Hasty mobilization,
loose enforcement, large-scale emergency buys, and lack of coordination at the federal level led to a situation
very attractive to people looking for a quick fortune.” Nagle (1999, p. 177) describes the wartime years as a
time when previously honest businessmen became “rapacious profiteers” who “hurried to the assault on the
treasury, like a cloud of locusts.” Suppliers charged exorbitant prices, sold shoddy blankets, uniforms, and
boots, and even supplied dangerous weapons and ammunition; middlemen extracted large fees for suspect
services; businessmen, politicians, and even military officers engaged in trade with the enemy – especially
buying cotton from the south. Congress investigated and catalogued many of the abuses, then tried to
tighten regulations with laws such as the False Claims Act (1863), but, as Keeney (2007, p. 17) notes, “most
of these regulation were only loosely enforced and soon of necessity went by the wayside.”




                                                      8
3      Methodology
Estimating the monetary rents of political office-holding is difficult for a variety of theoret-
ical and methodological reasons. In this section we discuss various reasons why a simple
comparison of wealth accumulation by politicians and non-politicians may lead to biased
estimates of the rents from office. Next, we introduce the regression discontinuity design
(RDD) based on close elections in order to estimate the causal effect of serving in congress
on wealth accumulation.

3.1     Selection into Politics
The main problem underlying the estimation of the rents of a seat in congress is the fact
that congressmen are different from other citizens with respect to various characteristics
that may be difficult to measure or observe. In many societies, basic literacy, age and
wealth restrictions that must be satisfied by anyone attempting to hold a political position
already create a wedge between politicians and the remainder of the population. More
generally however, the decision to become a politician is influenced by a series of personal
characteristics that are plausibly correlated with other personal outcomes such as economic
success. On the one hand, individuals more talented at accumulating wealth may find holding
office more costly, since they must sacrifice high returns in the private sector. If this were
true, then a simple comparison of wealth accumulated by politicians and non-politicians
would tend to underestimate the rents from politics.15 On the other hand, if only the most
talented individuals, who would have been very successful in the private sector anyway,
manage to win elections and become politicians, then a naive comparison of politicians and
non-politicians will tend to overestimate the rents from holding office. There is, in other
words, selection into politics which makes it very hard to disentangle the effect of access to
office from other personal characteristics.16 The direction and magnitude of the bias from a
  15
      Several papers, such as Besley and McLaren (1993) and Casselli and Morelli (2004) develop models in
which “low quality” – i.e., less competent and more dishonest – citizens have a comparative advantage in
pursuing politics. In a similar vein, Mattozzi and Merlo (2008) develop a dynamic optimization model in
which individuals with heterogenous market ability and political skills must choose between a job in the
private and the political sector. Their model suggests that higher salaries for politicians actually decrease
the average quality of citizens deciding to become politicians.
   16
      Several theoretical papers in the political economy literature have attempted to understand the process
of selection into politics. Osborne and Slivinski (1996) and Besley and Coate (1997) analyzed the decision of
individuals to participate as candidates in the political process as the result of optimizing behavior. In these
models, the preferences of individuals, their policy-making abilities, and the costs of running for office play
an important role in the decision to become a politician. Most importantly, these models illustrate that the



                                                       9
simple, nave comparison of politicians and non-politicians is not trivial to measure.

3.2     Empirical Specifications
The previous discussion suggests that a simple comparison of the wealth accumulation of
politicians and non-politicians will likely yield a biased estimate of the economic returns to
politics. The descriptive statistics in section 4 will indeed reveal that individuals who ran
for office were different from the rest of the population. In particular, they were mainly
very rich individuals even when compared to individuals with similar high-paying and high-
status occupations. It is likely that these individuals also differed from other citizens on
other characteristics that are correlated with the fact that they were significantly richer.
   To estimate a causal effect of political office-holding on wealth accumulation we employ a
regression discontinuity design (RDD). We must consider the following counterfactual: how
much wealth would politician i have accumulated had he not been elected? Close elections,
i.e. elections where the winner won by a very small margin, provide us with an empirical
counterpart of the above counterfactual. If we believe that the outcome of close elections is
as good as random, then we can assume that any differences in wealth accumulation between
close winners and close losers can be attributed to holding the political office sought.
    In the empirical analysis below, we focus on what happens to candidates in their first
race for congress. This allows us to estimate the effect of ever serving in congress, i.e., the
extensive margin. For those who win their first race by a close margin, the first election
provides the cleanest quasi-experimental assignment to office. As shown below, the vast
majority of candidates who lose their first election never run for congress again. Thus, we
focus on the first race even for losers, because those who run more than once may be different
from “typical” losing candidates in ways we cannot measure.17
    In our empirical approach we follow Hahn, Todd and Van der Klaauw (2001), Imbens
and Lemieux (2008) and Angrist and Pischke (2009). We estimate regressions of the form:

                                                            0
              W ealthti = β0 + β1 W ealtht−1           t                               t
                                         i + β2 W inneri + β3 Xi + f (V oteSharei ) + i

                                    for all i such that |0.5 − V oteSharei | < h                            (1)
process of entry into politics is not trivial, since “citizens contemplating standing for office must anticipate
who else will enter the race and the resulting voting equilibrium” (Besley and Coate, 1997, p. 86).
  17
     In other situations it might make sense to consider more than just the first race. For example, if the
vast majority of candidates ran twice, then we would probably want to consider both races, and classify
candidates on the basis of their closest race.




                                                      10
where W ealthti captures the wealth of candidate i in census year t, W innerit is a dummy
variable equal to one if candidate i won his first race for congress and served in the U.S.
House during the period between the two census years, and W ealtht−1  i  corresponds to the
initial value of wealth in the preceding census year (10 years earlier). The vector Xi includes
a battery of controls such as age, occupation dummies and state fixed effects. The term f (·)
corresponds to an nth order polynomial of the forcing variable, i.e., each candidate’s vote
share in their first race for congress. We allow a different polynomial on either side of the 0.5
threshold. The choice of bandwidth h implies a sensitive trade-off. A small bandwidth more
closely resembles the quasi-experimental assignment of close elections, but comes at the ex-
pense of efficiency due to small sample sizes. Large bandwidths are undesirable because they
make use of observations far away from the threshold, posing a threat to the identification
assumption.
       In our benchmark specifications, we follow Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and estimate local
linear regressions using a 3% bandwidth. With this bandwidth we observe balance across
covariates for winners and losers of close races. Moreover, this value of h is consistent with
the optimal selection procedure proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009).18 Following
previous work we also report the robustness of our results to alternative values of h and to
the inclusion of higher order polynomials in the vote share.
   The estimates based on equation (1) correspond to the reduced form effect of winning
the first race by a small margin on wealth accumulation – they correspond to “intention to
treat” estimates. However, some candidates who lose their first election run again and win.
Similarly, a few candidates do not serve in congress despite winning their first election. As
we discuss below, this is not a major concern in our case, because a substantial majority of
candidates (92%) who lose their first election never serve in Congress, and thus the number
of “non-compliers” is small. Therefore, we do not report IV estimates but focus throughout
the paper on the reduced form.19
   In all our analysis we report the regression results using wealth in levels and logs as our
dependent variable. This allows us to capture different forms of rents from office. If rents
  18
      Following Imbens and Lemieux (2008) we compute the optimal bandwidth after discarding observations
in the tails of the distribution – 50% of observations on either side of the threshold. For most periods and
dependent variables, the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009) procedure suggests using a bandwidth of 3% with
the exception of specifications using ending log wealth as dependent variable where the optimal bandwidth
is closer to 2%. For simplicity, we focus on a 3% bandwidth in the benchmark specifications but show the
robustness of our results to using a 2% bandwidth.
   19
      The patterns revealed by our IV estimates are identical, but all of the estimated coefficients are slightly
larger.



                                                       11
correspond mostly to bribes or side-payments to politicians, then specifications using wealth
in levels may be preferred. On the other hand, if rents correspond to returns on initial wealth
– as might be the case, for example, of access to privileged information regarding investment
opportunities – then the log functional form may be more appropriate. For regressions using
wealth in levels as a dependent variable we estimate median regressions in order to reduce
the influence of outliers on our estimates.


4     Data and Descriptive Statistics
In this section we describe briefly our data sources and data collection process. We defer a
more extensive discussion to the data appendix. We rely on two main data sources for our
analysis. The first is the electoral and biographical data on candidates to the U.S. Congress
between 1845 and 1875. The second is the U.S. Censuses of 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880,
which provide us with the wealth, occupation and other characteristics of the candidates. In
this section we describe our data sources and present some descriptive statistics.

4.1     Electoral and Political Data
The electoral data consists of election results for each election to the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives between 1845 and 1875. Additional information on the winners of each election
is available from a biographical dataset compiled by the ICPSR, as well as the Biographi-
cal Directory of the U.S. Congress. Finally, we use Canon, Nelson and Stewart (1998) to
construct measures of party leadership and committee positions.
    Several features of the electoral and political environment of the mid-19th century are
relevant for our analysis. As shown in more detail in the data appendix, congressional
elections were quite competitive compared to today. About 33% of congressmen received
less than 53% of the vote in their first race. This will be important for our empirical analysis
that will rely mainly on these close races. There were also very few “career congressmen”
compared to today. Fewer than 24% of those who won their first race ran for congress in
more than two elections, and only 16% served three or more terms. Finally, those who
lost their first race almost never served in congress – 80% of those who lost their first race
never ran again, and fewer than 9% served in congress during our period. The numbers are
similar for those who lost their first race by a small margin. This suggests that the issue of
“non-compliers” is not a major concern when interpreting our reduced form estimates.



                                              12
4.2     Census Wealth Data
The wealth data is from the 1850, 1860 and 1870 Federal U.S. censuses. These are the
only years in which the Federal census collected information on citizen’s wealth. The census
reported real estate wealth in 1850, 1860 and 1870, and personal wealth in 1860 and 1870. As
an alternative measure of wealth, we also collected information on the number of domestic
servants in the 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880 censuses. In addition, census records provide
information on year and place of birth, county and town of residence and occupation.
    We attempted to find the census record in each census year of every candidate for the
House of Representatives during our period who obtained at least 25% of the vote. All
census records before 1930, including slave schedules, are available in ancestry.com. This
is a genealogical website that provides images of the original census records and a search
engine to locate records by first, middle and last name, as well as year and place of birth, and
place of residence. Despite the automated matching of many of the records, wealth figures
and occupations had to be entered manually. Also, there are many miss-spelled names in
the search engine, probably due to the fact that is difficult to decipher the handwriting on
many census pages. Figure 2 shows one sample census record, the page on which Abraham
Lincoln was listed in 1860 (noted by the arrow). This illustrates the various types of data
that had to be coded manually for each record – in particular, occupation, wealth, and the
number of servants. We provide more details on the matching and searching process in the
data appendix.
   We successfully located and entered data on about 10,000 census records, out of a universe
of about 12,000 cases.20 This corresponds to an overall success rate of about 80%, higher
than that reported by previous work using census data for this period. As reported in the
data appendix, the attrition rates for the different census years and types of individuals were
similar. Thus, we do not believe that selection bias from those individuals whose records we
could not locate is a major concern.
   The wealth figures in the census records were self-reported and were not verified by other
government officials. In addition, it was often difficult to distinguish cases in which the
respondent had no wealth from cases in which the individual respondent refused to provide
a figure to the enumerator, because in both of these types of cases the wealth fields in the
census record were left blank. However, we provide extensive evidence on the reliability of
the census data in the data appendix. In particular, based on alternative wealth sources we
  20
     The biographical information allowed us to know the year of death of those who served. Naturally, we
did not attempt to find the census record of those who were dead in a given census year.


                                                   13
show that election winners are not more or less likely to misreport their wealth than election
losers. As an alternative measure of wealth, we also collected information on the number
of servants living with each individual in every census year (this will be our only measure
of wealth for 1880). Servants living in every dwelling had to be reported to the enumerator
and were, naturally, harder to hide and misreport than real or personal wealth figures. We
report all our results using both reported wealth and the number of servants as dependent
variables. See the data appendix for a detailed description of the coding of servants.
       Perhaps more important for our purposes is whether census wealth data can be used to
detect wealth accumulation of individuals known to have been corrupt and to have received
bribes. We explore this in the context of a prominent scandal: the Lacrosse & Milwaukee
Railroad scandal.

4.3       Detecting Corruption using Census Data: The Lacrosse &
          Milwaukee Railroad Scandal
In 1856 the Federal government ceded land for a major railroad project to the state of Wis-
consin, but left it to the state to decide which railroad(s) would receive the grant. Several
railroads competed for the land grant in 1856 and 1857, among them the Lacrosse & Mil-
waukee Railroad Company. In 1858, amidst fears that the railroad was in danger of going
bankrupt, creditors demanded an audit of its accounts. A major scandal broke as the ac-
counting revealed many troubling items, most importantly that the railroad had spent over
$800,000 to bribe various federal and Wisconsin officials.21
       Especially useful for our purposes, the committee appointed to inquire into the alleged
bribery of the railroad reported the exact value of the bribes received by all Wisconsin officials
involved in the scandal. The report revealed, for example, that 49 state representatives each
  21
     At the Federal level, the railroad paid $105,000 to congressmen for federal approval of the land grant.
However, the bulk of the bribes were paid to various Wisconsin officials, including 59 assemblymen and 19
state senators, $10,000 to state Supreme Court Justice Abram Smith, and $17,000 to state house clerks
to expedite business. Republican Governor Coles Bashford received over $50,000 in stocks and $15,000 in
cash. The railroad also appeared to be concerned about the scandal becoming public, since it paid $25,000
to silence a key member of the Wisconsin state legislative committee investigating the scandal (Horace A.
Tenney), and also paid bribes to journalists, including $10,000 to the editor of the Milwaukee Sentinel.
Government officials however, appeared to be less worried about their involvement in the scandal and taking
bribes from the railroad. State assemblyman George W. Parker explained why the railroad’s payments were
not bribes: They were made after voting for the railroad’s bill, not before. Moreover, having adjourned,
they “were no longer a Legislature... [so] our acceptance could in no way be considered or regarded as a
bribe... it could in no way affect our honor or integrity as men... and further, that coming at the time it
did, and especially when we remembered that the Company had just received at our hands 3 to $10,000,000
worth of lands as a gratuity, we could not find it in our hearts to refuse.”


                                                    14
received $5,000 in bribes, 7 more received $10,000 each, 1 received $20,000, and 1 received
$25,000. State senators generally received larger bribes – 10 received $10,000, 4 received
$20,000 and 1 received $5,000. We attempted to find the census records in 1850 and 1860
of all those Wisconsin officials who served in the state government in 1856.22 This allows
us to test whether those who received larger bribes, accumulated, on average, more wealth
between 1850 and 1860. To do this analysis we can estimate a regression of the form:

                W ealth1860
                       i    = γ0 + γ1 W ealth1850
                                             i    + γ2 BribeAmounti + γ30 Xi + i                          (2)

where Xi includes age and age2 as controls. The coefficient of interest is γ2 , which measures
the extent to which larger bribes in 1856 are reflected in higher census wealth in 1860.
    In Table 1 we report estimates of γ2 in equation (2). Columns 1 and 2 report the
estimated coefficients when all wealth variables – wealth in 1850 and 1860 and bribe amount
– are expressed in levels. Column 1 shows median regression estimates and column 2 shows
OLS estimates. Column 3 reports the OLS estimate when the logs of these variables are
used.23 The estimates reveal that the bribe amount is strongly and positively correlated with
reported wealth in 1860, and the coefficient is statistically significant at conventional levels.
The point estimate in column 1 implies that a bribe of $10,000 translates into about $10,000
in additional census wealth in 1860. These results provide further evidence of reliability of
the census wealth data. They suggest that we can detect changes in wealth that occur over
a decade resulting, partly, as a consequence of rents and bribes from holding office.

4.4     Descriptive Statistics
In this section we present some basic descriptive statistics of wealth levels and changes during
this period. To compare candidates in this period to other groups of the population, we use
the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) census samples for 1850, 1860, 1870
and 1880 collected by the Minnesota Population Center. These constitute representative
  22
     We found both the 1850 and 1860 records for 94 out of 139 government officials that were in power
during the 1856 legislature, when the scandal took place.
  23
     We only estimate the regression for the government officials who, according to the committee’s report,
received a positive bribe by the railroad. It is not clear what to assume regarding officials not listed in the
report. In particular, 21 state legislators supposedly did not receive any bribe. Of these, 8 voted in favor of
the Lacrosse & Milwaukee Railroad’s bill, and 13 voted against. Those who voted “yes” may have benefited
in other ways – e.g., the committee report noted that John Fitzgerald had a direct interest in the railroad –
and those who voted “no” might have received payments from other railroads. If we assign a value of zero
bribes to those not mentioned in the report, and who voted against the railroad, then the estimate for the
specification in levels reported in column 1 remains positive and statistically significant. However, the point
estimate for the log specification falls substantially and is no longer statistically significant.


                                                      15
1% samples from each population census and provide information on every single variable
collected in the census. This allows us to compare the candidates not only to the population
as a whole but also to individuals of similar occupations. These IPUMS samples as well as
other samples from the 1850-1880 censuses have been used by many economic historians.24
       Table 2a reports summary statistics on initial wealth, prior to running for congress – i.e.,
figures for wealth and servants in 1850 are for candidates who ran for office in the 1850s,
figures for 1860 are for individuals who ran for congress in the 1860s, and figures for 1870
are for individuals who ran for congress between 1870 and 1875. Given the skewness of
the wealth distribution, we report mean and median values for wealth but only the mean
for number of servants (the median number of servants is 1 in all but one sub-group of
candidates).
       The first outstanding fact is that congressional candidates – especially those who actually
served in congress – were very rich men. Not surprisingly, the average and median wealth of
congressional candidates exceeds substantially that of the mean and the median citizen in the
IPUMS samples. Congressional candidates were in the 99th percentile of the overall wealth
distribution. Somewhat more surprisingly, congressional candidates were rich even when
compared to other “elite” groups. The simplest comparison involves lawyers. Law was by
far the most common occupation of candidates in our sample – nearly half of all candidates
were lawyers. On average, congressional candidates who were lawyers were more than three
times as wealthy as the average lawyer in the country in 1860. The gap was even larger in
1870. Also, the gap is larger in relative terms in all decades if we compare medians. The
median congressional winner was located in the top decile of the wealth distribution of lawyers
nationwide. Thus, during this period congressional nominations were restricted to a rich elite.
The average (median) wealth of a congressman during the 1860s was about $43,000 ($17,000).
To put these numbers in context and bring them to present values, we use a multiplier of
50.25 This would imply that the average wealth of congressmen during the 1860s was more
than $2,000,000 in present values, and the median was over $800,000. Groseclose and Milyo
(1999) estimate that in 1992 the average wealth of congressional incumbents was $997,000
while the median was $356,000. Thus, congressmen in the mid-1800’s were relatively rich
  24
     The list includes Soltow (1975), Williamson and Lindert (1980), Atack and Bateman (1981), Kearl and
Pope (1984), Steckel (1988, 1989, 1990, 1994), Shammas (1993), Ferrie (1996), and Stewart (2006).
  25
     The daily wage of a carpenter in Massachusetts is $1.45 in 1850 and $1.70 in 1860. The median daily
wage of a carpenter today is about $160. This suggests a multiplier of about 100 to put 1850-1860 dollars
in today’s dollars. If we use the CPI then the multiplier is about 30. The correct multiplier probably lies
somewhere between these two, so we use 50 as a rough guess.



                                                    16
even when compared with congressmen today.
    A comparison of different types of candidates reveals that those who won and actually
served tended to be slightly richer than candidates who ran for congress but never served
– though, the differences are not overwhelming. This suggests that some of the selection
issues discussed in section 3.1 may be relevant in our context, since initial wealth, plausibly
correlated with traits important for economic and political success, is correlated with winning
elections and serving in congress.
       A comparison of wealth levels across parties does not reveal any robust patterns. In the
1850s, Democratic candidates were poorer than Whigs. However, in the 1860s Republican
and Democratic candidates were similarly wealthy, and in the 1870s Republicans were richer
than Democrats.
       Finally, Table 2b presents some descriptive statistics on changes in wealth and in the
number of servants. The samples correspond to candidates who ran during the respective
decades. Overall, the wealth of congressional candidates roughly doubled between 1850
and 1860, and increased by about 80% between 1860 and 1870. These rates of wealth
accumulation are similar to the values exhibited by synthetic cohorts constructed from the
IPUMS samples.26 Of course, given the much larger initial wealth of congressional candidates
the same change in percentage terms corresponds to a much larger increase in absolute terms.
   In addition, there is some evidence that those who won and served in congress became
richer than those who lost – particularly during the 1860s.27 Column 4 reveals that on
average, those who served during the 1860s became about 11 percentage points richer than
losers between 1860 and 1870, using the median change in column 3, this corresponds to
an additional $5,000. The figures for servants in column 5 exhibit a similar pattern. In the
1850s, winners did only slightly better than losers in terms of wealth, and about equally well
in terms of servants. Figures for the 1870-1880 period in the last column do not suggest any
abnormal wealth accumulation by winners relative to losers. A preview of the RDD results
can be seen by comparing wealth accumulation of close winners and close losers in Table 2b,
i.e. candidates who won or lost their first election with a vote share between 47% and 53%.
  26
     We do not have enough observations to construct synthetic cohorts for lawyers in the IPUMS sample.
  27
     More generally, the differences between winners and losers reflect a positive and statistically significant
relationship between a candidate’s vote share and wealth accumulation during each decade that suggests
that electoral success may be correlated with other traits that are also correlated with wealth accumulation.
For our baseline sample, an OLS regression of the change in the log of total wealth between 1860 and 1870
against the vote share in the first election reveals that an increase in one percentage point of the vote share
is associated with an increase in total wealth of 7%. The coefficient is statistically significant at the .05 level.
This confirms, once again, the importance of the RDD described in section 3.2.



                                                        17
There is no evidence that close winners accumulated more wealth than close losers during
the 1850s or 1870s – if anything, close winners did slightly worse. However, there is evidence
that those who won their first election in the 1860s by a small margin experienced a change
in wealth between 1860 and 1870 that was 37 percentage points larger than that of those
who ran but lost by a small margin. We explore this more systematically in Section 5.
   Overall, while the differences between winners and losers are all positive, they are hardly
overwhelming. This is already suggestive of the effectiveness of political institutions during
this period in preventing systematic rent-seeking by politicians. As we show below however,
some of these averages mask a large amount of heterogeneity.
    There is also an interesting partisan pattern. During the 1850s, when Democrats con-
trolled congress, Democratic candidates (both winners and losers) accumulated about 40%
more wealth than Whigs. This pattern is reversed in the 1860s. During this decade Repub-
licans took control of congress, and their candidates accumulated about 20% more wealth
than Democrats. This suggests that candidates from the party in control became richer
than candidates from the minority party. Since it is not the focus of our paper, we leave a
thorough investigation of this for future work.


5    Results
In this section we present the main results of the paper. First, for reference, we present
standard OLS estimates that illustrate average differences in wealth accumulation by con-
gressmen and those who ran but lost. Next we present the RDD estimates for the different
decades and some evidence on the underlying mechanisms that may explain the patterns in
the data.
   In all our tables we consider the following samples. The samples for the 1850-1860 period
include candidates who ran for the 31st-36th Congresses; these are candidates who ran
between 1848 and 1859 and, if they won, served at some point between 1850 and 1860. The
samples for the 1860-1870 period include candidates who ran for the 36th-41st Congresses.
Those who won during the 1860’s served in congress under very different political, fiscal, and
economic environments. The first half of the decade, the 37th-39th Congresses, coincided
with the Civil War and immediate post-war years. As discussed in the introduction, federal
spending rose to unprecedented levels, and most of the attention of government, indeed of
the whole society, focused on the war. During the non-war years – i.e. the 36th Congress just
before the war and the 40th and 41st Congresses afterward – the situation was more normal


                                             18
and federal spending after 1866 returned to levels roughly similar to those of the 1850s.
Thus, throughout our analysis, we report separate estimates for those who ran during the
Civil War and the non-war years. Finally, the sample for the 1870-1880 period corresponds
to those who ran for the 41st-43th Congresses (between 1869 and 1873) and, if they won,
served at some point between 1870 and 1875.
   In addition, all regressions include the following set of controls: initial wealth (for re-
gressions with wealth as dependent variable), initial number of servants (for regressions with
number of servants as a dependent variable), age, age2 , occupation dummies for lawyer,
farmer and manufacturer/merchant/banker, and a full set of state fixed effects.28

5.1       OLS Estimates
In Table 3 we present standard OLS estimates of equation (1) on the full sample of candidates
where we drop the control function f (·) altogether. We present estimates of β2 for our three
dependent variables Ending Wealth, Log Ending Wealth and Ending Servants in the first,
second and third columns respectively. Estimates in the first column correspond to median
regressions while those in columns 2 and 3 correspond to OLS estimates.
      The estimates in columns 1 and 2 of panel A, provide some suggestive evidence that those
who served during the 1850s accumulated more wealth than those who ran but never served.
However, this is not robust across dependent variables as the estimate in column 3 based
on number of servants as a dependent variable is very close to zero and is not statistically
significant. The estimates in panel B provide evidence that those who served during the
Civil War years accumulated more wealth than whose who ran during the 1860s but never
served. On the contrary, estimates for those who served during the non-war years are very
small and statistically insignificant. These patterns in panel B are robust across the different
dependent variables. Finally, there is no evidence that those who served between 1870 and
1875 accumulated more servants between 1870 and 1880 than those who ran during this
period but did not serve. The estimate in panel C is very small and it is not statistically
significant.
      The patterns revealed by the OLS estimates already anticipate the main results of the
paper. However, these estimates must be interpreted with caution as they confound the effect
of serving in congress with other characteristics of the candidates correlated with winning
elections and economic success (wealth accumulation). In order to isolate the effect of serving
 28
      In all our median regressions with wealth in levels as dependent variable, we include region fixed effects.



                                                       19
in congress and estimate the rents from office we must turn to the regression discontinuity
design (RDD) discussed in section 3.

5.2     Basic RDD Estimates
In this section we present the main results of our regression discontinuity analysis based
on equation (1). We begin by providing some validity checks that give us confidence in
our identification strategy. Next, we report our main regression estimates for the different
decades.

5.2.1   RDD Preliminaries

If the outcome of close elections is as good as random, then we should observe relative
“balance” across various characteristics of those who win and lose in these close elections.
In our benchmark specifications we will focus on candidates whose first vote share lay in a
3% window around the 50% threshold. This is the bandwidth suggested by the Imbens and
Kalyanaraman (2009) optimal bandwidth procedure. An important question is whether can-
didates in this “close election” sample resemble the quasi-random assignment that underlies
the identification strategy based on close elections.
   Table 4 presents differences in various covariates observed in the census records across
candidates in the “close election” sample. We present differences for the different decades.
Reassuringly, we find no systematic evidence of any major difference across winners and
losers in any of the covariates in our main samples. Differences in initial wealth and the
initial number of servants across winners and losers are small and statistically insignificant.
This is perhaps the most important piece of evidence, since one potential concern is that
richer candidates might be able to influence the outcome of elections – even close elections
– in their favor. There is also no systematic evidence of any statistical differences in age or
occupation groups across winners and losers, indicating that these factors do not influence
election outcomes in the close election sample.
   Recent papers by Snyder (2005), Caughey and Sekhon (2010) and Carpenter et al. (2011)
criticize RDD studies that rely on close elections, arguing that there are anomalies even very
near the 50% threshold. They show that in U.S. House elections, incumbents win noticeably
more than 50% of the very close races – especially those where the winning margin was
less than 1% – and that candidates from the party in control of state offices, such as the
governorship, secretary of state and state house and senate, hold a systematic advantage
in extremely close elections. These papers do not analyze the time period we study, so we

                                              20
provide some evidence here (a more detailed description is available in the data appendix).
We find no statistical evidence of “sorting at the threshold” for incumbents or for candidates
from the governor’s party using a 1% or a 2% bandwidth. Similarly, for a 3% bandwidth,
we find no evidence of sorting for candidates who ran in the 1850’s or during the Civil War
years (our main sub-sample of interest).29

5.2.2    RDD Regressions

Table 5 presents our main results for the 1850s (panel A), 1860s (panel B) and 1870s (panel
C). We focus on local linear regressions in a 3% bandwidth. The first column – for Ending
Wealth – reports estimates based on median regressions while regressions in columns 2 and
3 are estimated by OLS.
    Consider the estimates for the 1850-1860 period. The estimates are negative and sta-
tistically insignificant across the various specifications and dependent variables. A similar
pattern is revealed by the estimate in panel C for the 1870-1880 period: the point estimate is
small and statistically insignificant. This is a remarkable result. In spite of some anecdotal
evidence and claims made by historians and observers at the time about corruption during
the pre-war decade and during the Grant administration in the 1870s (recall the discussion
in section 2) our estimates indicate that, overall, congressmen during this period were not
able to accumulate wealth at an abnormal rate relative to those who ran but lost by a small
margin. A plausible interpretation is that democratic political institutions during these two
decades were effective at preventing systematic and widespread rent-seeking by members of
congress. Moreover, estimates for these decades stand in contrast with evidence for other
countries and different periods where the value of political connections has been found to be
large.
    In panel B we report the results for the 1860-1870 period where we allow a different
coefficient for those who served during the Civil War years and those who served in the non-
war years.30 At the bottom of the panel we report the p-value of an F-test for whether the
  29
     We do find some evidence of sorting for elections in the post-Civil War years using a 3% bandwidth.
However, these outcomes are not too surprising, since as Folke et al. (2011) show in districts with a “normal
vote” different from .5 we actually expect candidates from the favored party to win more than 50% of the time
except in extremely small windows around the threshold. Incumbents, as well as candidates whose party
won the governorship, tend to be from the favored party rather than the disadvantaged party in a district
and thus it is hard to disentangle the incumbency or party-control effect from the effect of the “normal vote”
in the district.
  30
     We do not report results from a fully saturated regression where we allow all controls, forcing variable
and the state fixed effects to vary across the Civil War and non-war sample. Estimating a fully saturated
model does not affect the point estimates noticeably, but naturally causes the standard errors to increase


                                                     21
coefficients for the Civil War and non-war samples are equal. The estimates provide evidence
of a large effect of serving in congress during the Civil War on wealth accumulation. The
point estimates for Ending Log Wealth in column 2 suggests that those who served during
the Civil War accumulated about 40% more wealth than those who ran and lost by a small
margin. Using average wealth values in 1860, the estimated coefficient implies that Civil
War congressmen accumulated an additional $17,000 dollars (approximately $850,000 in
current values) relative to those who ran but did not serve. This is remarkably similar to
the point estimate in column 1 produced by the median regression using Ending Wealth as
the dependent variable that suggests that congressmen who served during the Civil War
accumulated an additional $18,000 (approximately $900,000 in current values) relative to
those who ran but did not serve. The estimate using Ending Servants confirms the same
pattern, indicating that Civil War winners accumulated about 0.6 more servants than losers.
This is comforting since the number of servants, although a coarse measure of wealth, was
harder to misreport to census enumerators.31
   By contrast, the estimates for congressmen who served during the non-war years are
always small and are never statistically significant. The estimate for Ending Wealth in
column 2 is very close to zero while the estimates in columns 1 and 3 are negative and
statistically insignificant. The F-tests in columns 1 and 3 always reject the null hypothesis
that coefficients for Civil War and non-war years are the same at the .05 level. The F-test
for Ending Log Wealth also rejects this hypothesis but only at the .10 level.32
    Figure 3 illustrates these results graphically. It shows RDD plots for two variables:
due to the small sample sizes. Moreover, the inclusion of the state fixed effects does not affect the point
estimates substantially, and these fixed effects are rarely if ever jointly statistically significant.
  31
     Congressional salaries are unlikely to explain these differences. Until 1856 congressmen did not receive
a salary but a per-diem of $8 that produced an average annual payment of $880. From 1856 to 1865
congressmen received an annual salary of $3,000, and from 1866 to 1871 they received an annual salary of
$5,000. This was a large salary for the time, and congressmen during this period were not obliged to resign
their existing jobs. They did, however, have to forego income they could have earned in their regular jobs
during the time devoted to the congressional sessions. This was about one half of a year over the course
of a typical congress. In addition, congressmen had to set up a second residence in Washington D.C., a
large expense which consumed a large portion of their salary, according to contemporary reports. Note that
using the multiplier of 50, the $5,000 salary corresponds to about $250,000 in present value. This compares
favorably to the annual salary of $162,100 received by present congressmen.
  32
     Our estimates do not simply capture a more general “early vs. late half of the decade” effect. The point
estimate for those who served in the early half of the 1850s is not statistically different from the estimate
for those who served in the late half of the decade. Moreover, the estimate in panel C for the 1870-1880
period corresponds precisely to those who served in the early half of the decade (1870-1875), as we have only
collected wealth data for these individuals. That estimate is small and statistically insignificant providing
additional evidence that our results do not simply capture larger wealth accumulation by those who serve in
the early half of a decade. Our “before-and-after” analysis in section 6 will provide further evidence of this.


                                                      22
change in wealth (top row) and change in servants (bottom row). We compute binned
averages based on vote share of the first election, and plot these averages against the vote
share. We also plot locally-linear regression curves, which are allowed to differ on each side
of the 50% threshold, together with 95% confidence intervals.33 We show plots separately
for the Civil War and non-war years. The plots confirm the same patterns of Table 5; for
both dependent variables there is a sizable and statistically significant jump at the threshold
for Civil War years (first column), but not for the non-war years (second column).
       In panel D of Table 5 we report estimates of “placebo regressions” where we look at
wealth accumulation between 1850 and 1860 for candidates who ran during the 1860s. If
the estimated coefficients in panel B are actually due to service in congress, rather than
unobserved characteristics of the winners, then serving in congress during the 1860s should
have no effect on wealth accumulation in the previous decade. Reassuringly, “placebo”
estimates for Civil War congressmen are very small and never statistically significant at
conventional levels. Estimates for non-war congressmen are also small and insignificant with
the exception of the estimate in column 3 that is positive and statistically significant. These
estimates suggest that our estimates in panel B do not simply reflect pre-existing trends in
wealth accumulation across close winners and close losers.
   Finally, our results are also robust to the choice of bandwidth and control function f (·).
In Appendix A, we report robustness checks of our main results. We report our results
focusing on a 2% and 3% window around the threshold (“close elections sample”) where we
drop the control function f (·) altogether (see, e.g., Angrist and Lavy, 1999). Intuitively, for
a small enough window h, our variable of interest W innerit is as good as randomly assigned
across the individuals, and thus our estimate of β2 in regression (1) corresponds to the
causal effect of holding a seat in congress on wealth accumulation. This approach may be
inefficient in small samples but has the advantage of not relying on the correct specification
of the functional form of the control function. It also resembles more closely the quasi-
experimental assignment provided by close elections. The assumption of random assignment
should be even more convincing in this narrower 2% window, even if it may come at the
expense of noisier estimates. We also report robustness checks where we focus on a larger
sample by using a bandwidth of 20% and include a third order polynomial in the vote share
  33
     Plots for change in wealth show the median regression fitted line while those for change in servants show
the least squares regression line. To be consistent with our regression analysis, in the median regression
fitted lines in the top row we allow a different intercept for Civil War and non-war winners but impose the
same slope – i.e. we do not estimate a fully saturated regression where we allow the effect of the forcing
variable to vary across Civil War and non-war candidates.



                                                     23
of the first congressional race. This is consistent with the approach proposed in Angrist and
Pischke (2009) but has the disadvantage of relying crucially on the correct specification of
the polynomial in the forcing variable.
       Table A.1 shows the robustness checks for the regressions reported in Table 5. The
estimates in columns 1-9 confirm the same overall pattern: no evidence of a statistically
significant effect of serving in congress during the 1850s, the 1870s or during the non-war
years in the 1860s, and evidence of large rents for those who served during the Civil War.
       Finally, although we do not show this in a table, we can compare the winner against the
loser in each close race, on a race by race basis. The results are as follows. For the Civil War
years, the median difference in Ending Wealth between the winner and the loser is $10,300,
the average difference in Log Ending Wealth between the winner and the loser is 0.32, and
the average difference in Log Servants between the winner and the loser is 0.34. For the
non-war years, the corresponding differences between the winner and the loser are much
smaller: $5,525, 0.11, and 0.02, respectively. This confirms the overall pattern illustrated in
Table 5.34

5.3       Exploring Possible Mechanisms
What can explain our evidence of rent seeking by Civil War congressmen? A first element of
central importance in our interpretation is the size of federal government spending. Figure 1A
illustrates the evolution of nominal government spending by the federal government between
1850 and 1880. There was a dramatic increase in nominal government spending during the
Civil War years from about $60 million just before the outbreak of the war, to almost $1,200
million at the highest point during the war, followed by an equally sharp fall in spending
after the war ended. This was driven by the need to mobilize, equip, feed, and move armies
on a scale never before seen in U.S. history. The sudden spike in government spending might
have made it easier for incumbent congressmen (and other politicians) to collect rents as
there was a larger pool of resources on which to prey. Similarly, rent extraction would have
been more difficult to detect during the Civil War than during the 1850s or 1870s because
the same dollar amount of rents represented a much smaller fraction of total government
spending. Using the point estimates from Table 5, the total amount of rents extracted by
all incumbent congressmen serving during the Civil War would have represented less than
0.1% of total federal wartime spending. However, this would have represented almost 2% of
  34
    For the 1850s, the differences between the winner and the loser are all slightly negative – -$2,000, -0.09,
and -0.27, respectively.


                                                      24
the average level of pre-war spending (over four years), and about 1% of post-war spending.
Thus, rent extraction comparable in scale to what we estimate for the Civil War years would
have been much easier to detect during “normal” times.
      A second possibility – beyond the increase in federal spending – is that as a consequence
of the war, the effectiveness of the various checks and balances and political institutions set
in place to oversee and control the behavior of politicians was undermined. During the Civil
War years the federal government, the media, and the electorate were mainly focused on
fighting the war, and thus oversight might have been lax relative to “normal” times. This
would have allowed incumbent congressmen to channel contracts towards firms in which
they had an interest, or collect side-payments or legal fees from contractors in exchange for
favorable treatment. Procurement was especially frantic and disorganized during the first half
of the war, as an army of almost 700,000 men was built essentially from scratch (see Wilson,
2006a). Under severe pressure, and focused on the gloomy military situation in the east, it is
unlikely that the agencies of the federal government were capable of carefully overseeing and
auditing much of the contracting. In Figure 1B we show some evidence consistent with this
hypothesis. Reporting on corruption by local newspapers fell precisely during the Civil War
years and started increasing again right after the end of the war, when most of the political
turmoil and battles that had captured the media’s attention disappeared.
   Next, we address our hypothesis that wartime activity – especially military contracting
and membership on key congressional committees – might have been the source of some of
the rents extracted by congressmen during the Civil War.

5.3.1      Military Contracting States

First, we consider military contracts. Wilson (2006a) provides a list of the major military
contractors in the most important industries during the Civil War (Appendix B of his book).
These contractors were all located in Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, Maine, Mary-
land, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont.35
Using this list we define a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for the states with large military
contracts, and 0 for the remaining states. We then re-estimate the regressions reported in
panel B of Table 5, but add terms that interact this dummy variable with the variables indi-
cating which candidates won during the Civil War and non-war years. An important caveat
is that large contracting states differ from non-contracting states along other dimensions
other than the magnitude of military contracts during the war. Large contracting states
 35
      We exclude Delaware, Maryland and Missouri because they were slave states.


                                                    25
are richer and more consolidated states and thus our interaction terms may confound many
other characteristics of these states.
   Panel A of Table 6 presents the results of this analysis. The estimates provide robust
evidence of large returns for congressmen from large contracting states who served during the
Civil War. The point estimates for congressmen from these states – reported in the first row –
are the largest and are always statistically significant. The difference is particularly striking
for the estimates in column 1 – based on ending wealth – that suggest that congressmen
representing large contracting states who served during the Civil War accumulated up to
$28,000 (approximately $1,400,000 in present values) more wealth than those who ran but
never served. Moreover, in this specification we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficient
for congressmen from contracting states during the Civil War is equal to that of congressmen
from other states during the war. The estimates in columns 2 and 3 using ending log wealth
and number of servants as the dependent variable exhibit the same overall pattern. However,
the estimates for congressmen who represented other states during the Civil War, though
not statistically significant, are rather large in columns 2 and 3. In these specifications we
cannot reject the null hypothesis that the effect for congressmen who served during the Civil
War in contracting and other states is equal.
   On the other hand, the estimates in the third row reveal that congressmen from large
contracting states did not become abnormally richer in the non-war years once spending in
war supplies in these states declined dramatically. The estimates are relatively small and
are never statistically significant in the different specifications. There is also no evidence
of abnormal wealth accumulation from congressmen who represented non-contracting states
during the non-war years. Estimates in the fourth row of panel A are always small and
not significant. Moreover, in columns 1 and 3 we can always reject the hypothesis that the
coefficients for congressmen who served during the non-war years are equal to the coefficient
of congressmen from contracting states who served during the Civil War. Perhaps more
important, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of congressmen representing
contracting and non-contracting states were equal to each other during the non-war years.
This suggests that it was only during high military spending war-times, when congressmen
from large contracting states were able to accumulate wealth at an abnormal rate relative
to those who ran but never served in congress.
   In Panel B of Table 6 we report placebo regressions where we look at wealth accumulation
by those who represented Contracting and other states during the 1860s, in the decade prior
to serving in Congress. A potential concern with the results in panel A is that they may


                                               26
confound the effect of representing a large contracting state during the Civil War years with
an overall higher ability of congressmen from these states. The estimates in the first row
for those who represented contracting states during the Civil War are small and are not
statistically significant. This is comforting and suggests that evidence of large rents for
congressmen who represented these states during the Civil War does not reflect pre-existing
characteristics or patterns of wealth accumulation of these individuals. Moreover, from the
F-tests in panel B we cannot reject the null hypothesis that wealth accumulation between
1850 and 1860 was equal for congressmen who represented large contracting states and other
states during the 1860s.
   An additional concern has to do with the fact that the results in panel A may reflect the
overall advantage that individuals representing large contracting states enjoy in extracting
rents in any period other than the 1860s. To address this possibility, in Table 8 we explore
whether individuals who represented large contracting states during the 1850s (panel A) or
during the 1870s (panel B) accumulated more wealth relative to those who ran and never
served or those who represented other states during this period. The results are, once again,
reassuring. The estimates in panels A and B are, if anything, negative and are often small and
statistically insignificant. Most importantly, there is no evidence of a statistical difference
between the estimates for congressmen representing contracting states and other states in
any of these decades.
    Finally, in appendix table A.2 we report robustness checks for the regressions in panel
A of Table 6. The overall patterns are the same when we focus on a 2% or 3% band-
width and drop the control function altogether (columns 1-6) or when we use a much wider
bandwitdh (h=20%) and control for a third order polynomial in the vote share of the first
election (columns 7-9). Those who represented contracting states during the Civil War years
accumulated the largest amounts of wealth between 1860-1870.

5.3.2    Military Spending Committees

Next, we study the role of committee assignments. We use the Daily Journal of the House
of Representatives as well as the Congressional Globe to identify the committees most often
cited as responsible for large bills on military appropriations during the 37th and 38th
Congresses during the Civil War.36 These committees are the Ways and Means (responsible
for many appropriations bills including many for army and navy funding), Military Affairs
  36
     The House Journal reports the proceedings of all legislative activity for the house and provides details
on the committees responsible for every bill. The Congressional Globe records full debates.


                                                     27
and Militia, Expenditures of the War Department, Naval Affairs, Expenditures of the Navy
Department, and Roads and Canals (important for military railroads during the war).
   In Table 7 we explore whether congressmen who served on these key committees accumu-
lated more wealth between 1860 and 1870 than congressmen who served on other committees,
as well as candidates who ran and never served. The relevant variation of interest in this
exercise is committee assignment. Thus, we do not report regression discontinuity estimates
since these provide us with random assignment in access to office and not to different specific
committees. Instead, we consider the whole sample of candidates and report difference-in-
difference estimates for the effect of serving in a military spending committee in Civil War
and in non-war years. The estimates in the first four rows of panel A report wealth accu-
mulation between 1860 and 1870 by members of military spending committees and other
committees who served during the Civil War and during the non-war years, relative to those
who ran during this period but did not serve.
   The estimates provide evidence of especially large returns for congressmen who served
on the important military spending committees during the Civil War. The estimates in
the first row are large and statistically significant across the different dependent variables.
The estimate in column 1 implies that congressmen from these committees accumulated and
additional $20,000 (approximately $1,000,000 in current values) relative to those who ran
but did not serve. The estimates for congressmen from other committees who served during
the Civil War are also positive and statistically significant in columns 1 and 3 but are smaller
than those for congressmen in top military committees. Most importantly, the difference-in-
difference estimates reported at the bottom of panel A are positive for all dependent variables
though they are only statistically significant in columns 1 and 3 (in the latter case at the
.06 level). This provides suggestive evidence that assignment to these key committees was
particularly profitable during the Civil War years, when military spending was abnormally
high.
   In panel B of Table 7 we report placebo regressions that look at wealth accumulation
between 1850 and 1860, prior to serving in Congress, by those who served in military spend-
ing committees and other committees between 1860 and 1870. The estimates in panel B are
small and are never statistically significant suggesting that those who served between 1860
and 1870 did not accumulate more wealth in the 1850s relative to those who ran but did not
serve. Moreover the “placebo” difference-in-difference estimates reported at the bottom of
panel B are, if anything, negative and are never statistically significant. This suggests that
the patterns reported in panel A of Table 7 do not simply capture pre-existing differences


                                              28
across individuals serving in these committees.
   An additional validity check is reported in Table 8 that looks at wealth accumulation by
those who served in top military spending committees and other committees during “normal
times” in the 1850s (panel C) and 1870s (panel D) when military spending was not at
unusually high levels. The estimates in panel C suggest that those who served in military
spending committees during the 1850s may have accumulated more wealth between 1850 and
1860 than those who ran but never served, though this result is not robust across the different
dependent variables (estimates in column 3 are small and statistically insignificant). The
estimates in panel D are very close to zero and statistically insignificant. Most importantly,
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimates for those who served in military spending
committees and other committees in the 1850s and 1870s are equal to each other. Thus, our
estimates in panel A of Table 7 do not simply capture an overall advantage in rent-seeking
for those serving in military committees relative to those in other committees. Assignment
to military spending committees was only profitable during the war.
   Finally, the difference-in-difference estimates in Table 7 are based on the full sample of
candidates. This can raise concerns that the patterns in Table 7 partly confound the change
in the sample of candidates considered relative to the sample in Table 5 (that focuses on a
bandwidth of 3% around the 0.5 threshold). For robustness, in appendix table A.3 we report
estimates equivalent to those in Table 7 but focusing on the same 3% sample used in Table
5. The patterns remain essentially unchanged; the difference-in-difference estimates in panel
A are positive (and larger than those reported in Table 7) but only statistically significant in
columns 1 and 3 (in the latter case at the .09 level). The “placebo” difference in difference
estimates in panel B are, if anything, negative and are not statistically significant.
   Overall, the evidence in Tables 6-8 is consistent with the hypothesis that congressmen
who served during the Civil War got richer than they would have otherwise, and that this was
due in part to the unusually high levels of wartime spending. Members of congress from the
mainly industrial states that were home to the largest federal contractors, and members who
served on the committees that were responsible for most military appropriations, tended
to accumulate more wealth between 1860 and 1870 than other members of congress, and
noticeably more than the individuals who ran for congress but lost. These results highlight
the importance of increased opportunities associated to the spike in government spending and
contracting during the Civil War. Increased spending and opportunities for self-enrichment
may need to interact with lower control and oversight by state institutions, the voters and
the media to generate higher levels of rent-seeking. While we currently do not have data


                                              29
that allows us to disentangle the role of increased opportunities from the effect of reduced
control we are currently gathering additional data to address this in future research.

5.3.3   Alternative Mechanisms

Next we explore some additional potential interpretations of the results reported in Tables
5-8. First, we examine whether members of Congress accumulate more wealth than election
losers in the decades after serving in Congress. Next, we explore the hypothesis that the re-
sults in Table 5 reflect the fact that the Civil War may have attracted more venal candidates.
Finally, we discuss whether the lack of evidence on rents for the 1850s and 1870s may be
driven by lack of power – in particular, the inability to detect smaller levels of rent-seeking
during this period.

Wealth Accumulation After Serving in Congress The results in Table 5 provide no
systematic evidence of abnormal wealth accumulation while serving in office, at least for
those who served during the 1850s and 1870s. One possibility is that members of congress
are able to benefit from the connections and networks established while in office, after they
leave congress. This may include both legal activities – e.g., lawyers in congress may meet
and attract as clients a larger and richer set of individuals than they knew before serving –
as well as shadier dealings such as preferential treatment for contracts and land grants that
former congressmen receive from those inside government after leaving congress. Similarly,
politicians may prefer to receive side-payments or bribes after they leave office when they are
less under the scrutiny of voters and of political institutions. For the British case, Eggers and
Hainmueller (2008) find that Conservative MPs profited from office largely through lucrative
outside employment they later acquired as a result of their political positions.
   To explore this possibility, in Table 9 we look at whether those who served in congress
accumulated more wealth than those who ran but lost in the decade after they were out
of office. In panel A we explore wealth accumulation between 1850 and 1860 for those who
served in the 29th and 30th Congresses (between 1845 and 1850) but did not serve during
the 1850s. Similarly, in panel B we consider wealth accumulation between 1860 and 1870
for those who served during the 1850s (31st-36th Congresses) but did not serve during the
1860s. Finally, in panel C we consider wealth accumulation between 1870 and 1880 for those
who served during the 1860s (36th-41st Congresses) but not during the 1870s.
  Overall, the estimates in Table 9 provide no robust evidence of abnormal returns in the
decade after serving in congress. Estimates in columns 1 and 2 of panel A are negative,


                                               30
small and statistically insignificant. The estimate in column 3 is positive and rather large
but it is not statistically significant. The estimates in panel B are positive but they are
not statistically significant at conventional levels (even though the estimate in column 3 is
rather large). Finally, the estimates in panel C for those who served during the Civil War
and non-war years in the 1860s are also statistically insignificant.

Attraction of Venal Candidates Another possibility is that the political environment
during this period attracted more venal candidates, who anticipated that federal politicians
would have greater opportunities for war profiteering than others. Greater wealth accumula-
tion by congressmen during this period may partly reflect a change in the type of individuals
who ran for congress. However, using the information recorded in the census schedules, this
hypothesis receives only limited support in the data. As the validity checks in Table 4 show,
there is no evidence of any systematic difference across winning and losing candidates who
ran during this period. There is also little evidence of a change in the occupational back-
ground of the overall pool of candidates – winners and losers – who ran for congress during
the Civil War years. For the Civil War congresses, 58% of the candidates were lawyers, 19%
were farmers and 14% were merchants, manufacturers or bankers. These figures are not very
different for candidates who ran during the 1850s or during the non-war years in the 1860s
– 53% of candidates who ran during the 1850s were lawyers, 20% were farmers and 14%
were merchants, manufacturers or bankers. The corresponding figures for the non-war years
during the 1860s were 57%, 16% and 15% respectively. Of course, we cannot rule out that
candidates differed in terms of characteristics that we cannot observe, so this hypothesis
should be explored in more detail by future research.

Rents during Normal Times A final potential interpretation of the results in Table 5 is
that due to the relatively small size of the federal budget during the 1850s, 1870s and second
half of the 1860s, we may be unable to detect in the data rates of rent extraction similar to
those observed during the Civil War. In other words, political institutions may have been
equally effective during the Civil War in monitoring and keeping the levels of rent extraction
at the same proportion as during the non-war years, but we can only detect systematic
rents during the Civil War years due to the much larger size of federal spending. This
interpretation, while plausible, is unlikely to explain our results. Recall from our previous
discussion that the total value of rents accumulated by congressmen during the Civil War
years accounts to approximately 0.1% of total federal spending over the 4 years in this


                                              31
period. A similar rate or fraction of rent extraction during the 1850s or 1870s would have
corresponded to rents of approximately $2,000 or $5,500 respectively per congressman over
the 10-year period. Our analysis of the Lacrosse and Milwaukee railroad scandal revealed
that we can detect bribes of $5,000 using census wealth data (this was the most common
bribe amount in that scandal). Most importantly, there is no special reason why we may care
more about rents as a fraction of total federal spending as opposed to their absolute value.
Even if the fraction of federal spending appropriated by congressmen remained constant
during the Civil War years, the dollar amount of rents was substantially larger during this
period.


6       Another Empirical Strategy: Before-and-After De-
        sign
A common concern with RDD estimates is that they provide local average treatment effects
(LATE) for observations or individuals around the given threshold and thus may be unin-
formative regarding the effect of a given treatment on observations further away from the
discontinuity (see Angrist and Pischke, 2009). This is often referred to as the lack of external
validity of regression discontinuity estimates.
      In the context of our analysis, one could think of several reasons why estimates for the
returns to congress based on individuals whose first election was decided by a small margin
may lack external validity. One possible argument is that those who win by a narrow margin
will tend to be more disciplined and less likely to engage in rent extraction since they are less
safe and any minor wrongdoing may lead them to lose their seat in an upcoming election.37
In this case, our regression discontinuity estimates may underestimate the actual rents from
office enjoyed by congressmen who are safe in their seats and won their first election by a very
large vote margin. However, it is easy to think of reasons why the regression discontinuity
estimates overestimate the rents from congress enjoyed by those individuals who did not
enter congress following a close election. If the electoral outcome of their first race was due
to chance – say, an unusual partisan tide – then “close winners” may decide to make the
most of their time in congress and engage in rent-seeking, anticipating that they are unlikely
to win reelection in any case.
   We cannot directly assess how informative are the local treatment RDD estimates for
the broader set of candidates. As an alternative, we report evidence based on a different
 37
      However, the fact that there were few career congressmen during this period makes this case unlikely.


                                                     32
empirical strategy – a simple “before-and-after” design – first introduced in Querubin and
Snyder (2009). This approach does not rely on the comparison of winners and losers in close
elections, but relies solely on data for individuals who actually won and served.
      Figure 4 below illustrates the approach.38 Suppose we can observe the wealth of members
of congress at two different years t−10 and t. In Figure 4 we show this for t = 1860 (panel
A), t = 1870 (panel B) and t = 1880 (panel C). We can then create indicator functions to
classify all members of congress who served in the years around this period. Let NEARLY
be an indicator function that takes a value of 1 for all members of congress that served
only during the 5 years preceding t−10 and zero otherwise. Similarly, TEARLY takes a value
of 1 for members of congress that served only during the 5 years following t−10 and zero
otherwise. We can also define similar indicator functions for congressmen who served around
t. That is, TLAT E takes a value of 1 for all those who served only in the 5 years preceding t
and zero otherwise while NLAT E takes a value of 1 for congressmen who served only during
the 5 years after t and zero otherwise. We can use these indicator functions to get a rough
estimate of the returns to serving in congress in the early and late part of the decade under
consideration. For example, to get an estimate of the returns to congress in the post-war
years in the second half of the 1860s we can compare the accumulation of wealth between
1860 and 1870 for representatives that only served during the five years just before 1870 (i.e.
all congressmen for which TLAT E = 1) with those that only served during the five years just
after 1870 (i.e. all congressmen for which NLAT E = 1). The first group was “treated” by
politics – had access to congressional rents that would appear in their 1870 wealth – while
the latter group was not. Similarly, we can get an estimate of the returns from a seat in
congress during the Civil War years (early 1860s) by comparing the accumulation of wealth
between 1860 and 1870 for those individuals that only served during the five years just after
1860 (i.e. those for which TEARLY = 1) with those that only served during the 5 years just
before 1860 (those for which NEARLY = 1). In this case, only the latter group was treated by
politics between 1860 and 1870. We can compare the different treatment and control groups
around the different census years through a simple regression of the form:

                                                                   0
                           W ealthti = β0 + β1 W ealtht−1                  t
                                                      i + β2 Ti + β3 Xi + i               (3)

where W ealthti is the wealth of congressman i in year t, W ealtht−1
                                                                 i   is the wealth of congress-
man i in the previous census year, Ti corresponds to one of the “treatment” dummies defined
above, and Xi corresponds to a set of control variables, including age and age2 , occupation
 38
      See Querubin and Snyder (2009) for a more detailed discussion.


                                                    33
dummies, and state fixed-effects.
  The specific sample on which the above regression should be estimated depends on
whether we are estimating the returns to a seat in congress in the early or late half of
the decade under consideration. In order to estimate the returns for the late part of the
decade, we should estimate the regression on the sample of individuals that served only in
the five years preceding or following year t (i.e. those for which either TLAT E or NLAT E
equals 1). In this case, Ti will just correspond to the indicator function TLAT E . If we want
to estimate the returns in the early half of the decade, the estimation sample should consist
of all those who only served in the 5 years preceding and following year t − 10 (i.e. all those
for which either TEARLY or NEARLY equals 1). Notice that for the 1870-1880 period we can
only estimate the effect on the early half of the decade as we have only collected data for
those who served between 1870 and 1875.
       Table 10 presents the estimates of the main coefficient of interest – i.e., β2 in equation
(3), the coefficient on Ti . Each panel reports the results for the different decades under con-
sideration. The results are straightforward. First, and consistent with the RDD estimates,
we find no evidence of a large positive return to serving in congress during the 1850s. Point
estimates for this period are small and statistically insignificant with the exception of the
estimate in column 6 for the second half of the decade that is in fact negative and statisti-
cally significant. Similarly, and consistent with the results of Table 5, we find no evidence of
abnormal wealth accumulation for those who served in the first half of the early 1870s (panel
C). The point estimate is small and statistically insignificant. Finally, results for the 1860s –
reported in panel B – confirm the same patterns of Table 5. There is no evidence of abnormal
wealth accumulation for those who served in the post-war years during the second half of
the decade; estimates in columns 2, 4 and 6 are small and are not statistically significant.
However, we do find evidence of a relatively large return to serving in congress during the
Civil War years in the early part of the 1860s. The point estimate for Ending Log Wealth
reported in column 3 is 0.4, and the coefficient is highly statistically significant. The point
estimates for Ending Wealth and Ending Servants in columns 1 and 5, respectively, are also
large and the latter is also statistically significant at the 5% level.39
  39
     In order to assess the validity of our approach, we also test for pre-existing differences in congressmen
who served before and after the different census years.We do not show these results to save space but they
are available upon request. Not surprisingly, congressmen who serve prior to a given census year are, on
average, older than those who serve after the census year. To control for this difference, in our regressions
we always include the age and squared age of the congressman to capture the (possibly non-linear) effect
that age may have on wealth accumulation. Most importantly, treated congressmen do not differ by their
initial wealth, a variable that plausibly captures other relevant characteristics such as ability, education, or


                                                      34
    The point estimates from this analysis reveal a similar pattern as that for the RDD
estimates reported in Table 5. This analysis, which relies on a completely different source of
variation, confirms our main findings and gives us further confidence on the relevance of our
RDD estimates.


7     Conclusions
The results of this paper suggest that the returns to a seat in the U.S. House were low
during “normal” times in the mid-19th century. This is a remarkable result that stands in
contrast to evidence for other relatively weakly institutionalized countries where political
connections are valuable and often an important source of wealth accumulation. A plausible
interpretation for this result is that democratic political institutions during this period were
effective at controlling politicians and preventing the abuse of power for personal gain.
    However, we report evidence of substantial returns to a seat in congress between 1861
and 1866 when federal government spending expanded sharply to unprecedented levels in
order to fund the war. Our point estimates suggest that congressmen who served during the
Civil War accumulated about 40% more wealth between 1860 and 1870 (nearly $1,000,000
in present values) than those who ran but never served.
    We hypothesize that such dramatic increase in government spending may have made it
easier for incumbent congressmen to accumulate rents due to a surge in opportunities asso-
ciated, amongst others, to contracts for war supplies. In addition, the focus and attention
of government institutions during this period were probably centered on the affairs of the
war, diminishing the auditing and oversight capacity that may have been exercised by gov-
ernment agencies during normal times. This might have been particularly important in a
context in which significant rent extraction would have represented a much small fraction of
government spending than at other times. Similarly, politicians during this period may have
been less accountable to the voters and the media who were also focused on the political
and military events of the war, rather than on the dealings of politicians and the allocation
of federal expenditure. We also show that wealth accumulation was particularly significant
by representatives who represented states that played an important role providing supplies
during the war and by congressmen who served in top military committees.
    Conceptually, rent-seeking during the Civil War may have been triggered by increased
occupation. In addition – just as one example – we find that treated congressmen are no more or less likely
to be lawyers. These similarities give us some confidence that the main difference between politicians at
either side of the census year is their exposure to politics.


                                                    35
opportunities, reduced control and/or the interaction of these two forces. The results re-
ported in the paper emphasize the important role of increased spending and opportunities
but we do not report direct evidence on the role of decreased control and oversight by the
media and the voters. In this sense, we cannot rule out that it was only the increase in
spending (and not its interaction with reduced control) that lead to higher levels of rent
seeking. We are currently gathering additional data to disentangle the relative importance
of these two forces. An alternative is to gather data on media coverage in different states
during this period and establish whether rent-seeking was more systematic by representatives
from states where coverage of corruption decreased more during the Civil War. In addition,
we can identify episodes of spending increases in particular states that were not associated
to any particular event that may have reduced the accountability and control of politicians.
Evidence of rent-seeking during these episodes will allow us to assess the relative importance
of decreased control relative to increased opportunities for enrichment. We have found the
census records of many state and local politicians such as governors, state senators, state
legislators and city mayors. We are also gathering data on spending by state governments
during this period. This will allow us to analyze wealth accumulation by state politicians
during other episodes of increased spending.
   Our results point to a broader interpretation which suggests that corruption and rent
extraction may be more likely to occur in episodes of crisis such as natural disasters, wars
or other types of political and economic turmoil. During these periods government expen-
diture often increases substantially, increasing the amount of resources on which politicians
might prey, and at the same time the effectiveness of political institutions, the voters and the
media in controlling politicians can be heavily undermined. Future research should explore
this hypothesis more systematically in other contexts. This might be particularly important
in situations where politicians themselves are responsible for declaring states of emergency,
or engaging in war, justifying increases in government expenditure and distracting the at-
tention of the constituency, the media, and other public agencies responsible for supervising
politician’s behavior.




                                               36
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Maria Angelica Bautista, Pablo Querubin and James A. Robinson
   (2008) “Economic and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundina-
   marca, Colombia.” In Institutions and Economic Performance, Elhanan Helpman
   (ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2010) “Political Selection and
   Persistence of Bad Governments”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4): 1511-
   1575.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak and Todd Mitton (2010)
   “The Value of Political Connections in the United States.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy (1999) “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of
   Class Size on Scholastic Achievement.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(2):
   533-575.
Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2009) Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton
   University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Atack, Jeremy and Fred Bateman (1981) “The Egalitarian Ideal and the Distribution of
    Wealth in the Northern Agricultural Community: A Backward Look.” The Review of
    Economics and Statistics. 63(1): 124-129.
Austen-Smith, David (1987) “Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions, and Probabilistic
   Voting.” Public Choice 54: 123-139.
Banks, Jeffrey S., and Rangarajan Sundaram (1993) “Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard
   in a Repeated Elections Model.” In W. Barnett et al. (eds.), Political Economy:
   Institutions, Information, Competition and Representation. New York: Cambridge
   University Press.
Banks, Jeffrey S., and Rangarajan Sundaram (1998) “Optimal Retention in Agency Prob-
   lems.” Journal of Economic Theory 82: 293-323.
Baron, David P (1994) “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters.”
   American Political Science Review 88: 33-47.
Barro, Robert (1973) “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice
    14:19-42.
Berganza, Juan Carlos (2000) “Two Roles for Elections: Disciplining the Incumbent and
    Selecting a Competent Candidate.” Public Choice 105: 165-193.
Besley, Timothy and John McLaren (1993) “Taxes and Bribery: The Role of Wage Incen-
    tives.” The Economic Journal 103: 119-141.

                                          37
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997), “An Economic Model of Representative Democ-
    racy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 85-114.
Besley, Timothy (2005) “Political Selection” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(3): 43-
    60.
Besley, Timothy (2006) Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Buchanan, James (1989) “The Public Choice Perspective” in Essays on the Political Econ-
   omy, Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Canon, David, Garrison Nelson, and Charles Stewart (1998) “Historical Congressional
   Standing Committees, 1st to 79th Congresses, 1789-1947” (Computer file).
Carpenter, Daniel, Brian Feinstein, Justin Grimmer and Eitan Hersh (2011) “Are Close
   Elections Random?” Unpublished manuscript.
Caselli, Francesco, and Massimo Morelli (2004) “Bad Politicians.” Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics 88: 759-782.
Caughey, Devin M. and Jasjeet S. Sekhon (2010) “Regression-Discontinuity Designs and
   Popular Elections: Implications of Pro-Incumbent Bias is Close U.S. House Races.”
   Unpublished manuscript.
Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo (2005) “A Political Economy Model
    of Congressional Careers.” American Economic Review 95: 347-373.
Denzau, Arthur T., and Michael C. Munger (1986) “Legislators and Interest Groups: How
   Unorganized Groups Get Represented.” American Political Science Review 80: 89-106.
Dubin, Michael J. (1998) United States Congressional Elections, 1788-1997: The Official
   Results of the Elections of the 1st through 105th Congresses. Jefferson, NC: McFarland
   and Company, Inc.
Eggers, Andrew C. and Jens Hainmueller (2009) “MPs for Sale? Returns to Office in
   Postwar British Politics.” American Political Science Review, 103(4): 1-21.
Fearon, James D. (1999) “Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians: Selecting
    Good Types Versus Sanctioning Poor Performance.” In Democracy, Accountability and
    Representation, Bernard Manin, Adam Przeworski, Susan Stokes, (eds.). Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
Ferejohn, John (1986) “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice 50:
    5-25.
Ferguson, Thomas and Hans-Joachim Voth (2008) “Betting on Hitler: The Value of Polit-
    ical Connections in Nazi Germany.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1), 101-137.

                                           38
Ferrie, Joseph (1996) “A New Sample of Males Linked from the Public Use Micro Sample of
    the 1850 U.S. Federal Census of Population to the 1860 U.S. Federal Census Manuscript
    Schedules.” Historical Methods 29: 141-156.
Fisman, Raymond (2001) “Estimating the Value of Political Connections.” American Eco-
    nomic Review, 91(4): 1095-1102.
Fisman, David, Raymond Fisman, Julia Galef and Rakesh Kurana (2006) “Estimating the
    Value of Connections to Vice-President Cheney.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Folke, Olle, Shigeo Hirano, and James M. Snyder, Jr. (2011) “A Note on Sorting at the
    50-50 Threshold in RDD Studies Using Electoral Data.” Unpublished manuscript.
Gallman, Robert E. (1978) “Professor Pessen on the Egalitarian Myth.” Social Science
    History 2(2): 194-207.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Claudia Goldin (2004) “Corruption and Reform: Introduction.”
    NBER Working Paper 10775, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Groseclose, Tim, and Jeffrey Milyo (1999) “Buying the Bums Out: What’s the Dollar
   Value of a Seat in Congress?” Discussion Papers Series, Department of Economics,
   Tufts University 9923, Department of Economics, Tufts University.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman (1994) “Protection for Sale.” American Economic
   Review 84: 833-850.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman (1996) “Electoral Competition and Special Interest
   Politics.” Review of Economic Studies 63: 265-286.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman (2001) Special Interest Politics. Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw (2001) “Identification and Esti-
   mation of Treatment Effects With a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica
   69(1): 201-209.
Harrington, Joseph (1993) “Economic Policy, Economic Performance, and Elections.” Amer-
    ican Economic Review 83: 27-42.
Hindriks, Jean, and Paul Belleflamme (2001) “Yardstick Competition and Political Agency
   Problems.” Queen Mary and Westfield College, Department of Economics Discussion
   Papers, No. 444.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux (2008) “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
   to Practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.
Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman (2009) “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
   Regression Discontinuity Estimator.” Unpublished Manuscript.

                                          39
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research and Carroll McKibbin (1999)
    “United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968” (Computer File). ICPSR00001-
    v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
    (distributor).
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research and Carroll McKibbin (1997)
    “Roster of United States Congressional Officeholders and Biographical Characteristics
    of Members of the United States Congress, 1789-1996: Merged Data” (Computer file).
    10th ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
    Research (producer and distributor).
Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton (2003) “Cronyism and capital controls: evidence from
   Malaysia.” Journal of Financial Economics, 67(2): 351-382.
Josephson, Matthew (1938) The Politicos. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Kearl, James R. and Clayne L. Pope (1984) “Mobility and Distribution.” The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 66(2): 192-199.
Keeney, Sandy (2007) “The Foundations of Government Contracting” Journal of Contract
   Management, Summer: 7-19.
Le Borgne, Eric, and Ben Lockwood (2001) “Candidate Entry, Screening, and the Political
    Budget Cycle.” Unpublished manuscript.
Le Borgne, Eric, and Ben Lockwood (2006) “Do Elections Always Motivate Incumbents?
    Learning vs. Re-Election Concerns”, Public Choice, Vol. 129, No. 1/2, pp. 41-60.
Lee, David (2008) “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House
    Elections.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 675-697.
Lenz, Gabriel S. and Kevin Lim (2009) “The Returns to Office: Public Service Requires
   No Financial Sacrifice for U.S. Representatives.” Unpublished manuscript.
Martis, Kenneth C. (1982) The Historical Atlas of United States Congressional Districts:
   1789-1983. New York: The Free Press.
Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo (2008) “Political Careers or Career Politicians?”,
   Journal of Public Economics, 92, 597-608.
Mauro, Paolo (1995) “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3):
   681-712.
Nagle, James F. A. (1999) History of Government Contracting. Washington, DC: The
   George Washington University.
Osborne, Martin J and Al Slivinski (1996) “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
   Candidates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 65-96.

                                          40
Padro i Miquel, Gerard (2007) “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics
   of Fear.” Review of Economic Studies 74(4): 1259-1274.
Peltzman, Sam (1976) “Toward a More General Theory of Economic Regulation.” Journal
    of Law and Economics 19: 211-240.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic
    Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Querubin, Pablo, and James M. Snyder Jr. (2009) “The Returns to U.S. Congressional
   Seats in the Mid-19th Century” in The Political Economy of Democracy, E. Aragones,
   C. Bevia, H. Llavador, and N. Schofield (eds.). Barcelona: BBVA.
Rowell, George P. (1869) American Newspaper Directory. New York: Geo. P. Rowell and
   Company.
Shammas, Carole (1993) “A New Look at Long-Term Trends in Wealth Inequality in the
   United States.” The American Historical Review 98(2): 12-431.
Smart, Michael, and Daniel Sturm (2003) “Does Democracy Work? Estimating Incen-
   tive and Selection Effects of U.S. Gubernatorial Elections, 1950-2000.” Unpublished
   manuscript.
Smart, Michael, and Daniel Sturm (2004) “Term Limits and Electoral Accountability.”
   Unpublished manuscript.
Snyder, Jason (2005) “Detecting Manipulation in U.S. House Elections.” Unpublished
   manuscript.
Soltow, Lee (1975) Men and Wealth in the United States, 1850-1870. New Haven: Yale
    University Press.
Stampp, Kenneth M. (1990) America in 1857: A Nation on the Brink. New York: Oxford
   University Press.
Steckel, Richard H. (1988) “Census Matching and Migration: A Research Strategy.” His-
    torical Methods 21(2): 52-60.
Steckel, Richard H. (1989) “Household Migration and Rural Settlement in the United
    States, 1850-1860.” Explorations in Economic History 26: 190-218.
Steckel, Richard H. (1990) “Poverty and Prosperity: A Longitudinal Study of Wealth
    Accumulation, 1850-1860.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 72 (2) p. 275-
    285.
Steckel, Richard H. (1994) “Census Manuscript Schedules Matched with Property Tax
    Lists.” Historical Methods 27 (2) p. 71-85.


                                            41
Stewart, James I. (2006) “Migration to the Agricultural Frontier and Wealth Accumulation,
    1860-1870.” Explorations in Economic History 43: 547-577.
Stigler, George (1971) “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics
    2: 3-21.
Summers, Mark W. (1987) The Plundering Generation: Corruption and the Crisis of the
   Union, 1849-1861. New York: Oxford University Press.
Summers, Mark W. (1993) The Era of Good Stealings. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thistlethwaite, Donald and Donald Campbell (1960) “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis:
    An alternative to the ex post facto experiment.” Journal of Educational Psychology
    51: 309-317.
Van Deusen, Glyndon (1947) Thurlow Weed: Wizard of the Lobby. Boston: Little, Brown
   and Company.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. and Peter H. Lindert (1980) American Inequality: A Macroeconomic
    History. New York: Academic Press.
Wilson, Mark R. (2006a) The Business of Civil War: Military Mobilization and the State,
    1861-1865. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wilson, Mark R. (2006b) “The Politics of Procurement: Military Origins of Bureaucratic
    Autonomy.”, Journal of Policy History, 18 (1) 44-73.




                                          42
                                    Table 1:
                      LaCrosse & Milwaukee Railroad Scandal
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)
                                        Wealth       Wealth     Log Wealth
                                         1860         1860         1860
                 Bribe Amount            1.000        1.923
                                        (0.158)      (0.713)
                 Log Bribe Amount                                  0.853
                                                                  (0.249)
                 Observations             66           66           66
                 R-square                0.199        0.487        0.215

Median regression estimates in column 1 and OLS estimates in columns 2 and 3.




                                                43
                                          Table 2a: Summary Statistics on Initial Wealth
                                             Real Wealth                     Total Wealth                            Servants
                                               1850                  1860                  1870              1850 1860          1870
                                            Mean Median           Mean Median           Mean Median          Mean Mean          Mean
            All candidates                  16140       5500      41403      16500     85817         27450    0.64      1.12     1.19
            Winners                         17335       5508      43191      17025     99754         28485    0.64      1.13     1.26
            Losers                          15053       5250      39934      15000     71405         26000    0.65      1.11     1.12
            Democrats                       13458       4500      43731      15500     69668         25600    0.62      1.11     1.23
            Republicans                      7307       3000      36269      15500    107403         30000    0.37      1.08     1.18
            Whigs                           19559       7250          .          .         .             .    0.67         .        .
            Lawyers                         13969       4000      28342      13415     56611         21000    0.59      1.04     1.11
            IPUMS All                         927          0       1823        200      2716           200       .      0.20     0.18
            IPUMS Law                        6722          0       8357       1500     10532          2000       .      0.53     0.51
                                      Table 2b: Summary Statistics on Changes in Wealth




44
                                            ∆ Log Real ∆ Servants ∆ Total ∆ Log Total ∆ Servants ∆ Servants
                                            1850-1860  1850-1860 1860-1870 1860-1870  1860-1870 1870-1880
            All candidates                      0.93           0.53          14925            0.84           0.24           -0.03
            Winners                             0.96           0.52          17550            0.90           0.37           -0.02
            Losers                              0.90           0.54          12790            0.79           0.14           -0.03
            Winners w/Margin < .03              0.82           0.36          21750            0.98           0.38           0.03
            Losers w/Margin < .03               0.95           0.57          11000            0.61           0.13           -0.00
            Democrats                           1.04           0.54          11000            0.77           0.19           -0.08
            Republicans                         1.04           0.34          19000            0.96           0.32           0.03
            Whigs                               0.68           0.56            .                .              .              .
            Lawyers                             1.06           0.51          11450            0.79           0.21           0.02
            IPUMS All                           1.00                                          0.97           -0.00          0.01
            IPUMS Law
     In Table 2b all figures are means except those in the ∆ Total 1860-1870 column, which are medians.
                             Table 3: OLS Estimates of
                            Wealth vs. Serving in Congress
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)
                                       Ending         Ending       Ending
                                       Wealth       Log Wealth     Servants
                Panel A: 1850-1860
                Winner 1850s            2775          0.191          -0.017
                                       (1061)        (0.075)        (0.079)
                Obs.                    690            690            802
                Panel B: 1860-1870, Civil War vs. Non-War
                Winner Civil War        8574          0.203          0.441
                                       (2218)        (0.080)        (0.082)
                Winner Non-War          1038          0.104          -0.070
                                       (2203)        (0.080)        (0.079)
                p-value of F-test       0.03          0.44            0.00
                Obs.                    757            757            917
                Panel C: 1870-1880
                Winner 1870s                                         0.044
                                          –             –           (0.081)
                Obs.                                                  688

Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (column 1). OLS estimates for
Ending Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 2-3). The p-values are for
F-tests of H0: β for Winner Civil War = β for Winner Non-War.




                                               45
          Table 4: Balance on Covariates in RDD Samples (3% margin)
     1850-1860                       Winner Mean      Loser Mean     Difference p-Value
     Log Initial Real Wealth               8.61          8.61          0.00        0.99
     Log Initial Servants                  0.72          0.65          0.07        0.65
     Age                                  51.01          50.52         0.49        0.65
     Lawyer Dummy                          0.71          0.64          0.06        0.25
     Manuf/Merch/Banker                    0.16          0.22          -0.05       0.24
     Farmer Dummy                          0.21          0.20          0.02        0.72
     1860-1870, Civil War Years
     Log Initial Total Wealth              9.98          9.76          0.22        0.32
     Log Initial Servants                  1.21          1.44          -0.23       0.25
     Age                                  42.71          42.51         0.19        0.89
     Lawyer Dummy                          0.65          0.69          -0.04       0.57
     Manuf/Merch/Banker                    0.21          0.19          0.02        0.80
     Farmer Dummy                          0.23          0.12          0.11        0.08
     1860-1870, Non-War Years
     Log Initial Total Wealth              9.57          9.57          0.00        1.00
     Log Initial Servants                  1.09          1.02          0.07        0.64
     Age                                  40.22          40.53         -0.30       0.81
     Lawyer Dummy                          0.74          0.67          0.07        0.25
     Manuf/Merch/Banker                    0.15          0.24          -0.09       0.13
     Farmer Dummy                          0.14          0.09          0.05        0.25
     1870-1880
     Log Initial Servants                  1.17          1.09          0.08        0.60
     Age                                  35.07          36.32         -1.25       0.26
     Lawyer Dummy                          0.64          0.52          0.12        0.05
     Manuf/Merch/Banker                    0.22          0.28          -0.06       0.25
     Farmer Dummy                          0.13          0.26          -0.13       0.01

Samples restricted to candidates who won between 47% and 53% of the vote in their first race.




                                              46
                        Table 5: RDD Estimates of Effect of
                     Winning First Race for Congress on Wealth
                                       (1)            (2)                (3)
                                     Ending         Ending            Ending
                                     Wealth       Log Wealth          Servants
             Panel A: 1850-1860
             Winner 1850s              -6472         -0.339             -0.462
                                      (5580)        (0.244)            (0.261)
             Obs.                       230           230                252
             Panel B: 1860-1870, Civil War vs. Non-War
             Winner Civil War         17731          0.382              0.568
                                      (4260)        (0.172)            (0.170)
             Winner Non-War            -2148         0.034              -0.272
                                      (3987)        (0.161)            (0.168)
             p-value of F-test          0.00          0.10               0.00
             Obs.                       235           235                283
             Panel C: 1870-1880
             Winner 1870s                                               0.145
                                        –              –               (0.250)
             Obs.                                                        252
             Panel D: 1850-1860, Civil War vs. Non-War, Placebo Regressions
             Winner Civil War          153           -0.028             -0.015
                                      (5512)        (0.293)            (0.253)
             Winner Non-War             -58          0.312              0.600
                                      (5353)        (0.274)            (0.249)
             p-value of F-test         0.97           0.28               0.04
             Obs.                      141            141                186

RDD Estimates – Local Linear Regressions with 3% Bandwidth. Median regression estimates for
Ending Wealth dependent variable (column 1). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and Ending
Servants dependent variables (columns 2-3). The p-values are for F-tests of H0: β for Winner Civil
War = β for Winner Non-War.




                                               47
                         Table 6: Contracting vs. Other States
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)
                                             Ending         Ending        Ending
                                             Wealth       Log Wealth      Servants
            Panel A: RDD Estimates, 1860-1870
            Civil War, Contract State        28028           0.413          0.637
                                             (5567)         (0.194)        (0.191)
            Civil War, Other State            7034           0.310          0.386
                                             (7298)         (0.269)        (0.281)
            Non-War, Contract State            569           0.029          -0.287
                                             (5014)         (0.179)        (0.183)
            Non-War, Other State               322           0.051          -0.226
                                             (7767)         (0.289)        (0.293)
            p-value of F-test 1               0.01            0.73           0.42
            p-value of F-test 2               0.00            0.12           0.00
            p-value of F-test 3               0.00            0.26           0.01
            Obs.                               235            235            283
            Panel B: Placebo Regressions, 1850-1860
            Civil War, Contract State          552           -0.195         -0.076
                                              (6742)        (0.311)        (0.277)
            Civil War, Other State             -309          0.493          0.095
                                              (9135)        (0.439)        (0.391)
            Non-War, Contract State            109           0.357          0.716
                                              (6481)        (0.291)        (0.273)
            Non-War, Other State               -675          0.306          0.241
                                             (10037)        (0.492)        (0.427)
            p-value of F-test 1                0.92           0.11           0.68
            p-value of F-test 2                0.96           0.13           0.02
            p-value of F-test 3                0.90           0.32           0.48
            Obs.                               141            141            186

RDD Estimates – Local Linear Regressions with 3% Bandwidth. Median regression estimates for
Ending Wealth dependent variable (column 1). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and Ending
Servants dependent variables (columns 2-3). The p-values are for F-tests of the hypothesis that
the β for Civil War, Contract State Winners is equal to: (1) β for Civil War, Other State Winners,
(2) β for Non-War, Contract State Winners, and (3) β for Non-War, Other State Winners.




                                               48
                Table 7: Military Committees vs. Other Committees
                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)
                                               Ending         Ending         Ending
                                               Wealth       Log Wealth       Servants
            Panel A: Difference-in-Difference Estimates, 1860-1870
            Civil War, Military Comm           19756           0.394           0.598
                                               (4429)         (0.153)         (0.151)
            Civil War, Other Comm               6187           0.147           0.440
                                               (2564)         (0.089)         (0.090)
            Non-War, Military Comm              -314           0.125           -0.268
                                               (3400)         (0.118)         (0.120)
            Non-War, Other Comm                 479            0.034           -0.022
                                               (2647)         (0.092)         (0.090)
            Diff-in-Diff Estimate              14362           0.156           0.403
            p-value                             0.02           0.47             0.06
            Obs.                                757             757             917
            Panel B: Placebo Difference-in-Differences, 1850-1860
            Civil War, Military Comm            -5462          0.143           0.159
                                               (4797)         (0.212)         (0.169)
            Civil War, Other Comm               -1280          0.071           0.060
                                               (2791)         (0.124)         (0.102)
            Non-War, Military Comm              4362           0.121           0.146
                                               (3968)         (0.174)         (0.146)
            Non-War, Other Comm                 -2827          -0.102          0.046
                                               (3047)         (0.134)         (0.114)
            Diff-in-Diff Estimate              -11371          -0.151          -0.001
            p-value                              0.12           0.63            1.00
            Obs.                                 511            511             664

Difference-in-Difference = (Civil War, Military Comm − Civil War, Other Comm) - (Non-War, Mil-
itary Comm − Non-War, Other Comm). Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent
variable (column 1). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent vari-
ables (columns 2-3). The p-value is for an F-test of the hypothesis that the difference-in-difference
estimate is equal to zero.




                                                 49
                             Table 8: Contracting States and
                          Military Committees in Other Decades
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)
                                    Ending        Ending           Ending
                                    Wealth      Log Wealth         Servants
                Panel A: 1850-1860, Contracting States vs. Other States
                Contract State        -7027          -0.340          -0.442
                                     (5317)         (0.251)         (0.268)
                Other State            520           -0.333          -0.553
                                     (7343)         (0.348)         (0.373)
                Obs.                   230            230             252
                Panel B: 1870-1880, Contracting States vs. Other States
                Contract State         –              –              0.118
                                                                    (0.271)
                Other State            –              –              0.189
                                                                    (0.301)
                Obs.                                                  252
                Panel C: 1850-1860, Military Committees vs. Other Committees
                Military Comm         4308           0.202           -0.046
                                     (1717)         (0.117)         (0.119)
                Other Comm            2567           0.187           -0.005
                                     (1200)         (0.081)         (0.086)
                Obs.                   690            690             802
                Panel D: 1870-1880, Military Committees vs. Other Committees
                Military Comm          –              –              0.005
                                                                    (0.116)
                Other Comm             –              –              0.065
                                                                    (0.089)
                Obs.                                                  688

RDD Estimates in Panels A and B – Local Linear Regressions with 3% Bandwidth. Median
regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (columns 1). OLS estimates for Ending
Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 2-3). In all cases we do not reject
the hypothesis that the coefficient for Contract State (Military Comm) is equal to the coefficient
for Other State (Other Comm) even at the .10 level.




                                               50
                           Table 9: RDD Estimates of Effect of
                             Serving in Congress on Wealth
                                 After Leaving Congress
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)
                                       Ending         Ending      Ending
                                       Wealth       Log Wealth    Servants
                  Panel A: 1850-1860
                  Winner 1840s          -5167         -0.058       0.587
                                       (19296)       (0.339)      (0.466)
                  Obs.                   121           121          123
                  Panel B: 1860-1870
                  Winner 1850s           -122         0.156        0.480
                                       (14452)       (0.318)      (0.306)
                  Obs.                   157           157          168
                  Panel C: 1870-1880
                  Winner Civwar                                    0.352
                                          –             –         (0.277)
                  Winner Non-War                                   -0.306
                                          –             –         (0.253)
                  p-value of F-test       –             –           0.08
                  Obs.

Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (column 1). OLS estimates for
Ending Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 2-3).




                                               51
                   Table 10: Effect of Serving in Congress on Wealth
                               Before and After Analysis
                              Ending Wealth      Ending Log Wealth      Ending Servants
                               (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                              Served   Served        Served   Served    Served    Served
         Panel A: 1850-1860   Early     Late         Early     Late     Early      Late
         Served in Period      3565      607      0.098        0.063     -0.062    -0.365
                              (2383)   (2941)    (0.127)      (0.151)   (0.185)   (0.117)
         Obs.                   194      243       194          243       221       296
                              Served   Served        Served   Served    Served    Served
         Panel B: 1860-1870   Early     Late         Early     Late     Early      Late
         Served in Period      8024     1670      0.382        -0.026    0.354     0.213
                              (6955)   (3143)    (0.145)      (0.122)   (0.157)   (0.135)
         Obs.                   251      283       251          283       293       319
                              Served   Served        Served   Served    Served    Served
         Panel C: 1870-1880   Early     Late         Early     Late     Early      Late
         Served in Period                                                -0.042
                                –        –             –        –       (0.182)     ()
         Obs.                                                             274

Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (columns 1-2). OLS estimates
for Ending Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 3-6).




                                                52
                                                                     Figure 1A
                 Federal Government Spending Before, During and After the Civil War
          1200
          1000
          500
          200
          50
          Nominal
          1850
          1855
          1860
          1865
          1870
          1875
          Year    Spending in Millions


                           1200        1000
            Nominal Spending in Millions
                 500       200
                           50




                                              1850     1855       1860       1865        1870          1875
                                                                           Year




                                                                     Figure 1B
                                               Reporting on Corruption, During and After the Civil War
          Reporting on Corruption
          1
          .9
          .8
          .7
          .6
          Reporting
          1850
          1855
          1860
          1865
          1870
          1875
          Year
                           1
              Reporting on Corruption
            .7          .8 .6      .9




                                              1850      1855        1860          1865          1870          1875
                                                                           Year




Figure 1B shows number of newspaper pages containing the words “corrupt*” or “fraud*” divided
by the number of pages containing the word January (a neutral word), for a sample of local
newspapers available in Ancestry.com. Source: Glaeser and Goldin (2004)



                                                                         53
                     Figure 2: Sample Census Page (with Abraham Lincoln)




This corresponds to the page where Abraham Lincoln was listed in the 1860 Census. He reports
real estate wealth of $5,000, personal wealth of $12,000, and one servant living in his dwelling. His
occupation is Lawyer.                            54
                                                                     Figure 3

                                          RDD Plots for Change in Wealth and Change in Servants




55
     Figures in top row show fitted median regression line together with bootstrapped confidence intervals at the threshold. Figures in bottom
     row show OLS fitted line together with 95% confidence intervals.
                                      Figure 4

                               Before and After Design




     A. For Wealth Changes Between 1850 and 1860




            1845       1850           1855           1860       1865


     B. For Wealth Changes Between 1860 and 1870




56
             1855       1860           1865              1870   1875


     C. For Wealth Changes Between 1870 and 1880




             1865       1870           1875              1880   1885
                                               Appendix A: Robustness Checks

                                    Table A.1: Robustness Checks on RDD Estimates in Table 5
                                      2% Bandwidth                       3% Bandwidth                       Polynomial
                              (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)
                             Ending      Ending      Ending     Ending     Ending       Ending     Ending     Ending     Ending
                             Wealth    Log Wealth    Servants   Wealth   Log Wealth     Servants   Wealth   Log Wealth   Servants
        Panel A: 1850-1860
        Winner 1850s          -1702       -0.084      -0.292     -1513      -0.042       -0.243      298      -0.333      -0.433
                             (3629)      (0.156)     (0.181)    (2679)     (0.131)      (0.144)    (1983)    (0.200)     (0.211)
        Obs.                   163         163         183        230        230          252        635       635         731
        Panel B: 1860-1870, Civil War vs. Non-War
        Winner Civil War     16440        0.390        0.687    19586       0.397         0.634    13984      0.265        0.398




57
                             (3680)      (0.198)     (0.185)    (3586)     (0.140)      (0.141)    (3198)    (0.118)     (0.116)
        Winner Non-War        -3323       0.010       -0.277      152       0.050        -0.205     2922      0.191       -0.122
                             (3386)      (0.190)     (0.183)    (3380)     (0.134)      (0.138)    (3258)    (0.119)     (0.122)
        p-value of F-test      0.00        0.21        0.00      0.00        0.10         0.00      0.01       0.60        0.00
        Obs.                   162         162          183       235        235           283       714       714          854
        Panel C: 1870-1880
        Winner 1870s                                  0.062                              0.009                            -0.120
                               –           –         (0.172)                            (0.131)                          (0.224)
        Obs.                                           155                                252                              644

     Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (columns 1,4,7). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and
     Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 2,3,5,6,8,9).
                                   Table A.2: Robustness Checks on RDD Estimates in Table 6
                                                 Contracting State vs. Other States
                                            2% Bandwidth                       3% Bandwidth                       Polynomial
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)
                                  Ending      Ending       Ending     Ending     Ending       Ending     Ending     Ending     Ending
                                  Wealth    Log Wealth     Servants   Wealth   Log Wealth     Servants   Wealth   Log Wealth   Servants
      Civil War, Contract State    37866        0.460        0.868    27771       0.426         0.703    15703      0.282        0.454
                                   (7450)     (0.233)      (0.208)    (3132)     (0.167)      (0.166)    (3675)    (0.132)     (0.130)
      Civil War, Other State          -76       0.249        0.137     6487       0.331         0.455     5591      0.210        0.270
                                  (10551)     (0.361)      (0.367)    (4471)     (0.248)      (0.262)    (4780)    (0.176)     (0.177)
      Non-War, Contract State        -348       0.044       -0.236      203       0.049        -0.229     1283      0.114       -0.127
                                   (6604)     (0.212)      (0.199)    (2922)     (0.157)      (0.160)    (3627)    (0.130)     (0.133)
      Non-War, Other State          -2425      -0.113       -0.438     -1844      0.057        -0.130     3064      0.381       -0.093




58
                                  (11535)     (0.453)      (0.438)    (4678)     (0.270)      (0.267)    (4919)    (0.179)     (0.180)
      p-value of F-test 1            0.00        0.62         0.08      0.00       0.74         0.42      0.05       0.71        0.34
      p-value of F-test 2            0.00        0.23         0.00      0.00       0.13         0.00      0.00       0.31        0.00
      p-value of F-test 3            0.00        0.26         0.01      0.00       0.25         0.01      0.02       0.60        0.00
      Obs.                           162         162          183       235        235           283       714       714          854

     Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent variable (columns 1,4,7). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and
     Ending Servants dependent variables (columns 2,3,5,6,8,9). The p-values are for F-tests of the hypothesis that the β for Civil
     War, Contract State Winners is equal to: (1) β for Civil War, Other State Winners, (2) β for Non-War, Contract State Winners,
     and (3) β for Non-War, Other State Winners.
         Table A.3: Robustness Checks on Diff-in-Diff Estimates in Table 7
        Military Committees vs. Other Committees, Restricted to 3% Sample
                                           (1)            (2)                 (3)
                                         Ending          Ending            Ending
                                         Wealth        Log Wealth          Servants
        Panel A: Difference-in-Difference Estimates, 1860-1870
        Civil War, Military Comm         45182           0.716               0.806
                                         (7244)         (0.248)             (0.249)
        Civil War, Other Comm             9606           0.364               0.533
                                         (4399)         (0.148)             (0.149)
        Non-War, Military Comm            8486           0.270               -0.419
                                         (5677)         (0.188)             (0.205)
        Non-War, Other Comm               -1159          0.064               -0.050
                                         (4520)         (0.154)             (0.155)
        Diff-in-Diff Estimate            25931           0.146               0.643
        p-value                            0.02           0.68                0.09
        Obs.                               235            235                 283
        Panel B: Placebo Difference-in-Differences, 1850-1860
        Civil War, Military Comm          1019           -0.049              0.021
                                         (6634)         (0.320)             (0.321)
        Civil War, Other Comm             1256           0.038               -0.188
                                         (4557)         (0.216)             (0.202)
        Non-War, Military Comm              80           0.233               0.389
                                         (6168)         (0.307)             (0.304)
        Non-War, Other Comm               -2349          -0.010              0.112
                                         (5321)         (0.249)             (0.241)
        Diff-in-Diff Estimate             -2666          -0.329              -0.067
        p-value                            0.81           0.53                0.90
        Obs.                               141            141                 186

Difference-in-Difference = (Civil War, Military Comm − Civil War, Other Comm) - (Non-War, Mil-
itary Comm − Non-War, Other Comm). Median regression estimates for Ending Wealth dependent
variable (column 1). OLS estimates for Ending Log Wealth and Ending Servants dependent vari-
ables (columns 2-3). The p-values are for F-tests of the hypothesis that the difference-in-difference
estimates are equal to zero.




                                                  59
Appendix B: Data Appendix
In this section we discuss various issues associated with our data sources and data collection
process. First, we describe in more detail some characteristics of the political environment
during this period. Then, we provide an in-depth discussion of the reliability of the census
wealth, as well as a detailed description of the process for matching politicians to their census
records, and for the coding of servants.

Electoral Data
The electoral data consists of election results for each election to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives between 1845 and 1875. These data were collected by the Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), and we revised and updated the ICPSR dataset
using Dubin (1998).40
       Additional information on the winners of each election is available from a biographical
dataset compiled by the ICPSR, as well as the Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress.41
These provide information on the year and place of birth, profession and career, and the
county of residence at different points in time. We use Martis (1982) to match counties and
cities to congressional districts. This biographical and geographical information was useful
for cleaning the electoral database (e.g., finding cases in which the election winner did not
serve in congress), and also for matching candidates to census records.
    It is important to describe several features of the electoral and political environment of
the mid-19th century, because they are relevant for our analysis and quite different from
the environment today. As shown in Table B.1, there were about 2,400 races to the House
of Representatives between 1845 and 1875, involving about 3,000 distinct candidates. Con-
gressional elections were quite competitive compared to today. Approximately 50% of all
winners received less than 55% of the vote (as a percentage of the top two candidates’ votes),
and about 33% received less than 53% of the vote.
    Also, there were very few “career congressmen” compared to today.42 Fewer than 24%
of those who won their first race ran for congress in more than two elections, and only 16%
  40
     ICPSR Number 1. Dubin (1998) is essential not only for providing more complete and accurate election
returns, but also for providing the first and middle names or initials of many candidates for which the
ICPSR data provides only the last name, or the last name plus the first initial. Dubin (1998) also provides
information on many special elections that are not included in the ICPSR data set.
  41
     ICPSR Number 7428, and http://bioguide.congress.gov.
  42
     However, many of those who served in congress served in other offices, both before and after their
congressional service, so a larger number of men were “career politicians.”


                                                    60
served three or more terms. The numbers are similar for those who won their first race by
a narrow margin – only 21% ran more than twice for congress and only about 12% served
three or more terms. In sum, few congressmen seem to have been interested in long careers
in congress, irrespective of whether they first entered this office by a small or large margin.
       Those who lost their first race almost never served in congress – 80% of those who lost
their first race never even ran again, and fewer than 9% served in congress during our period.
As one would expect, those who lost their first race by a small margin were more likely to
try again and succeed in the future: about 28% ran again and about 16% ended up serving
in congress.43 Thus, as mentioned earlier, we focus on what happens in a candidate’s first
race, since this is the election that determines whether or not the “typical” candidate serves
in congress.44 Moreover, this suggests that “non-compliers” are not a major concern, and
therefore our “intention to treat” estimates based on (1) provide a reasonable estimate of
the causal effect of holding a congressional seat on wealth accumulation.

Close Elections and Sorting at the Threshold

Recent papers by Snyder (2005), Caughey and Sekhon (2010) and Carpenter et al. (2011)
criticize RDD studies that rely on close elections, arguing that there are anomalies even very
near the 50% threshold. They show that in U.S. House elections, incumbents win noticeably
more than 50% of the very close races – especially those where the winning margin was
less than 1% – and that candidates from the party in control of state offices, such as the
governorship, secretary of state and state house and senate, hold a systematic advantage in
extremely close elections.
       These papers do not analyze the time period we study, so we provide some evidence
here. In races where the winner’s margin was 1% or less and an incumbent was running,
exactly 50% of the incumbents won and 50% lost. In the 2% window, 56% of the incumbents
won, but this figure is not statistically different from 50% at the .05 level. In the wider 3%
window 60% of incumbents won, and the percentage is statistically significant. We check the
hypothesis explored in Carpenter et al. (2011), by studying outcomes from the point of view
  43
     As noted above, there were also a few cases of candidates who did not serve in congress despite winning
the election, due to reasons such as being disqualified, death, and election contests. However, this only
happened in 37 cases.
  44
     Some candidates – about 5% of our sample – ran more than once, for non-consecutive congresses. In
these cases we define a “spell” as a set of consecutive election attempts separated by at least one congress
in which they did not run. We treat the spells as separate “quasi-experiments” and consider the vote share
in the first election of each spell. In other words, we count as “close winners” or “close losers” those who
won or lost the first race of any of their election spells by a small margin.


                                                    61
of the party controlling the governor’s office at the time of the election. In races where the
winner’s margin was 1% or less, the candidate whose party controlled the governor’s office
won 53% of the time, but this figure is not statistically different from 50% at the .05 level. In
the 2% window, the candidate from the governor’s party won 54%, and again the percentage
is not statistically different from 50% at the .05 level. In the wider 3% window, 56% of the
candidates from the governor’s party won, and the percentage is statistically different from
50%.45
       Interestingly, the “sorting” at the threshold is concentrated in the post-Civil War con-
gresses. In the congresses of the 1850s (31st-36th Congresses) there is no significant evidence
of sorting. The figures for the percentage of close races won by the incumbent for the various
windows are as follows: 46% for the 1% window, 57% for the 2% window, and 57% for the
3% window. Similarly, the figures for the percentage of close races won by the governor’s
party are as follows: 47% for the 1% window, 52% for the 2% window, and 53% for the 3%
window. None of these are statistically different from 50% at the .05 level. We find the same
patterns – no significant evidence of sorting – for our main sub-sample of interest, the Civil
War years (37th-39th Congresses). The figures for the percentage of close races won by the
incumbent for the various windows are as follows: 50% for the 1% window, 51% for the 2%
window, and 55% for the 3% window. Similarly, the figures for the percentage of close races
won by the governor’s party are as follows: 51% for the 1% window, 53% for the 2% window,
and 56% for the 3% window. Again, none of these are statistically different from 50% at the
.05 level.

Census Wealth Data
In this section we provide evidence by previous authors and new evidence compiled by
ourselves that suggest that census wealth data can be trusted and does not introduce any
major biases for the purposes of our analysis. Next we discuss our census records matching
procedure and address any potential selection issues that may arise from our inability to find
the census record of every single candidate in every census year.
  45
     In fact, these outcomes are not too surprising, since as Folke et al. (2011) show, in districts with a
“normal vote” different from .5 we actually expect candidates from the favored party to win more than 50%
of the time except in extremely small windows around the threshold. And incumbents, as well as candidates
whose party won the governorship, tend to be from the favored party rather than the disadvantaged party
in a district.




                                                    62
Reliability of the Census Data

The wealth data provided in census records was self-reported by the respondents, and was
not checked for accuracy in other ways by government officials. Given this, it is important to
discuss the possible problems associated with these data, as well as work done by previous
authors and ourselves to establish its reliability.
   All censuses were administered in person, by U.S. assistant marshals. The exact instruc-
tions given to the enumerators for the 1860 census were as follows. For the value of real
estate:

      “Under heading 8, insert the value of the real estate owned by each individual
      enumerated. You are to obtain this information by personal inquiry of each head
      of a family, and are to insert the amount in dollars, be the estate located where
      it may. You are not to consider any question of lien or encumbrance; it is simply
      your duty to enter the value as given by the respondent.”

Similarly, for the value of personal estate:

      “Under heading 9, insert (in dollars) the value of personal property or estate.
      Here you are to include the value of all the property, possessions, or wealth of
      each individual which is not embraced in the column previous consist of what
      it may; the value of bonds, mortgages, notes, slaves, live stock, plate, jewels
      or furniture; in fine, the value of whatever constitutes the personal wealth of
      individuals. Exact accuracy may not be arrived at, but all persons should be
      encouraged to give a near and prompt estimate for your information. Should
      any respondent manifest hesitation or unwillingness to make a free reply on this
      or any other subject, you will direct attention to Nos. 6 and 13 of your general
      instructions and the 15th section of the law.”

   According to Wright (1970b), there was some concern at the time regarding the “suspi-
cions of the interviewees about the intentions of the enumerators and about the uses to which
the information divulged would be put” (p. 38). Also, some observers expressed fears that
the information might be used for tax purposes, although much of this was probably political
posturing. For instance, a southern journal inquired whether “this Federal prying into the
domestic economy of the people was not a precursor to direct taxes” (p. 38). Williamson
and Lindert (1991) discuss the reliability of the 1860 census returns, in particular the possi-
bility that respondents gave casual, and therefore inaccurate, answers to the census takers.
They note that “a large number of [households] may have reported zero wealth in order to
avoid the bother of estimating asset value (in fact 38% of free adult males reported property

                                               63
less than $100 in the 1860 census sample) but it is hard to tell what share of these actually
reported zero wealth” (p. 41). They add that “at the other end of the wealth spectrum, one
might speculate that the very rich overstated their wealth in the 1860 and 1870 censuses,
but this is a hard conjecture to sustain [and] we know of no clear bias in the estimates, either
for the 1774 or for 1860 [censuses]” (p. 41).
    There are, however, several reasons to believe that these issues are not a major concern
for our purposes. First, the information collected by census officials was, as a matter of
policy, strictly confidential. The U.S. Secretary of the Interior stated the policy as follows:

      “... all marshals and assistants are expected to consider the facts intrusted to
      them as if obtained exclusively for the use of the Government, and not to be used
      in any way to the gratification of curiosity, the exposure of any man’s business or
      pursuits, or for the private emolument of the marshals or assistants, who, while
      employed in this service, act as agents of the Government in the most confidential
      capacity.”

This policy was reinforced for the 1870 census, with the following:

      “No graver offense can be committed by assistant marshals than to divulge infor-
      mation acquired in the discharge of their duty. All disclosures should be treated
      as strictly confidential, with the exception hereafter to be noted in the case of
      the mortality schedule [where professional review by a local physician was au-
      thorized]. Information will be solicited of any breach of confidence on the part
      of assistant marshals. The [Department of Interior] is determined to protect the
      citizen in all his rights in the present census.”

   Moreover, Wright (1970b) adds that “enumerators were instructed to approach every
family ‘with civil and conciliatory manners’ and to ‘secure confidence and good will.”’ They
were to warn recalcitrant respondents of the penalties for refusal to answer or for giving false
information. Above all, the information received was to be kept strictly confidential, and
interviewees were to be assured that this was true. By 1860 one would suppose that much
of the apprehension of the earlier years would have been dissipated by virtue of experience”
(p. 38). Steckel (1990) notes that although the census did not verify self-reported wealth
figures, it would have been difficult to conceal real estate holdings and thus these figures
were probably reported reliably.
   Second, even if some respondents were worried that the information provided would not
in fact be kept confidential, there was no clear incentive for under-reporting or over-reporting


                                                64
wealth. There was no federal tax on wealth at the time, and no estate tax. Personal vanity,
however, might have lead to some over-reporting.
   Several previous studies have assessed the reliability of the census data in different ways.
Soltow (1975) used random samples from the 1850-1870 censuses to analyze the evolution
of wealth inequality in the U.S. He found that “wealth averages for the samples in the
years 1850-1870 are generally in line with estimates made by various authorities on wealth
distribution. Growth rates are similar to those found for GNP per worker by Kusnetz and
commodity output per worker by Gallman” (p. 6). He also found evidence that the census
wealth figures were consistent with aggregates obtained by county assessors. The fact that
patterns of wealth and wealth inequality suggested by the census data were in line with those
described by other sources provides evidence in favor of the reliability of census wealth.
   Another group of studies compared wealth reported in the census sheets with taxable
wealth. In an early paper, Gallman (1969) used a random sample from a 1 percent sample
of census sheets from Baltimore, New Orleans, St. Louis, Maryland (excluding Baltimore)
and Louisiana (excluding New Orleans), and found that “the aggregate value of property
reported on the population schedules exceeded the value of property assessed for tax purposes
by more than 50% and the estimated true value of taxable property by almost 20%” (p. 17).
The discrepancies could be explained by the fact that not all property was subject to tax,
and also that some of the property listed in the tax records belonged to corporations and
other institutions (not enumerated in the population census). Moreover, individuals owning
personal property worth less than $100 were apparently not obliged to list their property in
the census but presumably were obligated to list for tax purposes. Gallman concludes that
“the large value of property reported on the population schedule, relative to the estimated
true value of taxed property, is good evidence that the enumerators and respondents met
their obligations” (p. 17).
   One of the most relevant studies for our purpose is Steckel (1994), who matched 20,000
households from the federal census of Massachusetts and Ohio with real and personal prop-
erty tax records from 1820 to 1910. Simple scatter plots of taxable wealth against census
wealth reveal that for Massachusetts most observations line up around the 45 degree line,
indicating an average coincidence of census and taxable wealth. The data from Ohio shows
that census wealth tends to exceed taxable wealth, in line with the findings of Gallman
(1969). Steckel explains the discrepancies by pointing to the “old-fashioned practice of valu-
ing property at about one-half or two-thirds of what it was worth” (p. 79), differences in the
dates of the wealth valuations relative to the census enumerations, and the fact that some


                                              65
property exempt from taxation, particularly personal property, may have been included in
wealth totals reported by the census. In addition, some individuals may have owned wealth
in taxing jurisdictions outside their place of residence. Finally, one cannot ignore the fact
that some individuals evaded taxes. In addition, the census may have reported family or
household property, including that owned by children or by a spouse, with the head, whereas
taxable property included only that owned personally by the head. In order to establish any
systematic discrepancies between census and taxable wealth, Steckel (1994) ran regressions
of taxable wealth on census wealth and characteristics of the household head, for every census
year. The results suggest no systematic associations between the discrepancies and any of
the variables with the exception of gender status (taxable wealth is well below census wealth
for women). This, however, is easily explained by the fact that widows received favorable tax
treatment. Moreover, and despite the discrepancies between the sources of data pointed out
above, inequality measures calculated with both census and taxable wealth are remarkably
similar. Steckel concludes by stating that “these data [wealth from census schedules] are
particularly valuable for analyzing patterns of wealth holding.” (p. 84).
       Even more important for our purposes, however, is whether politicians are more likely
to misreport the true value of their wealth. In order to explore this issue, we found the
1850 and 1860 census records for all of the individuals in The Rich Men of Massachusetts, a
book that purports to give the wealth of (most of) the richest 1,500 men in Massachusetts
as of about 1851 as reported by independent parties.46 We matched the individuals in this
book to lists of mayors, state legislators and congressmen who served during the period in
order to explore any systematic discrepancies between both sources by politicians, relative
to non-politicians. As can be seen in Appendix Table B.2, the correlation between wealth
reported in this book and the wealth recorded in the censuses of 1850 and 1860 is relatively
high. More importantly, there is no evidence of significant under-reporting or over-reporting
of politicians compared to non-politicians. This provides further confidence in the reliability
of the census data.
       Another measurement issue concerns the fact that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish
between respondents with zero wealth and respondents who refused to provide any informa-
tion to the census marshall, or instances where the marshal did not request the information.47
  46
     The book provides information on total wealth while the 1850 census, as note above, reported only real
estate wealth. Thus we matched individuals in the book with the 1860 census as well as the 1850 census, in
order to have a measure of total wealth despite the fact that the 1860 census measure is 9 years later.
  47
     Steckel (1994) notes that the incidence of “zero” wealth responses suggests that “some census enu-
merators failed to acquire accurate information on the value of wealth holdings through lack of diligence,



                                                    66
In both situations census marshals left the census record fields blank, which makes it hard
to distinguish “zero” wealth from “wealth figure not available.” It is clear that in most cases
an empty wealth field corresponds to zero or very low wealth, since they are in the census
records of very young individuals, and individuals with low-paying occupations such as la-
borers and domestic servants. However, one also finds census records of individuals known
to be wealthy at the time, such as Fernando Wood, who despite reporting being rich in 1850
and 1860, did not report any wealth figure in 1870. For these individuals it is clear that the
missing wealth figure did not correspond to zero wealth as can be inferred from the fact that
there were various servants working for them.
   The potential measurement error introduced by this issue should only be a concern for our
purposes if there is a differential likelihood of not reporting any wealth by close winners and
close losers. To explore this, in Appendix Table B.3 we focus on the close election sample –
i.e. candidates who won or lost their first election by a margin smaller than 3% – and report
in the first two columns, linear probability estimates for a dummy variable that indicates
whether the candidate failed to report any wealth in 1860 and 1870 as a function of whether
the individual served in congress in the decade prior to that census year, reported wealth
in the previous census and the interaction of these two terms. All regressions include state
fixed effects, age and age2 as well as the same occupational dummies included in our main
analysis. The results show that election winners, or those originally richer, are not more
likely to fail to report their wealth. This gives us further confidence that this phenomenon
does not introduce any systematic bias in our results.

Coding of Domestic Servants

As an alternative measure of wealth, we also collected information on the number of servants
living with each individual in every census year. Servants living in every dwelling had to be
reported to the enumerator and were, naturally, harder to hide and misreport than real or
personal wealth figures. Servants were typically reported at the bottom of each household’s
record, following the enumeration of the relatives of the household head. We classified as
servants all individuals who had a variation of one of the following occupations: servant, do-
mestic servant, cook, coachman, nurse, gardener, laundress, seamstress, washwoman, waiter,
hostler, or butler. In 1850 most servants’ occupations were not listed. Inspection of the 1860
and 1870 records revealed that the majority of servants were young, foreign-born women,
or were non-white. Therefore, for 1850 we classified as servants all individuals that did not
non-compliance of the household, or ignorance of the respondent” (p. 80).


                                                   67
share the same family name of the household head and had no occupation listed, but were
Irish, German, Scandinavian, or non-white women aged 30 or younger. Moreover, the num-
ber of servants is strongly correlated with reported wealth in the census: a regression of total
wealth against the number of servants reveals that an additional servant was associated with
approximately $20,000 of additional wealth in 1860 and with $40,000 of additional wealth
in 1870. The correlation is highly statistically significant, with a t-statistic over 10. We also
used information on servants to detect cases in which reported wealth figures appear to be
unreliable. Consider all candidates with 1 servant. We compute the 10th percentile of the
distribution of wealth for these individuals, and recode the wealth as missing for candidates
whose reported wealth is below this threshold. We repeat this for all other values of the
number of servants. We also assign a value of total wealth of $100 to all individuals who
do not report any wealth and do not have any servants living with them. In 1870, census
enumerators were instructed not to record personal wealth values below $100. None of our
results change substantially as a result of these transformations.

Matching of Candidates to their Census Records

We attempted to find the census record in each census year of every candidate for the House
of Representatives during our period that obtained at least 25% of the vote. To do so
we initially used PERL scripts to automatically match candidates to census records using
the first and last name, as well as geographic information based on the county or counties
located in the congressional seat sought. In the case of winners we used information provided
in the biographical databases on the year of birth, county, and town of residence to further
narrow the search. In the case of losers, for which more precise biographical information was
not always available, we matched candidates by first and last name and verified that they
were living in a county contained in the congressional district in which they were running.
Despite the automated matching done by the scripts, the data collection process was still
very labor intensive since we had to manually enter wealth figures and occupations. Also, the
scripts only found 47% of the cases, due to typographical errors in the information provided
by ancestry.com or to candidates who moved. We had to locate other cases by searching
manually, checking alternative spellings and miss-spellings of names, checking miss-coded
birth years, and searching in other counties and states for candidates who moved.
   We successfully located and entered data on about 10,000 census records, out of a universe
of about 12,000 cases.48 This corresponds to an overall success rate of about 80%. We
 48
      The biographical information allowed us to know the year of death of those who served. Naturally, we


                                                    68
matched approximately 98% of the winners to at least one census year, and nearly 80% to
all three census years. We matched nearly 90% of the losers to at least one census year,
and about 60% to all three census years. The lower success rate for losers is not surprising,
since we did not always have detailed biographical information that allowed us to perform a
more detailed search. Our success rate was relatively uniform across the three census years.
Overall, our success rate is very satisfactory. This matching success rate compares with
a 59% success rate reported by Steckel (1988) when trying to match over 1,800 household
heads from 300 different counties in the 1850 and 1860 censuses and with a success rate
of only 19% reported by Ferrie (1996) who tried to match a sample of over 25,000 males
included in the IPUMS sample for 1850 to the 1860 census.
    We were not able to find the census record of every single candidate in every single year.
This could lead to concerns of selection bias in our sample. One encouraging fact is that
our overall success rates were similar across the different census years – we found 75% of the
census records in 1850, 78% of the records in 1860 and 75% of the records in 1870. Failure to
match a congressional candidate to its census record in a given census year could happen for
a variety of reasons. First, there is the possibility of underenumeration. Evidence reported
by Steckel (1988) suggests enumeration rates were around 85%.49 In addition, there were
frequent typos in the transcription of the original census records which made it harder to
find some of the candidates. Steckel (1988) examined a sample from the 1860 census, and
found that 8.8% of the transcriptions were searchable errors (minor mistakes or typos), while
15.8% constituted non-searchable errors (that is, errors that would have made it impossible
to find an individual). Migration and death were additional factors which complicated the
matching of individuals, though this was less of a problem for winners for which we had
not only their exact year of death but also some information on migration reported in the
congressional biographies. For the case of the losers however, it is likely that some of the
candidates we failed to match in the later census years had already passed away.
   A large fraction of the candidates we failed to match were those individuals with too
common names and for which we could find two or more matches in the census records with
the exact same first, middle and last name in the same congressional district and of the
did not attempt to find the census record of those who were dead in a given census year.
  49
     However, as mentioned by Wright (1970b), there were large efforts toward avoiding underenumeration
and the instructions on coverage were explicit and italicized in the government circulars: “The assistant
marshall shall make the enumeration by actual inquiry at every dwelling house, or by personal inquiry of
the head of every family, and not otherwise” (p. 149). Also, the assistant marshals were sworn to carry out
their instructions and violations were subject to penalties. Another incentive for avoiding the undercounting
of individuals was provided by the fact that compensation for assistant marshals was on a per-entry basis.


                                                     69
relevant age. In order to minimize our type I error, we decided to exclude these candidates
with very common names that we could not match. However, we are confident that this
should not introduce any systematic bias in our sample. In fact, for their 1850 and 1860
samples Steckel (1988) and Ferrie (1996) ran logit regressions of a “common name” dummy
against characteristics such as location of residence (region and city size) and other personal
characteristics such as real and personal wealth, ethnicity, illiteracy and occupation. Their
results show that while common names occur less often in southern states and in cities with
less than 75,000 inhabitants, having a common name is not correlated with real or personal
wealth. In order to explore in greater detail all these matching issues Steckel (1988) ran
a logit regression of a “failure to match” dummy against different personal and geographic
characteristics and found that people in the North Central and Mountain and Pacific regions,
those in cities larger than 75,000 inhabitants, those foreign born and those illiterate were less
likely to be matched while those with large real estates and living in smaller cities were easier
to match (though the coefficient on wealth is very small for practical purposes). Something
very similar was done by Ferrie (1996) who found that the probability of a successful match
was higher for households in the northeastern states, for married individuals, for household
heads involved in farming activities and it was lower for foreign-born and older individuals.
   For our purposes, the only concern would be if we were differentially likely to find the
census records of close winners or of individuals with different wealth levels. Thus, in columns
3 and 4 of Appendix Table B.3 we report linear probability models on the close election
sample where we regress a “failure to find” dummy in 1860 and 1870 as a function of whether
the individual served in congress in the prior decade, log of wealth reported in the previous
census year and the interaction of these two. The point estimates reveal that we were not
more or less likely to find the census records of those who won these close races or those who
were originally richer. This suggests that failure to find some census records should not have
introduced any systematic bias in our analysis.




                                               70
Table B.1: Summary Statistics on Congressional Races
#   of   Races                = 2355
#   of   Races w/Margin < 55% = 1117
#   of   Races w/Margin < 53% = 752
#   of   Candidates           = 2946
#   of   Democrats            = 1539
#   of   Whigs                = 490
#   of   Republicans          = 734
                         All Candidates
                               Won 1st Race        Lost 1st Race
#   who   run 1 time           609        38.0% 1939       79.6%
#   who   run 2 times          618        38.6% 291        12.0%
#   who   run 3+ times         376        23.5% 205         8.4%
#   who   win 0 times            0         0.0% 2230       91.6%
#   who   win 1 time           862        53.8% 103         4.2%
#   who   win 2 times          482        30.1%   62        2.5%
#   who   win 3+ times         259        16.2%   40        1.6%
                Candidates with Close First Race
                               Won 1st Race        Lost 1st Race
#   who   run 1 time           237        38.0%    481     71.7%
#   who   run 2 times          255        40.9%     91     13.6%
#   who   run 3+ times         131        21.0%     99     14.8%
#   who   win 0 times            0         0.0%    560     83.5%
#   who   win 1 time           374        60.0%     55      8.2%
#   who   win 2 times          177        28.4%     33      4.9%
#   who   win 3+ times          72        11.6%     23      3.4%




                              71
             Appendix Table B.2: Census Wealth vs.
               Wealth in Rich Men of Massachusetts
                                   (1)       (2)         (3)
                               Log Real    Log Real   Log Total
                                 1850        1860       1860
RMM Wealth                         0.79     0.81        1.01
                                   (.05)    (.07)       (.06)
Politician                         0.08     0.13        0.12
                                   (.12)    (.14)       (.12)
Constant                           0.71     0.81        -0.64
                                   (.62)    (.81)       (.68)
R-square                           .30       .27        .46
N                                  505       368        356
Correlation with RMM Wealth        .54       .52         .68




                              72
                           Appendix Table B.3:
               Assessing the Reliability of the Census Data
                               (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)
                            No Report       No Report   Not Found Not Found
                              1860            1870        1860      1870
Winner                        -0.007          0.025       -0.005    0.025
                             (0.019)         (0.034)     (0.034)   (0.034)
Log(Wealtht−10 )              0.016           -0.005      0.001     -0.005
                             (0.015)         (0.017)     (0.018)   (0.017)
Winner × Log(Wealtht−10 )     0.006           0.008       -0.021    0.008
                             (0.019)         (0.026)     (0.022)   (0.026)
Observations                   290             309         290       309
R-square                      0.077           0.069       0.071     0.069




                                       73
