                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GETTING BENEATH THE VEIL OF EFFECTIVE SCHOOLS:
                          EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY

                                             Will Dobbie
                                          Roland G. Fryer, Jr

                                        Working Paper 17632
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17632


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




We give special thanks to Seth Andrews and William Packer of Democracy Prep Charter School, Michael
Goldstein of the MATCH charter school, and James Merriman and Myrah Murrell from the New York
City Charter School Center for invaluable assistance in collecting the data necessary for this project.
We are grateful to our colleagues Michael Greenstone, Larry Katz, and Steven Levitt for helpful comments
and suggestions. Sara D'Alessandro, Abhirup Das, Ryan Fagan, Blake Heller, Daniel Lee, Sue Lin,
George Marshall, Sameer Sampat, and Allison Sikora provided exceptional project management and
research assistance. Financial support was provided by the John and Laura Arnold Foundation, the
Broad Foundation, and the Fisher Foundation. Correspondence can be addressed to the authors by
e-mail: dobbie@fas.harvard.edu [Dobbie] or rfryer@fas.harvard.edu [Fryer]. The usual caveat applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Will Dobbie and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence from New York City
Will Dobbie and Roland G. Fryer, Jr
NBER Working Paper No. 17632
December 2011
JEL No. I20,J10,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Charter schools were developed, in part, to serve as an R&D engine for traditional public schools,
resulting in a wide variety of school strategies and outcomes. In this paper, we collect unparalleled
data on the inner-workings of 35 charter schools and correlate these data with credible estimates of
each school's effectiveness. We find that traditionally collected input measures -- class size, per pupil
expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no certification, and the fraction of teachers with an advanced
degree -- are not correlated with school effectiveness. In stark contrast, we show that an index of five
policies suggested by over forty years of qualitative research -- frequent teacher feedback, the use
of data to guide instruction, high-dosage tutoring, increased instructional time, and high expectations
-- explains approximately 50 percent of the variation in school effectiveness. Our results are robust
to controls for three alternative theories of schooling: a model emphasizing the provision of wrap-around
services, a model focused on teacher selection and retention, and the "No Excuses'' model of education.
 We conclude by showing that our index provides similar results in a separate sample of charter schools.


Will Dobbie
Education Innovation Laboratory
Harvard University
44 Brattle Street, 5th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02138
dobbie@fas.harvard.edu

Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17632
1       Introduction

Improving the efficiency of public education in America is of great importance. The United States
spends $10,768 per pupil on primary and secondary education, ranking it fourth among OECD
countries (Aud et al. 2011). Yet, among these same countries, American fifteen year-olds rank
twenty-fifth in math achievement, seventeenth in science, and twelfth in reading (Fleischman 2010).
Traditionally, there have been two approaches to increasing educational efficiency: (1) expand the
scope of available educational options in the hope that the market will drive out ineffective schools,
or (2) directly manipulate inputs to the educational production function.
    Evidence on the efficacy of both approaches is mixed. Market-based reforms such as school choice
or school vouchers have, at best, a modest impact on student achievement (Rouse 1998, Ladd 2002,
Krueger and Zhu 2004, Cullen, Jacob, Levitt 2005, 2006, Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2006, Wolf et
al. 2010, Belfield and Levin 2002, Hsieh and Urquiola 2006, Card, Dooley, and Payne 2010, Winters
forthcoming). This suggests that competition alone is unlikely to significantly increase the efficiency
of the public school system.
    Similarly, efforts to manipulate key educational inputs have been hampered by an inability to
identify school inputs that predict student achievement (Hanushek 1997).1 This is due, at least in
part, to a paucity of detailed data on the strategies and operations of schools, little variability in
potentially important inputs (e.g. instructional time), and the use of non-causal estimates of school
effectiveness. For instance, the vast majority of quantitative analyses only account for inputs such
as class size, per pupil expenditure, or the fraction of teachers with an advanced degree. Measures of
teacher development, data driven instruction, school culture, and student expectations have never
been collected systematically, despite decades of qualitative research suggesting their importance
(see reviews in Edmunds 1979, 1982).
    In this paper, we provide new evidence on the determinants of school effectiveness by collecting
unparalleled data on the inner-workings of 35 charter schools in New York City and correlating
these data with credible estimates of each school’s effectiveness. An enormous amount of infor-
mation was collected from each school. A principal interview asked about teacher development,
instructional time, data driven instruction, parent outreach, and school culture. Teacher interviews
asked about professional development, school policies, school culture, and student assessment. Stu-

    1
     Krueger (2003) argues that resources are systematically related to student achievement when the studies in
Hanushek (1997) are given equal weight. It is only when each estimate is counted separately, as in Hanushek (1997),
that the relationship between resources and achievement is not significant.


                                                        1
dent interviews asked about school environment, school disciplinary policy, and future aspirations.
Lesson plans were used to measure curricular rigor. Videotaped classroom observations were used
to calculate the fraction of students on task throughout the school day.
   Schools in our sample employ a wide variety of educational strategies and philosophies, providing
dramatic variability in school inputs. For instance, the Bronx Charter School for the Arts believes
that participation in the arts is a catalyst for academic and social success. The school integrates
art into almost every aspect of the classroom, prompting students to use art as a language to
express their thoughts and ideas. At the other end of the spectrum are a number of so-called “No
Excuses” schools, such as KIPP Infinity, the HCZ Promise Academies, and the Democracy Prep
Charter School. These “No Excuses” schools emphasize frequent testing, dramatically increased
instructional time, parental pledges of involvement, aggressive human capital strategies, a “broken
windows” theory of discipline, and a relentless focus on math and reading achievement (Carter 2000,
Thernstrom and Thernstrom 2004, Whitman 2008). This variability, combined with rich measures
of school inputs and credible estimates of each school’s impact on student achievement, provides an
ideal opportunity to understand which inputs best explain school effectiveness.
   Our new data are interesting and informative. Input measures associated with a traditional
resource-based model of education – class size, per pupil expenditure, the fraction of teachers with
no teaching certification, and the fraction of teachers with an advanced degree – are not correlated
with school effectiveness in our sample. Indeed, our data suggest that increasing resource-based
inputs may actually lower school effectiveness. Schools with more certified teachers have annual
math gains that are 0.043 (0.022) standard deviations lower than other schools. Schools with more
teachers with a masters degree have annual ELA gains that are 0.034 (0.019) standard deviations
lower. An index of class size, per pupil expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no teaching
certification, and the fraction of teachers with an advanced degree, explains about 15 percent of the
variance in charter school effectiveness, but in the unexpected direction.
   In stark contrast, an index of five policies suggested by forty years of qualitative case-studies
– frequent teacher feedback, data driven instruction, high-dosage tutoring, increased instructional
time, and a relentless focus on academic achievement – explains roughly half of the variation in school
effectiveness. A one standard deviation (σ) increase in the index is associated with a 0.056σ (0.011)
increase in annual math gains and a 0.039σ (0.010) increase in annual ELA gains. Moreover, four out
of the five school policies in our index make a statistically significant contribution controlling for an
index of the other four, suggesting that each policy conveys some relevant information. Controlling


                                                   2
for the other four inputs, schools that give formal or informal feedback ten or more times per
semester have annual math gains that are 0.038σ (0.022) higher and annual ELA gains that are
0.028σ (0.015) higher than other schools. Schools that tutor students at least four days a week in
groups of six or less have annual math gains that are 0.044σ (0.026) higher than other schools, and
ELA gains that are 0.064σ (0.021) higher. Schools that add 25 percent or more instructional time
have annual gains that are 0.059σ (0.015) higher in math.
   We conclude our analysis by exploring the robustness of our results across three dimensions.
First, we demonstrate that the main results are unchanged when accounting for three alternative
theories of schooling: a model emphasizing the social and emotional needs of the “whole child”
through wrap-around services and parental engagement, a model focused solely on the selection and
retention of teacher talent, and the so-called “No Excuses” model of education. Second, we show
that the results are unaffected if we control for an index of 37 other control variables collected for
the purposes of this research. Third, we show that our main results are qualitatively similar in a
larger sample of charter schools in NYC, using more coarse administrative data from site visits,
state accountability reports, and school websites.
   Our analysis has three important caveats. First, our estimates of the relationship between school
inputs and school effectiveness are unlikely to be causal given the lack of experimental variation
in school inputs. Unobserved factors such as principal skill, student selection into lotteries, or
the endogeneity of school inputs could drive the correlations reported in the paper. Second, our
estimates come from a subset of charter schools in New York City. Although participating schools
are similar to other urban charter schools, they could differ in important ways that limit our ability
to generalize our results. Moreover, there may be inputs common to almost all of the schools in
our sample (e.g. a non-unionized staff) that have important interactions with other inputs. An
important next step is to inject the strategies identified here into a set of traditional public schools
(see Fryer 2011 for preliminary evidence from Houston). Third, while our data are remarkably
rich, we cannot test every dimension of the alternative theories of education described above. For
instance, advocates of the “whole child” approach will (correctly) argue that our data provide only
a partial test of what is inevitably a rich, complex, and interlocking theoretical construct.
   The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the literature examining
ways to increase school effectiveness. Section 3 describes the data collected for our analysis. Section
4 details our empirical strategy to estimate a school’s effectiveness and reports treatment effects for
our sample of charter schools. Section 5 provides a series of partial correlations of school inputs


                                                   3
and school effectiveness. Section 6 concludes. There are three online appendices. Online Appendix
A describes our sample and variable construction. Online Appendix B outlines our data collection
process. Online Appendix C provides information on the lottery data from each charter school.


2    A Brief Review of the Literature

There is a large literature investigating ways to increase educational efficiency. We divide the
literature into three parts: (1) evaluations of market based mechanisms such as school choice and
school vouchers, (2) quantitative attempts to link school inputs to student performance, and (3)
qualitative analyses of the strategies embedded in effective schools. We briefly describe each of these
literatures in turn.

                                   A. Market Based Reforms

    Early research estimating the impact of school competition on school efficiency exploits variation
in private school enrollment as a proxy for competitive pressure. Couch et al. (1993) finds a positive
relationship between district-wide average test scores at public schools and the fraction of local stu-
dents in private schools, which he interprets as evidence of a competition effect. Subsequent studies
using the same approach on different data find smaller and generally insignificant effects (New-
mark 1995, Sander 1999, Geller et al. 2006). Hoxby (1994) argues that private school enrollment
endogenously responds to the quality of local public schools. Using the fraction of Catholics in a
metropolitan area as an instrument for private enrollment, Hoxby (1994) reports that a ten percent
increase in the fraction of a county enrolled in Catholic schools increases educational attainment by
0.33 years and wages by two percent. Conversely, Winters (forthcoming) finds that schools losing
more students to charter schools are largely unaffected by the competitive pressures of the charter
option.
    A second and related group of studies examines the impact of Tiebout competition between
public school districts. Borland and Howsen (1992) use the Herfindahl index of enrollment shares
at different school districts as a measure of Tiebout competition, finding a slightly negative effect of
competition on test scores. Arguing that district fragmentation is endogenous, Hoxby (2000) uses
the number of rivers and streams in a metropolitan area as an instrument for the Herfindahl index.
While Hoxby (2000) reports a positive impact of competition on student achievement, Rothstein
(2006b) finds no effect of district fragmentation on the degree of sorting between school districts,
suggesting that inter-district competition effects are small.

                                                   4
    A third strand of the literature examines the impact of private school vouchers on public school
efficiency. Consistent with theoretical analyses by Epple and Romano (1998) and Nechyba (2000),
Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) find that the expansion of private school vouchers in Chile led to increased
stratification across schools, with few gains in student outcomes. Hoxby (2003), Carnoy et al.
(2007), and Chakrabarti (2008) use the expansion of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program to
estimate the impact of school vouchers on school efficiency in non-voucher schools, finding evidence
that student performance improved in the first few years of the expansion. However, Carnoy et al.
(2007) find few gains at non-voucher schools after the initial voucher expansion.2

                                               B. School Inputs

    An immense literature relating school inputs to student achievement has developed in the wake
of the Coleman Report (Coleman et al. 1966). In a meta-analysis of close to 400 studies, Hanushek
(1997) finds that there is little evidence of a relationship between student performance and school
resources after family background is taken into account. However, Krueger (2003) argues that
resources are systematically related to student achievement when the studies in Hanushek (1997)
are given equal weight. It is only when each estimate is counted separately, as in Hanushek (1997),
that the relationship between resources and achievement is not significant.
    Two recent papers attempt to link charter school characteristics and student achievement gains.
Using data from 32 charter schools in NYC, Hoxby and Muraka (2009) find that an additional ten
instructional days is associated with a 0.2σ increase in annual achievement gains. Angrist, Pathak,
and Walters (2011) use data from 30 charter schools in Massachusetts to show that urban charter
schools are more effective at raising test scores than non-urban charter schools. Like many others,
they argue that adherence to the so-called “No Excuses” paradigm can account for the nearly all of
the urban advantage (Carter 2000, Thernstrom and Thernstrom 2004). Both Hoxby and Muraka
(2009) and Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2011) lack the kind of detailed within the school data
used in this paper.

                                C. Case-Studies of Effective Schools
   2
      An emerging literature uses randomized admission lotteries to estimate the impact of exercising the school choice
option. Peterson et al. (1998) and Howell and Peterson (2002) find that attending a private school modestly increases
student achievement for low-achieving African-American students in New York City, Dayton, and Washington, DC.
A reanalysis of the New York City experiment by Krueger and Zhu (2004), however, suggests little impact of receiving
a school voucher. Cullen et al. (2006), using randomized admission lotteries to magnet high schools in Chicago, find
little impact of attending a better high school on academic achievement. Similarly, Hastings et al. (2006) find little
impact of attending a “first-choice” school in Charlotte-Mecklenburg on achievement, though Deming (forthcoming)
and Deming et al. (2011) find a positive impact on crime and college attendance.


                                                          5
    Qualitative researchers have amassed a large literature exploring the attributes of effective
schools. In 1974, New York’s Office of Education Performance Review analyzed two NYC pub-
lic schools serving disadvantaged students, one highly effective, one not. The study concluded that
differences in academic achievement were driven by differences in principal skill, expectations for
students, and classroom instruction. Madden, Lawson and Sweet (1976) examined 21 pairs of Cal-
ifornia elementary schools matched on pupil characteristics, but differing in student achievement.
The more effective schools were more likely to provide teacher feedback, tutor their students, mon-
itor student performance, and have classroom cultures more conducive to learning. Brookover and
Lezotte (1977) found similar results for a set of schools in Michigan. Summarizing the literature,
Edmonds (1979) argued that effective schools tend to have a strong administrative leadership, high
expectations for all children regardless of background, an atmosphere conducive to learning, a focus
on academic achievement, and frequent monitoring of student progress.
    A more recent branch of this literature focuses on the characteristics of so-called “No Excuses”
schools, loosely defined as schools that emphasize strict discipline, extended time in school, and
an intensive focus on building basic reading and math skills. Using observations from 21 high
poverty high performing schools, Carter (2000) argues that “No Excuses” schools succeed due to
empowered principals, the use of interim assessments to measure student progress, frequent and
effective professional development, aggressive parent outreach, and a relentless focus on achievement
for all students regardless of background. Thernstrom and Thernstrom (2004) similarly argue that
“No Excuses” schools are more effective due to more instructional time, a zero tolerance disciplinary
code, high academic expectations for all students, and an emphasis on teaching basic math and
reading skills (see Whitman 2008 for similar arguments).


3    Constructing a Database on the Inner-Workings of Schools

The main data for this paper are gathered from two sources: (1) school specific data collected from
principal, teacher, and student surveys, lesson plans, and videotaped observations of classroom
lessons, and (2) administrative data on student demographics and outcomes from the New York
City Department of Education (NYCDOE). Below, we describe each data source.




                                                 6
3.1   School Characteristics Data

In the spring of 2010, we attempted to collect survey, lottery, and video data for all charter schools
in New York City with students in grades 3 - 8. Eligible schools were invited to participate via
email and phone. We also hosted an informational event at the New York Charter Center to explain
the project to interested schools. Schools were offered a $5000 stipend to be received conditional
on providing all of the appropriate materials. Of the 48 eligible charter elementary schools (entry
grades K - 4) and 37 eligible charter middle schools (entry grades 5 - 8), 22 elementary schools
and 13 middle schools chose to participate in the study. Within the set of participating schools,
13 elementary schools and 9 middle schools also provided admissions lottery data. The other 13
schools were either under-subscribed or did not keep usable lottery records. Table 1 summarizes
the selection process. Appendix Table 1 lists each participating school, along with the data that is
available for each school.
   An enormous amount of information was collected from participating schools. A principal inter-
view asked about teacher and staff development, instructional time, data driven instruction, parent
outreach, and school culture. An hour long follow up phone interview with each school leader pro-
vided additional details on each domain. Information on curricular rigor was coded from lesson plans
collected for each testable grade level in both math and ELA. Finally, information on school culture
and practices was gathered during full day visits to each school. These visits included videotaped
classroom observations of at least one math and reading class and interviews with randomly chosen
teachers and students. Below we describe the variables we code from this data. Additional details
on the data are available in Online Appendix A. Full survey and interview scripts are available in
Online Appendix B.

                                        A. Human Capital

   A school’s human capital policies are captured through the number of times a teacher receives
formal or informal feedback from classroom visits, how many hours teachers spend on instructional
and non-instructional activities during a normal week, the highest teacher salary at the school, the
fraction of teachers who leave involuntarily each year, and the number of non-negotiables a school
has when hiring a new teacher. See Online Appendix B for further details.
   Summary statistics for our human capital data are displayed in Table 2. We split our sample
into more and less effective schools based on estimates described in Section 4. Specifically, we
separate the sample at the median using the average of each school’s estimated impact on math

                                                  7
and ELA scores. Consistent with Edmonds (1979, 1982), high achieving schools have more intensive
human capital policies than other schools. The typical teacher at a high achieving elementary school
receives feedback 16.41 times per semester, compared to 11.31 times at other charter schools. The
typical teacher at a high achieving middle school receives feedback 13.42 times per semester, 6.35
more instances of feedback than teachers at other charter schools. Teachers at high achieving schools
also work longer hours than teachers at other charter schools; an additional 7.75 hours per week
at the elementary level and 10.29 hours per week at the middle school level. Despite this higher
workload, the maximum salary of teachers at high achieving schools is the same or somewhat lower
than other charter schools.

                      B. The Use of Data in Instructional Practice

   We attempt to understand how schools use data through the frequency of interim assessments,
whether teachers meet with a school leader to discuss student data, how often teachers receive
reports on student results, and how often data from interim assessments are used to adjust tutoring
groups, assign remediation, modify instruction, or create individualized student goals.
   Summary statistics for our data driven instruction variables are displayed in Table 2. High
achieving schools use data more intensely than other charter schools in our sample. High achieving
elementary schools test students 3.92 times per semester, compared to 2.42 times at other charter
schools. Higher achieving middle schools test students 4.00 times, compared to 2.04 times at other
charter middle schools in our sample. Higher achieving schools are also more likely to track students
using data and utilize more differentiation strategies compared to low achieving schools.

                                   C. Parental Engagement

   Parent outreach variables capture how often schools communicate with parents due to academic
performance, due to behavioral issues, or to simply provide feedback.
   Summary statistics in Table 2 suggest that high achieving elementary and middle schools provide
more feedback of all types to parents. Higher achieving schools provide academic feedback 3.00 more
times per semester than other schools, behavioral feedback 9.20 more times per semester, and general
feedback to parents 7.27 more times per semester.

                                  D. High-Dosage Tutoring

   Tutoring variables measure how often students are tutored and how large the groups are. We
code a school as offering small group tutoring if the typical group is six or fewer students. Schools

                                                 8
are coded as offering frequent tutoring if groups typically meet four or more times per week. Finally,
schools are coded as having high-dosage tutoring if the typical group is six or fewer students and
those groups meet four or more times per week.
    While almost all charter schools in our sample offer some sort of tutoring, high achieving charter
schools in our sample are far more likely to offer high-dosage tutoring. Thirty-three percent of high
achieving elementary schools offer high-dosage tutoring compared to ten percent of low achieving
schools. Seventeen percent of high achieving middle schools offer high-dosage tutoring, while none
of the low achieving schools do.

                                         E. Instructional Time

    Instructional time is measured through the length and number of instructional days and the
number of minutes spent on math and ELA in each school.
    High achieving charter schools in our sample have a longer instructional year and day than other
charter schools. The typical high achieving elementary school has 190.67 instructional days and an
instructional day of 8.07 hours, compared to 183.80 instructional days and 7.36 instructional hours
at other charter schools. The typical high achieving middle school meets for 191.00 instructional
days, with a typical instructional day lasting 8.17 hours. Other charter middle schools in our sample
meet for only 187.14 instructional days with an average day of 7.87 hours. In other words, high
achieving elementary schools provide about 26.68 percent more instructional hours per year than a
typical NYC schools, while high achieving middle schools provide about 28.07 percent more. Other
charter schools, on the other hand, provide just 11.39 and 21.38 percent more instructional time at
the elementary and middle school levels respectively.3

                                     F. Culture and Expectations

    School culture is measured through two sets of questions. The first set of questions asks leaders
to rank ten school priorities. We code a school as having high academic and behavioral expectations
if an administrator ranks “a relentless focus on academic goals and having students meet them” and
“very high expectations for student behavior and discipline” as her top two priorities (in either
order). Other potential priorities include “a comprehensive approach to the social and emotional
needs of the whole child,” “building a student’s self-esteem through positive reinforcement,” and
“prioritizing each child’s interests and passions in designing a project-based unit.”
   3
    Traditional public schools in NYC meet for 180 instructional days and 6.0 to 7.5 instructional hours each day.
We assume a 6.75 hour instructional day when calculating changes in instructional time.


                                                        9
    The second set of culture questions consists of ten multiple choice questions written for the
purposes of this study by the founder of the MATCH charter high school in Boston, a prominent
“No Excuses” adherent. The questions ask about whether rules are school-wide or classroom specific,
how students learn school culture, whether students wait for the teacher to dismiss the class, desk
and backpack rules, hallway order, classroom activities, and whether students track teachers with
their eyes. We create a dichotomous variable for each question equal to one if a school leader
indicates a “No Excuses,” or more strict, disciplinary policy. Our measure of a school’s disciplinary
policy is the standardized sum of the ten dichotomous variables.
    Consistent with past research (e.g. Edmunds 1979, 1982, Carter 2000, Thernstrom and Thern-
strom 2004), high achieving charter schools are more likely to have higher academic and behavioral
expectations compared to other charter schools and are more likely to have school-wide disciplinary
policies.

                                         G. Lesson Plans

    The rigor of a school’s curriculum is coded from lesson plans collected from each testable grade
level and subject area in a school. We code whether the most advanced objective for each lesson
is at or above grade level using New York State standards for the associated subject and grade.
Lesson plan complexity is coded using the cognitive domain of Bloom’s taxonomy which indicates
the level of higher-order thinking required to complete the objective. In the case where a lesson
has more than one objective, the most complex objective was chosen. We also code the number of
differentiation strategies present in each lesson plan and the number of checks for understanding.
Finally, we create an aggregate thoroughness measure that captures whether a lesson plan includes
an objective, an essential question, a do-now, key words section, materials section, introduction
section, main learning activity, a check for understanding, an assessment, a closing activity, time
needed for each section, homework section, teacher reflection section, and if the lesson plan follows
a standardized format. The inclusion of each element increases the thoroughness measure by one,
which is then standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
    Surprisingly, lesson plans at high achieving charter schools are not more likely to be at or above
grade level and do not have higher Bloom’s Taxonomy Scores. Higher achieving charter schools also
appear no more likely to have more differentiated lesson plans and appear to have less thorough
lesson plans than lower achieving charter schools. Above median elementary schools have an average
of 4.67 items on our lesson plan thoroughness measure, while lower achieving scores have 5.12. The


                                                 10
gap between above and below median middle schools is even larger, with above median schools
having 5.50 items and below median schools averaging 6.83 items.


3.2   Administrative Data

Our second data source consists of administrative data on student demographics and outcomes from
the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE). The data include information on student
race, gender, free and reduced-price lunch eligibility, behavior, attendance, and state math and ELA
test scores for students in grades three through eight. The NYCDOE data span the 2003 - 2004 to
2009 - 2010 school years.
   The state math and ELA tests, developed by McGraw-Hill, are high-stakes exams conducted
in the spring semester of third through eighth grade. The math test includes questions on number
sense and operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, and statistics. Tests in the earlier grades
emphasize more basic content such as number sense and operations, while later tests focus on
advanced topics such as algebra and geometry. The ELA test is designed to assess students on
their information and understanding, literary response and expression, and critical analysis and
evaluation. The ELA test includes multiple-choice and short-response sections based on a reading
and listening section, as well as a brief editing task.
   All public-school students, including those attending charters, are required to take the math and
ELA tests unless they are medically excused or have a severe disability. Students with moderate
disabilities or who are English Language Learners must take both tests, but may be granted special
accommodations (additional time, translation services, and so on) at the discretion of school or
state administrators. In our analysis the test scores are normalized to have a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one for each grade and year across the entire New York City sample.
   Student level summary statistics for the variables that we use in our core specifications are
displayed in Table 3. Charter students are more likely to be black and less likely to be English
language learners or participate in special education compared to the typical NYC student. Charter
students receive free or reduced price lunch at similar rates as other NYC students. Charter middle
school students score 0.08σ lower in fifth grade math and 0.06σ lower in fifth grade ELA compared
to the typical NYC student. Students in our sample of charter schools score 0.12σ lower in math
and 0.08σ lower in ELA compared to the typical charter student in NYC, suggesting that schools
in our sample are negatively selected (on test score levels) from the NYC charter school population
as a whole.


                                                   11
4    The Impact of Attending a NYC Charter School

To estimate the causal impact of each school in our sample, we use two empirical models. The
first exploits the fact that oversubscribed charter schools in NYC are required to admit students
via random lottery. The second statistical model uses a combination of matching and regression
analysis to partially control for selection into charter schools.
    Following Hoxby and Muraka (2009), Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2011), and Dobbie and Fryer (2011),
we model the effect of a charter school on student achievement as a linear function of the number
of years spent at the school:


                        achievementigt = αt + λg + βXi + ρCharterigt + εigt                         (1)


where αt and λg and year and grade of test effects respectively, Xi is a vector of demographic
controls including gender, race, free lunch status, and baseline test scores. εigt is an error term that
captures random variation in test scores.
    The causal effect of attending a charter school is ρ. If the number of years a student spends at a
charter was randomly assigned, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of equation (1) would cap-
ture the average causal effect of years spent at the school. Because students and parents selectively
choose whether to enroll at a charter school, however, OLS estimates are likely to be biased by cor-
relation between school choice and unobserved characteristics related to student ability, motivation,
or background.
    To identify ρ we use an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits the fact that New York
law dictates that over-subscribed charter schools allocate enrollment offers via a random lottery.
    The first stage equations for IV estimation take the form:

                                                            X
                     Charterigt = µt + κg + γXi + πZi +           νj Lotteryij + ηigt               (2)
                                                              j


where π captures the effect of the lottery offer Zi on the number of years a student spends at a
charter school. The lottery indicators Lotteryij are lottery fixed effects for each of the school’s j
lotteries. We also control for whether the student had a sibling in a lottery that year. We estimate
the impact of each school separately within the pool of lottery applicants. We stack test scores and
cluster standard errors at the student level.
    Our lottery sample is drawn from each lottery that took place between 2003 and 2009 at our


                                                   12
sample schools. We make three sample restrictions. First, applicants with a sibling already at
a school are excluded, as they are automatically admitted. Second, applicants are dropped who,
because of within-district preference introduced in 2008, had either no chance of winning the lottery
or were automatically granted admission. Finally, we include only the first application of students
who apply to a school more than once. These restrictions leave us with a sample of 9,850 lottery
students in 58 lotteries at 22 schools. Appendix C describes the lottery data from each school in
more detail.
   Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 present summary statistics for lottery applicants in our lottery
sample. As a measure of lottery quality, Table 3 also tests for balance on baseline characteristics.
Specifically, we regress an indicator for winning the lottery on pretreatment characteristics and
lottery fixed effects. Elementary lottery winners are 0.03 percentage points less likely to be eligible
for free and reduced price lunch compared to Elementary lottery losers. Middle school lottery
winners are 0.01 percentage points less likely to be English language learners. There are no other
significant differences between lottery winners and lottery losers. This suggests that the lottery is
balanced and that selection bias should not unduly affect our lottery estimates.
   An important caveat to our lottery analysis is that lottery admissions records are only available
for 22 of our 35 schools. To get an estimate of school effectiveness for schools in our sample that
do not have valid lottery data or are not oversubscribed, our second empirical strategy computes
observational estimates. Following Angrist et. al (2011), we use a combination of matching and
regression estimators to control for observed differences between students attending different types of
schools. First, we match students attending sample charters to a control sample of traditional public
school students using the school a student is originally zoned to, cohort, sex, race, limited English
proficiency status, and free and reduced price lunch eligibility. Charter students are included in the
observational estimates if they are matched to at least one regular public school student. Traditional
school students are included if they are matched to at least one charter student. This procedure
yields matches for 94.3 percent of students in charter schools in our sample.
   Within the group of matched charter and traditional public school students, we estimate equation
(1) controlling for baseline test scores and fixed effects for the cells constructed in the matching
procedure. Specifically, the observational estimates were constructed by fitting:


                   achievementigtc = σt + τg + ιc + ϕXi + θs Charterigts + ζigts                   (3)




                                                  13
where σt and τg and year and grade of test effects respectively, Xi is a vector of demographic
controls including baseline test scores and years enrolled in charters not in our sample, ιc are match
cell fixed effects, and Charterigts is a vector of the number of years spent in each charter in our
sample. The observational estimates therefore compare demographically similar students zoned to
the same school and in the same age cohort, who spend different amounts of time in charter schools.
We stack student observations for all schools in our sample, and cluster standard errors at the
student level.
   Table 4 reports a series of results on the impact of attending charter schools on student achieve-
ment in our sample. We report reduced-form (column 1), first stage (column 2), and instrumental
variable estimates from our lottery sample (column 3), a non-experimental estimate of our lottery
sample (column 4), and a non-experimental estimate that includes schools without oversubscribed
lotteries (column 5). We estimate effects for elementary and middle schools separately. All regres-
sions control for grade and year effects, gender, race, free lunch status, lottery cohort, and previous
test scores in the same subject.
   Elementary school lottery winners outscore lottery losers by 0.119σ (0.029) in math and 0.056σ
(0.027) in ELA. Middle school lottery winners outscore lottery losers by 0.064σ (0.015) in math and
0.023σ (0.014) in ELA. The lottery first stage coefficient is 0.755 (0.054) for elementary school, and
0.403 (0.024) for middle school. In other words, by the time they were tested, elementary school
lottery winners had spent an average of 0.755 more years at a charter school than lottery losers.
This first stage is similar to lottery winners at other urban charter schools (Abdulkadiroglu et al.
2011, Angrist et al. 2010). The two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimate, which captures the causal
effect of attending a charter school for one year, is 0.158σ (0.038) in math and 0.074σ (0.036) in
ELA for elementary schools, and 0.159σ (0.037) in math and 0.057σ (0.034) in ELA for middle
schools. The magnitude of these results is consistent with other work on “No Excuses” charter
schools (Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2011, Angrist et al. 2010, Dobbie and Fryer 2011), but larger than
the average charter in New York (Hoxby and Muraka 2009). The larger estimates could be due to
an increase in school effectiveness since the Hoxby and Muraka study, or positive selection into our
sample.
   Column 4 of Table 4 presents observational results for our lottery charter schools. Our obser-
vational estimates imply that elementary charter students score 0.054σ (0.004) higher in math for
each year they attend a charter school, and 0.050σ (0.003) in ELA. Middle school charter students
gain 0.051σ (0.004) in math and 0.013σ (0.004) in ELA for each year they attend a charter. The


                                                  14
observational are qualitatively similar to the lottery estimates, though smaller in magnitude. This
suggests that while matching and regression control for some of the selection into charter schools,
observational estimates are still downwards biased relative to the true impact of charter schools.
Observational estimates for the full sample of charters are somewhat lower compared to the lottery
sample.
    Figure 1 plots lottery and observational estimates for the 22 schools in our lottery sample. Re-
gressing each school’s lottery estimate on that school’s observational estimate results in a coefficient
of 0.768 (0.428) for math and 0.526 (0.597) for ELA, suggesting that our observational estimates
at least partially control for selection bias. With that said, Figure 1 also suggests that our ob-
servational estimates are biased downwards and have less variance than the corresponding lottery
estimates. For instance, the lottery estimates for math have a standard deviation of 0.251, while
the observational estimates have a standard deviation of 0.142. Estimates for ELA reveal a similar
pattern.


5     Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools

5.1    Main Results

In this section, we present a series of partial correlations between strategies and policies that describe
the inner workings of schools and each school’s effectiveness at increasing student test scores. The
specifications estimated are of the form:


                                  θs = constant + ϕM Ss + ϑPs + ξs                                    (4)


where θs is an estimate of the effect of charter school s, M Ss is an indicator for being a middle
school, and Ps is a vector of school policies and school characteristics measured in our survey and
video observations. The estimates of equation (4) are weighted by the inverse of the standard error
of the estimate treatment effect θs . Standard errors are clustered at the school level to account
for correlation between elementary and middle school campuses. Unless otherwise noted, we use
observational estimates of θs , which increases our sample size from 22 to 35. Our main results are
qualitatively unchanged using lottery estimates, though the estimates are less precise (see Appendix
Tables 2 through 5).
    The parameter of interest is ϑ, which measures the partial correlation of a given school char-



                                                   15
acteristic on effectiveness. Recall, our estimates are not likely to be causal in nature. Unobserved
factors such as principal ability or parental involvement could drive the correlation between our
measures and school effectiveness.
    As mentioned in Section 2, there is a voluminous literature relating school inputs to average test
scores. The typical dataset includes variables such as class size, per pupil expenditure, and teacher
credentials. With the notable exception of a number of quasi-experimental studies finding a positive
impact of class size on test scores, previous research has found little evidence linking these inputs
to achievement (see reviews in Hanushek 1997 and Krueger 2003).
    Table 5 presents results using several of the traditionally collected school inputs – class size, per
pupil expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no certification, and the fraction of teachers with
a masters degree – as explanatory variables for school effectiveness. For each measure we create
an indicator variable equal to one if a school is above the median in that measure. Consistent
with Hanushek (1997), we find that these measures are either statistically unrelated to school
effectiveness or are significant in an unexpected direction. For instance, schools where at least 89
percent of teachers are certified have annual math gains that are 0.043σ (0.022) lower. Schools
where at least eleven percent of teachers have a masters degree have annual ELA gains that are
0.034σ (0.019) lower. An index of the four dichotomous measures explains 13.6 to 20.4 percent of
the variance in charter school effectiveness but in the unexpected direction.4
    In stark contrast, Table 6 demonstrates that the five policies suggested most often by the qual-
itative literature on successful schools (Edmunds 1979, 1982) – teacher feedback, the use of data to
guide instruction, tutoring, instructional time, and a culture of high expectations – explain around
50 percent of the variance in charter school outcomes. Schools that give formal or informal feedback
ten or more times per semester have annual math gains that are 0.075σ (0.021) higher and annual
ELA gains that are 0.054σ (0.017) higher than other schools. Schools that give five or more interim
assessments during the school year and that have four or more differentiation strategies have annual
math and ELA gains that are 0.078σ (0.036) and 0.045σ (0.029) higher, respectively. Schools that
tutor students at least four days a week in groups of six or fewer have 0.069σ (0.033) higher math
scores and 0.078σ (0.025) higher ELA scores. Schools that add 25 percent or more instructional time

   4
      One concern is that charter schools do not use resource-based inputs at the same rate as traditional public
schools. This does not appear to be the case, though its possible. According to the NYCDOE, for example, charter
elementary schools have class sizes that range from 18 to 26 students per class and charter middle schools have class
sizes ranging from 22 to 29 students. In 2010 - 2011, the average class size in a traditional elementary school in NYC
was 23.7 students and the average class size in a traditional middle school was 26.6 to 27.1 students, depending on
the subject.


                                                         16
compared to traditional public schools have annual gains that are 0.084σ (0.022) higher in math
and 0.043σ (0.024) higher in ELA. Whether or not a school prioritizes high academic and behavioral
expectations for all students is associated with math gains that are 0.066σ (0.028) higher than other
schools and ELA gains that are 0.049σ (0.019) higher per year. A one standard deviation increase
in an index of all five dichotomous variables is associated with a 0.056σ (0.011) increase in annual
math gains and a 0.039σ (0.010) increase in annual ELA gains.5
    Table 7 estimates the partial correlation of each of the five policies on school effectiveness, con-
trolling for the other four. Surprisingly, four out of the five policy measures used in our index
continue to be statistically significant, suggesting that each policy conveys some relevant informa-
tion. Controlling for other school policies, schools that give formal or informal feedback ten or more
times per semester have annual math gains that are 0.038σ (0.022) higher and annual ELA gains
that are 0.028σ (0.015) higher than other schools. Schools that give five or more interim assessments
during the school year and that have four or more differentiation strategies have annual math and
ELA gains that are 0.051σ (0.022) higher. The lack of significance in ELA is intuitive, as it is less
clear how to use data to inform reading instruction relative to math. Schools that add 25 percent
or more instructional time compared to traditional public schools have annual gains that are 0.059σ
(0.015) higher in math, though not in ELA. Controlling for other policies, schools that prioritize
high-dosage tutoring have annual math gains that are 0.044σ (0.026) higher than other schools and
ELA gains that are 0.064σ (0.021) higher.


5.2     Robustness Checks

In this subsection, we explore the robustness of our results by accounting for a more diverse set of
controls and performing an out of sample test of our main index.

                    A. Three Alternative Models of School Effectiveness

    Our first robustness test attempts to account for three alternative models of effective schooling
put forth in the literature. The first model we test emphasizes the importance of taking into account
the social and emotional needs of the “whole child” through wrap-around services. Advocates of
    5
      While the index variable is associated with large and statistically significant gains in the lottery sample, the
measure only explains 18.4 percent of the variance in math effectiveness and 8.8 percent of the variation in ELA
effectiveness in the lottery sample. The relatively low R2 is most likely due to the imprecision of the lottery estimates
of school effectiveness; only 7 of the 22 schools have statistically significant results in either subject when using our
lottery estimation strategy. The reduction in sample size from 35 to 22 schools itself does not appear important,
however. The index measure explains over 50 percent of the variation in both math and ELA effectiveness among
the 22 lottery schools when using observational measures of effectiveness.


                                                           17
this approach argue that teachers and school administrators are dealing with issues that originate
outside the classroom, citing research that shows racial and socioeconomic achievement gaps are
formed before children ever enter school (Fryer and Levitt 2004, 2006) and that one-third to one-half
of the gap can be explained by family-environment indicators (Phillips et al. 1998, Fryer and Levitt
2004). In this scenario, combating poverty and having wrap-around services that address some of
the social and emotional needs of students may lead to more focused instruction in school. In a
meta-analysis, Payton et al. (2008) estimate that school-wide social-emotional learning programs
increase achievement by 0.28σ, that programs that target at-risk individuals increase achievement
by 0.43σ, and that after school programs raise achievement by 0.08σ.
   To partially test this theory, we create a set of indicator variables equal to one if a school has a
school social worker, provides health services, provides any wrap-around services, and if they rank
“a comprehensive approach to the social and emotional needs of the whole child,” as one of their
top two school priorities. Our index of wrap-around services is the standardized sum of these four
dichotomous variables. The first two columns in panels A and B of Table 8 present the correlation
between wrap-around services and school effectiveness with and without controlling for our main
index.
   A one standard deviation increase in wrap-around services is associated with a 0.025σ (0.014)
decrease in annual math gains and a statistically insignificant 0.018σ (0.012) decrease in annual
ELA gains. Consistent with the findings in Dobbie and Fryer (2011), there is not a statistically
significant relationship between providing a comprehensive approach to the “whole child” through
wrap-around services that we are able to measure and school effectiveness after controlling for our
main index. Perhaps more importantly, the coefficient on our main index after controlling for
wrap-around service provision is statistically indistinguishable from the specification without these
controls. As discussed in the Introduction, however, our data provide only a partial test of the
“whole child” model of schooling.
   The second model we account for emphasizes the selection and retention of talented teachers.
Teacher quality is believed to be one of the most important inputs into the educational production
function. A one standard deviation increase in teacher quality raises math achievement by 0.15σ
to 0.24σ per year and reading achievement by 0.15σ to 0.20σ per year (Rockoff 2004, Rivkin, Kain,
and Hanushek 2005, Aaronson et al. 2007, Kane and Staiger 2008). The difficulty, however, is
extremely difficult to identify ex ante the most productive teachers (see reviews in Hanushek 1986,
1997). As a result, many have argued that in addition to selecting better teachers, schools must


                                                 18
remove ineffective teachers, and introduce pay-for-performance schemes in order to retain more
effective teachers. For example, Hanushek (2009) argues that eliminating the worst six to ten
percent of teachers would increase student achievement by about 0.5σ.
    To test this hypothesis, we create a set of indicator variables equal to one if a school has an
above median number of requirements when hiring a new teacher, if the school has above median
involuntary turnover, if the school has an above median maximum salary, and if the school offers
performance pay to teachers. Our index of teacher selection, retention, and pay, is the standardized
sum of these four dichotomous variables.
    The second two columns in panels A and B of Table 8 present results for these teacher selection
strategies. Interestingly, higher values of our teacher index are associated with school effectiveness
in math, but not ELA.6 The policy index suggested by the qualitative case-study literature is
statistically identical whether or not we control for the index of teacher selection, retention, and
pay.
    The third model we test is whether the adherence to a “No Excuses” philosophy drives school
success. As discussed by Carter (2000), Thernstrom and Thernstrom (2004), Whitman (2008), and
others, “No Excuses” schools emphasize strict discipline, extended time in school, and an intensive
focus on basic reading and math skills. Angrist et. al (2011) argue that adherence to the “No
Excuses” philosophy explains the difference between the effectiveness of urban and non-urban charter
schools in Massachusetts.
    Similar to Angrist et al (2011), we create an indicator variable for whether a school is considered
a follower of the “No Excuses” model of schooling. Consistent with previous research, Columns 5
and 13 of Table 8 demonstrate a strong correlation between being identified as a “No Excuses” school
and school effectiveness (Monroe 1999, Carter 2000, Thernstrom and Thernstrom 2004, Angrist et
al. 2011). Students at “No Excuses” schools gain 0.065σ (0.029) more in math than students at
other charter schools and a statistically insignificant 0.034σ (0.020) more in ELA. Interestingly,
however, after controlling for the the five factors in our main index, “No Excuses” schools do no
better or worse than other charter schools.
    The fact that the “No Excuses” designation becomes statistically insignificant when one accounts
for five policies is striking and highly suggestive that their is nothing mystical about “No Excuses”
schools. More time, more effective teachers, the use of data and high-dosage tutoring, and high


   6
    Appendix Table 4 demonstrates some fragility in these results. The index of teacher selection, retention, and
pay has the opposite sign and is marginally significant in our lottery sample.


                                                       19
expectations seem to be more important predictors of school effectiveness, regardless of a school’s
overarching philosophy (e.g. “No Excuses,” Montessori, or arts infused).

                                  B. Accounting for More Controls

    Our second robustness check simply accounts for every other measure of school inputs collected
during the study that does not enter the main index. This control index is created by standardizing
the sum of six indexes – human capital policies, data policies, parent engagement strategies, in-
structional time differences, culture and expectations, and curricular rigor – to have a mean of zero
and a standard deviation of one. In total, the index captures variation in 37 measures, virtually all
of the data we collected in the principal survey.
    The final two columns of Table 8 present results controlling for the aggregate index of 37 vari-
ables. A one standard deviation increase in this aggregate index is associated with a 0.024σ (0.014)
increase in annual math gains, and a statistically insignificant 0.011σ (0.007) increase in annual
ELA gains. However, the control index is statistically indistinguishable from zero after controlling
our main index. The coefficient on the main index is again statistically indistinguishable from the
specification with no controls, which suggests the other variables collected do not convey any more
statistically relevant information in explaining charter school success.

                                        C. An Out of Sample Test

    Our final robustness check explores the association between the school inputs in our main index
and school effectiveness in a set of schools that did not participate in our survey. To do this, we col-
lected similar (though more coarse) administrative data on human capital, data driven instruction,
instructional time, and culture for every possible charter school in New York City. Despite an ex-
haustive search, we could not find any administrative data on whether or how these schools tutored
students. Thus, our index for this out of sample test will contain four out of the five variables.
    Our data is drawn primarily from annual site visit reports provided by each school’s chartering
organization. New York City charter schools are either authorized by the New York City Depart-
ment of Education (NYCDOE), the State University of New York (SUNY), or the New York State
Department of Education (NYSDOE). The site visits are meant to “describe what the reviewers
saw at the school - what life is like there” (NYCDOE 2011). The report identifies some of the
strengths in a school, as well as areas where improvement is needed.7 Thirty-one NYCDOE and
   7
     Site visit reports chartered by the NYCDOE include quantitative rankings, from which we draw our measures.
SUNY site visit reports are qualitative in nature. In the latter case, we code each variable directly from the text of
the site visit report.


                                                         20
twenty-five SUNY schools have both site visit reports and students in grades 3 - 8. For this set
of schools, we complement the site visit data with data from New York State Accountability and
Overview Reports, the Charter School Center, and each school’s website. More information on each
data source and how we construct our variables to most closely match the variables collected in our
survey is available in Online Appendix A.
    Table 9 presents results using all eligible charter schools chartered with site visit data. The
results of our out of sample test are similar to, though less precise than, the survey results. A
one standard deviation increase in the case-study index is associated with a 0.025σ (0.010) increase
in math scores and a 0.011σ (0.006) increase in ELA scores. However, the index explains less
than seven percent of the variation in math and ELA, likely reflecting measurement error in the
data. Instructional time and high academic and behavioral expectations are significantly related to
achievement. The point estimates on teacher observations and data driven instruction are positive
but not statistically significant.


6    Conclusion

Charter schools were created to (1) serve as an escape hatch for students in failing schools and (2)
use their relative freedom to incubate best practices to be infused into traditional public schools.
Consistent with the second mission, charter schools employ a wide variety of educational strategies
and operations, providing dramatic variability in school inputs. Taking advantage of this fact, we
collect unparalleled data on the inner-workings of 35 charter schools in New York City to understand
what inputs are most correlated with school effectiveness. Our data include a wealth of information
collected from each school through principal, teacher, and student surveys, sample teacher evaluation
forms, lesson plans, homework, and video observations.
    We show that input measures associated with a traditional resource-based model of education
– class size, per pupil expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no teaching certification, and the
fraction of teachers with an advanced degree – are not positively correlated with school effectiveness.
In stark contrast, an index of five policies suggested by forty years of qualitative research – frequent
teacher feedback, data driven instruction, high-dosage tutoring, increased instructional time, and a
relentless focus on academic achievement – explains almost half of the variation in school effective-
ness. Moreover, we show that these variables continue to be statistically important after accounting
for alternative models of schooling, and a host of other explanatory variables, and are predictive in



                                                  21
a different sample of schools.
   While there are important caveats to the conclusion that these five policies can explain significant
variation in school effectiveness, our results suggest a model of schooling that may have general
application. The key next step is to inject these strategies into traditional public schools and assess
whether they have a causal effect on student achievement.




                                                  22
References

 [1] Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2007. “Teachers and Student Achievement
        in the Chicago Public High Schools," Journal of Labor Economics, 25: 95-135.

 [2] Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas Kane, and Parag Pathak.
        2011. “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters
        and Pilots.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 699-748.

 [3] Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn. 1995. “The Effects of School and Family Character-
        istics on the Return to Education.” NBER Working Paper No. 5072.

 [4] Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn. 1996a. “Using Siblings to Estimate the Effect of
        School Quality on Wages.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4): 665-671.

 [5] Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn. 1996b. “The Effects of Family Characteristics on the
        Return to Schooling.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4): 692-704.

 [6] Angrist, Joshua, Susan Dynarski, Thomas Kane, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2010.
        “Who Benefits from KIPP?” NBER Working Paper No. 15740.

 [7] Angrist, Joshua, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2011. “Explaining Charter School
        Effectiveness.” NBER Working Paper No. 17332.

 [8] Arum, Richard. 1996. “Do Private Schools Forces Public Schools to Compete?” American
        Sociological Review, 61(1): 29-46.

 [9] Aud, S., Hussar, W., Kena, G., Bianco, K., Frohlich, L., Kemp, J., Tahan, K. 2011. The
        Condition of Education 2011 (NCES 2011-033). U.S. Department of Education, National
        Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

[10] Belfield, Clive R., and Henry M. Levin. 2002. “The Effects of Competition between Schools on
        Educational Outcomes: A Review for the United States Review of Educational Research.”
        Review of Educational Research, 72(2): 279-341.

[11] Borland, Melvin V., and Roy M. Howsen. 1992. “Student Academic Achievement and the Degree
        of Market Concentration in Education.” Economics of Education Review, 11(1): 31-39.

[12] Brookover, Wilbur, and Lawrence Lezotte. 1977. “Changes in School Characteristics Coinci-
        dent with Changes in Student Achievement.” Michigan State University, College of Urban
        Development.


                                               23
[13] Budde, Ray. 1988. “Education by Charter: Restructuring School Districts. Key to Long-Term
        Continuing Improvement in American Education,” Regional Laboratory for Educational
        Improvement of the Northeast & Islands.

[14] Card, David, Martin D. Dooley, and A. Abigail Payne. 2010. “School Competition and Efficiency
        with Publicly Funded Catholic Schools.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
        2(4): 150-76.

[15] Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. “Does School Quality Matter: Returns to Educa-
        tion and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 100(1): 1-40.

[16] Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992b. “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
        A Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 151-200.

[17] Carnoy Martin, Frank Adamson, Amita Chudgar, Thomas F. Luschei, and John F. Witte. 2007.
        Vouchers and Public School Performance. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.

[18] Carter, Samuel C. 2000. “No Excuses: Lessons from 21 High-Performing, High-Poverty Schools.”
        Heritage Foundation.

[19] Chakrabarti, Rajashri. 2008. “Can Increasing Private School Participation and Monetary Loss
        in a Voucher Program Affect Public School Performance? Evidence from Milwaukee.” Jour-
        nal of Public Economics, 92(5-6):1371-1393.

[20] Coleman, James, Ernest Campbell, Carol Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander Mood, Fred-
        eric Weinfeld, and Robert York. 1966. “Equality of Educational Opportunity.” Washington,
        DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

[21] Couch, Jim F., William F. Shughart, and Al L. Williams. 1993. “Private School Enrollment
        and Public School Performance.” Public Choice, 76(4): 301-312.

[22] Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2005. “The Impact of School Choice
        on Student Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public
        Economics, 89: 729-760

[23] Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Effect of School Choice on
        Participants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1191-1230.

[24] Curto, Vilsa, and Roland G. Fryer. 2011. “Estimating the Returns to Urban Boarding Schools:
        Evidence from SEED.” NBER Working Paper No. 16746.

                                               24
[25] Deming, David J. Forthcoming. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[26] Deming, David J., Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, Douglas O. Staiger. 2011. “School
        Choice, School Quality and Academic Achievement.” NBER Working Paper No. 17438.

[27] Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer. 2011. “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
        Achievement among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone.” American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 158-187.

[28] Edmonds, Ronald. 1979. “Effective Schools for the Urban Poor.” Educational Leadership, 37(1):
        15-24.

[29] Edmonds, Ronald. 1982. “Programs of School Improvement: An Overview.” Educational Lead-
        ership, 40(3): 4-11.

[30] Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romero. 1999. “Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
        Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects.” American Economic Review, 88(1): 33-62.

[31] Fleischman, H.L., Hopstock, P.J., Pelczar, M.P., and Shelley, B.E. 2010. “Highlights From
        PISA 2009: Performance of U.S. 15-Year-Old Students in Reading, Mathematics, and Sci-
        ence Literacy in an International Context (NCES 2011-004).” U.S. Department of Educa-
        tion, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
        Office.

[32] Fryer, Roland and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in
        the First Two Years of School.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 447-464.

[33] Fryer, Roland and Steven D. Levitt. 2006. “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third
        Grade.” American Law and Economics Review, 8(2): 249-281.

[34] Fryer, Roland. 2011. “Creating “No Excuses” (Traditional) Public Schools: Preliminary Evi-
        dence from an Experiment in Houston.” NBER Working Paper No. 17494.

[35] Geller, Christopher R., David L. Sjoquist, and Mary Beth Walker. 2006. “The Effect of Private
        School Competition on Public School Performance in Georgia.” Public Finance Review,
        34(1): 4-32.

[36] Gleason, Philip, Melissa Clark, Christina Clark Tuttle, Emily Dwoyer, and Marsha Silver-
        berg. 2010. “The Evaluation of Charter School Impacts.” National Center for Education
        Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
        Education.

                                               25
[37] Hanushek, Eric, Steven G. Rivkin, Lori L. Taylor. 1996. “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects
        of School Resources.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4): 611-627.

[38] Hanushek, Eric A. 1986. “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
        Schools.” Journal of Economic Literature, 24(3): 1141-1177.

[39] Hanushek, Eric. 1997. “Assessing the Effects of School Resources on Student Performance: An
        Update.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19(2): 141-164.

[40] Hanushek, Eric. 2009. “Teacher Deselection.” In Creating a New Teaching Profession, edited
        by Dan Goldhaber and Jane Hannaway (eds.), 165-180. Washington, DC: Urban Institute
        Press.

[41] Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. “Gender and Performance:
        Evidence from School Assignment by Randomized Lottery.” American Economic Review
        Papers and Proceedings, 96(2): 232-236.

[42] Heckman, James S., Anne Layne-Farrar, and Petra Todd. 1996. “Does Measured School Quality
        Really Matter? An Examination of the Earnings-Quality Relationship.” In Does money
        matter? The Effect of School Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success, edited
        by Gary Burtless, 192-289. Washington, DC: Brookings.

[43] Howell, William G., and Paul E. Peterson. 2002. The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban
        Schools. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

[44] Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sonali Murarka. 2009. “Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls
        and How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. 14852.

[45] Hoxby, Caroline M. 1994. “Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?” NBER
        Working Paper No. 4978.

[46] Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
        Taxpayers?” American Economic Review, 90(5): 1209-1238.

[47] Hoxby, Caroline M. 2003. “School Choice and School Productivity: Could School Choice be
        a Tide that Lifts All Boats?” In The Economics of School Choice, ed. Caroline M Hoxby,
        287-341. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

[48] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Miguel Urquiola. 2006. “The Effects of Generalized School Choice on
        Achievement and Stratification: Evidence from Chile’s Voucher Program.” Journal of Public
        Economics, 90(8-9): 1477-1503.

                                                  26
[49] Jepsen, Christopher. 2002. “The Role of Aggregation in Estimating the Effects of Private School
        Competition on Student Achievement.” Journal of Urban Economics, 52(3): 477-500.

[50] Jepsen, Christopher. 2003. “The Effectiveness of Catholic Primary Schooling.” Journal of Hu-
        man Resources, 38(4): 928-941.

[51] Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
        Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper No. 14607.

[52] Krueger Alan B. 2003. “Economic Considerations and Class Size.” Economic Journal, 113(485):
        34-63.

[53] Krueger Alan B., and Pei Zhu. 2004. “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher
        Experiment.” American Behavioral Scientist, 47(5): 658-698.

[54] Ladd, Helen F. 2002. “School Vouchers: A Critical View.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
        16(4): 3-24.

[55] Madden, J. V, D. Lawson, and D. Sweet. 1976. “School Effectiveness Study.” Sacramento, CA:
        State of California Department of Education.

[56] Monroe, Lorraine. 1999. Nothing’s impossible: Leadership lessons from inside and outside the
        classroom. New York: Times Books.

[57] Nechyba, Thomas. 2000. “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers.” American Eco-
        nomic Review, 90(1): 130-146.

[58] Newmark, Craig M. 1995. “Another Look at Whether Private Schools Influence Public School
        Quality.” Public Choice, 82(3-4): 365-373.

[59] Payton, John, Roger P. Weissberg, Joseph A. Durlak, Allison B. Dymnicki, Rebecca D. Taylor,
        Kriston B. Schellinger, and Molly Pachan. 2008. The positive impact of social and emotional
        learning for kindergarten to eighth-grade students: Findings from three scientific reviews.
        Chicago: Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning.

[60] Peterson, Paul E. 2002. “Victory for Vouchers?” Commentary, 114 (2): 46-51.

[61] Phillips, Meredith, James Crouse, and John Ralph. 1998. “Does the Black-White Test Score Gap
        Widen after Children Enter School?” In The Black-White Test Score Gap. eds. Christopher
        Jencks and Meredith Phillips, 229âĂŞ272. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institute.

[62] Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, schools, and academic
        achievement.” Econometrica 73(2): 417-458.

                                                27
[63] Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
       from Panel Data.” American Economic Review 94(2): 247-252.

[64] Rockoff, Jonah E., Brian A. Jacob, Thomas J. Kane, Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Can You
       Recognize an Effective Teacher When You Recruit One?” NBER Working Paper No. 14485.

[65] Rothstein, Jesse. 2006a. “Good Principals or Good Peers: Parental Valuation of School Char-
       acteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdic-
       tions.” American Economic Review, 96(4): 1333-1350.

[66] Rothstein, Jesse. 2006b. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Tax-
       payers? A Comment on Hoxby (2000).” American Economic Review , 97(5): 2026-2037.

[67] Rouse Cecilia E. 1998. “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of
       the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 553-
       602.

[68] Sander, William. 1999. “Private Schools and Public School Achievement.” Journal of Human
       Resources, 34(4): 697-709.

[69] State of New York, Office of Education Performance Review. 1974. “School Factors and Influ-
       encing Reading Achievement: A Case Study of Two Inner City Schools.”

[70] Thernstrom, Abigail, and Stephan Thernstrom. 2004. “No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in
       Learning.” Simon & Schuster.

[71] Whitman, David. 2008. “Sweating the Small Stuff: Inner-City Schools and the New Paternal-
       ism.” Thomas B. Fordham Institute.

[72] Winters, Marcus. Forthcoming. “Measuring the Effect of Charter Schools on Public School
       Student Achievement in an Urban Environment: Evidence from New York City.” Economics
       of Education Review.

[73] Wolf, Patrick, Babette Gutmann, Michael Puma, Brian Kisida, Lou Rizzo, Nada Eissa,
       Matthew Carr,Marsha Silverberg. 2010. “Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship
       Program.” NCEE 2010-4018. U.S. Department of Education.




                                              28
                                            Table 1
                                     School Participation
                                       All    Eligible Survey        Lottery
                                     Charters Sample Sample          Sample
                                       (1)      (2)      (3)           (4)
                      Elementary       68        48      22            13
                      Middle           38        37      13             9

Notes: This table reports the number of elementary and middle charter schools in New York City
and their participation in the observational and lottery studies. Elementary schools include all
schools that have their main admissions lottery in grades PK - 4. Middle schools include all schools
that have their main admissions lottery in grades 5 - 8. Eligible charters are defined as schools that
serve a general student population with at least one tested grade in 2009 - 2010.




                                                29
                                  Table 2
                    Characteristics of Charter Schools
                                     Elementary Schools        Middle Schools
                                      Above    Below          Above     Below
Human Capital                        Median    Median         Median Median
  Frequent Teacher Feedback             0.83    0.60            0.83     0.14
  Teacher Formal Feedback               3.52     2.35           3.33     1.50
  Teacher Informal Feedback            12.89    8.96           10.08     5.57
  Non-Negotiables When Hiring           1.55    1.20            1.17     1.20
  Teacher Tenure                       3.45     3.89            3.50     4.21
  Teachers Leaving Involuntarily        0.09    0.07            0.07     0.14
  Total Teacher Hours                  60.25    52.50          60.00    49.71
  Teacher Non-Instructional Hours       2.25    2.00            5.33     2.50
  Teacher Responsibilities             2.17     2.60           3.33      2.00
  Max Teacher Pay                       7.89    8.13            8.39     8.68

Data Driven Instruction
  Data Driven Instruction                     0.86    0.50     1.00     0.33
  Uses Interim Assessments                    1.00    0.90     0.83     1.00
  Number of Interim Assessments               3.92    2.42     4.00     2.04
  Number of Differentiation Strategies        4.62    3.50     4.67     4.00
  Number of Teacher Reports                   4.27    3.50     3.00     2.86
  Data Plan in Place                          0.50    0.38     0.33     0.33
  Tracking Using Data                         0.45    0.20     0.67     0.57

Parent Engagement
  Academic Feedback                       6.14       5.58     13.92    6.79
  Behavior Feedback                       20.67      10.60    23.00    15.25
  Regular Feedback                         9.32       6.34    16.00    1.46

Tutoring
  High-Dosage Tutoring                        0.33    0.10     0.17     0.00
  Any Tutoring                                0.91    0.89     1.00     0.57
  Small Group Tutoring                        0.60    0.50     0.17     0.25
  Frequent Tutoring                           0.60    0.12     0.67     0.25

Instructional Time
   +25% Increase in Time                    0.67       0.00    0.67      0.57
   Instructional Hours                     8.07       7.36     8.17      7.87
   Instructional Days                     190.67     183.80   191.00   187.14
   Daily Time on Math                      68.30      77.11    84.33    77.40
   Daily Time on ELA                      137.86     122.86   113.00    91.90

Culture and Expectations
   High Expectations                          0.58    0.10     0.50     0.43
   School-wide Discipline                     0.25    0.10     0.50     0.29
Schools                                        12      10       6         7


                                         30
                                          Table 2
                     Characteristics of Charter Schools Continued
                                              Elementary Schools  Middle Schools
                                              Above     Below    Above     Below
     Traditional Inputs                       Median    Median   Median Median
       Small Classes                           0.17      0.40     0.25      1.00
       High Expenditure                        0.44      0.33     0.67      0.60
       High Teachers with MA                   0.33      0.50     0.50      0.83
       Low Teachers without Certification      0.50      0.50     0.00      0.67

     Lesson Plans
        Blooms Taxonomy Score                       0.11    0.25       0.00      0.17
        Objective Standard                          0.67    0.88       0.75      1.00
        Number of Differentiation Strategies        0.56    0.75       0.50      0.67
        Number of Checks For Understanding          0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00
        Thoroughness Index                          4.67    5.12       5.50      6.83

     Other Controls
        Wrap-around Service Index                   -0.32   0.39       -0.05    0.04
        Teacher Selection Index                      0.09   -0.37       0.55    -0.11
        No Excuses                                   0.60    0.25       0.80    0.29
     Schools                                          12      10         6        7

Notes: This table reports results from a survey of New York City charter schools with entry in
elementary school (PK - 4th) or middle school (5th - 8th) grades. The survey sample excludes
schools without a tested grade in 2009 - 2010.




                                               31
                                           Table 3
                                 Student Summary Statistics
                                  Eligible  Survey  Lottery      Lottery Applicants
                         NYC      Charters Charters Charters Winners Losers Difference

                                    Panel A. Elementary    Schools (3rd - 5th Grades)
   Male                   0.51      0.49      0.49         0.52       0.52      0.55       0.00
   White                  0.15      0.03      0.02         0.00       0.01      0.01      −0.00
   Black                  0.33      0.67      0.64         0.71       0.70      0.65       0.01
   Hispanic               0.39      0.28      0.31         0.27       0.27      0.32      −0.02
   Asian                  0.13      0.02      0.02         0.00       0.01      0.01      −0.00
   Free Lunch             0.84      0.82      0.84         0.84       0.86      0.89      −0.04∗∗∗
   Special Education      0.09      0.03      0.05         0.03       0.05      0.07      −0.02∗∗
   LEP                    0.11      0.04      0.04         0.03       0.04      0.07      −0.01

  Years in Charter       0.06       2.19        1.91       2.49        1.83      0.91       0.68∗∗∗
Observations            678708     18872        8109       1986        1769      3448

                                        Panel B. Middle Schools (5th - 8th Grades)
   Male                   0.51       0.49       0.50       0.48       0.48     0.51       −0.01
   White                  0.14       0.03       0.03       0.02       0.03     0.02        0.00
   Black                  0.34       0.64       0.62       0.66       0.62     0.63        0.02
   Hispanic               0.39      0.30        0.33       0.31       0.33     0.33       −0.02
   Asian                  0.13       0.02       0.02       0.01       0.01     0.02       −0.01
   Free Lunch             0.84      0.83        0.84      0.85        0.87     0.88       −0.00
   Special Education      0.09      0.04        0.06      0.07        0.09     0.10        0.01
   LEP                    0.09      0.04        0.04       0.05       0.05     0.06       −0.01∗
   Baseline Math          0.02      -0.06      -0.18      -0.29      -0.25    -0.21       −0.04
   Baseline ELA           0.01      -0.05      -0.13      -0.19      -0.15    -0.14        0.01

  Years in Charter       0.05       2.38        2.16       1.84        1.19      0.60       0.29∗∗∗
Observations            778929     17263        6491       1545        1608      3025

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the sample of public school students, the sample
of students in eligible charter schools, the sample of students in charter schools in the observational
study, and the sample of students in the lottery study. The sample is restricted to students in
grades 3 - 8 between 2003 - 2004 and 2009 - 2010 with at least one follow up test score. The final
column reports coefficients from regressions of an indicator variable equal to one if the student won
an admissions lottery on the variable indicated in each row and lottery risk sets. *** = significant
at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                32
                                          Table 4
               The Effect of Attending a Charter School on Test               Scores
                            Reduced       First                Lottery          Survey
                               Form       Stage      2SLS       OLS              OLS
             Level Subject      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)              (5)
                   Math       0.119 ∗∗∗  0.755 ∗∗∗  0.158 ∗∗∗  0.054∗∗∗         0.041∗∗∗
                             (0.029)    (0.054)    (0.038)    (0.004)          (0.003)
                               9706       9706       9706      666928           666928
                   ELA        0.056 ∗∗   0.755 ∗∗∗  0.074 ∗∗   0.050∗∗∗         0.036∗∗∗
                             (0.027)    (0.054)    (0.036)    (0.003)          (0.003)
                               9706       9706       9706      666928           666928
                   Math       0.064 ∗∗∗  0.403 ∗∗∗  0.159 ∗∗∗  0.051∗∗∗         0.029∗∗∗
                             (0.015)    (0.024)    (0.037)    (0.004)          (0.002)
                              11712      11712      11712     1061829          1061829
                   ELA        0.023∗     0.404∗∗∗ 0.057∗       0.013∗∗∗         0.015∗∗∗
                             (0.014)    (0.024)    (0.034)    (0.004)          (0.002)
                              11712      11712      11712     1061829          1061829

Notes: This table reports reduced form, first stage, and two-stage least squares results for the lottery
study (Columns 1 - 3) and observational estimates for the survey study (Columns 4 - 5). The lottery
sample is restricted to students in an elementary or middle school charter school lottery, excluding
students with sibling preference. All lottery specifications control for lottery risk set, race, sex, free
lunch eligibility, grade, and year. All observational specifications include match cell, race, sex, free
lunch eligibility, grade, and year. Middle school specifications also include baseline test scores. All
specifications cluster standard errors at the student level. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                  33
                                       Table 5
                  The Correlation Between Traditional Resource Inputs
                                and School Effectiveness

                                                        Panel A: Math Results
                                        (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
   Class Size                        −0.041
                                      (0.029)
   Per Pupil Expenditure                           0.003
                                                  (0.028)
   Teachers with No Certification                             −0.043∗
                                                              (0.022)
   Teachers with MA                                                      −0.038
                                                                          (0.026)
   Index                                                                             −0.029∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.011)
   R2                                  0.060         0.001      0.078      0.059      0.136
   Observations                          35            35         35        35          35


                                                        Panel B: ELA Results
                                        (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)          (10)
   Class Size                        −0.027
                                      (0.021)
   Per Pupil Expenditure                         −0.001
                                                 (0.020)
   Teachers with No Certification                             −0.023
                                                              (0.018)
   Teachers with MA                                                      −0.034∗
                                                                          (0.019)
   Index                                                                             −0.021∗
                                                                                     (0.011)
   R2                                  0.117         0.071      0.112      0.158      0.204
   Observations                          35            35         35        35          35

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Each independent variable is an indicator for being above the median in that domain. The index is a
sum of the dichotomous measures standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5
percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                34
                                       Table 6
           The Correlation Between Non-Traditional (i.e. “Within the School”)
                            Inputs and School Effectiveness

                                                         Panel A: Math Results
                                  (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)
   Teacher Feedback             0.075∗∗∗
                               (0.021)
   Data Driven Instruction                  0.078∗∗
                                           (0.036)
   Tutoring                                                0.069∗∗
                                                          (0.033)
   Instructional Time                                                  0.084∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.022)
   High Expectations                                                               0.066∗∗
                                                                                  (0.028)
   Index                                                                                      0.056∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.011)
   R2                            0.199       0.196          0.090      0.262       0.169       0.470
   Observations                    35          20            35         35           35         35


                                                         Panel B: ELA Results
                                  (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)          (11)       (12)
   Teacher Feedback             0.054∗∗∗
                               (0.017)
   Data Driven Instruction                  0.045
                                           (0.029)
   Tutoring                                                0.078∗∗∗
                                                          (0.025)
   Instructional Time                                                  0.043∗
                                                                      (0.024)
   High Expectations                                                               0.049∗∗
                                                                                  (0.019)
   Index                                                                                      0.039∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.010)
   R2                            0.262       0.200          0.287      0.201       0.250       0.498
   Observations                    35          20            35         35           35         35

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                    35
                                        Table 7
                 The Partial Correlation of Each Non-Traditional Input

                                                     Panel A: Math Results
                                        (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)            (5)
         Teacher Feedback             0.038∗
                                     (0.022)
         Data Driven Instruction                  0.051∗∗
                                                 (0.022)
         Tutoring                                            0.044∗
                                                            (0.026)
         Instructional Time                                              0.059∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.015)
         High Expectations                                                           0.014
                                                                                    (0.011)
         Index                        0.046∗∗∗ 0.051∗∗∗ 0.052∗∗∗ 0.039∗∗∗            0.054∗∗∗
                                     (0.012)   (0.010)  (0.011)  (0.009)            (0.010)
         R2                            0.471     0.479    0.470    0.482              0.494
         Observations                    35        35      35       35                  35


                                                     Panel B: ELA Results
                                        (6)         (7)       (8)      (9)            (10)
         Teacher Feedback             0.028∗
                                     (0.015)
         Data Driven Instruction                  0.025
                                                 (0.020)
         Tutoring                                            0.064∗∗∗
                                                            (0.021)
         Instructional Time                                              0.020
                                                                        (0.020)
         High Expectations                                                           0.015
                                                                                    (0.012)
         Index                        0.031∗∗∗ 0.035∗∗∗ 0.031∗∗∗ 0.033∗∗∗            0.035∗∗∗
                                     (0.009)   (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.011)            (0.010)
         R2                            0.498     0.499    0.544    0.503              0.510
         Observations                    35        35      35       35                  35

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                 36
                                                        Table 8
                                        Testing Alternative Models of Schooling

                                                                 Panel A: Math Results
                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
     Non-Traditional Index                  0.054∗∗∗                0.053 ∗∗∗           0.054∗∗∗              0.056∗∗∗
                                          (0.011)                  (0.009)             (0.012)               (0.012)
     Wrap-around Services    −0.025∗      −0.008
                              (0.014)      (0.009)
     Teacher Selection                                  0.025∗      0.016∗
                                                       (0.013)     (0.009)
     No Excuses                                                               0.065∗∗    0.015
                                                                             (0.029)    (0.022)
     Control Index                                                                                  0.024∗   −0.000
                                                                                                   (0.014)    (0.011)
     R2                        0.087        0.478       0.100       0.513     0.153      0.490       0.076     0.470
     Observations                35           35          35          35        35         35          35        35




37
                                                                      Panel B: ELA Results
                                      (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)      (13)      (14)         (15)        (16)
         Non-Traditional Index                   0.037∗∗∗               0.038 ∗∗∗           0.038∗∗∗                 0.042∗∗∗
                                               (0.009)                 (0.009)             (0.010)                  (0.011)
         Wrap-around Services      −0.018      −0.006
                                    (0.012)     (0.008)
         Teacher Selection                                   0.012      0.005
                                                            (0.010)    (0.008)
         No Excuses                                                                0.034      0.001
                                                                                  (0.020)    (0.016)
         Control Index                                                                                   0.011     −0.008
                                                                                                        (0.007)     (0.005)
         R2                          0.154       0.507       0.118       0.507     0.192      0.510       0.106      0.511
         Observations                  35          35          35          35        35         35          35         35

     Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics. The sample includes all
     schools with at least one tested grade that took the survey. Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the




38
     estimated school impact. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
     percent level.
                                         Table 9
                       Out of Sample Test of Non-Traditional Inputs

                                                   Panel A: Math Results
                                       (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)            (5)
        Teacher Feedback             0.027
                                    (0.022)
        Data Driven Instruction                −0.004
                                               (0.026)
        Instructional Time                                  0.056∗∗
                                                           (0.023)
        High Expectations                                              0.070∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.025)
        Index                                                                      0.025∗∗
                                                                                  (0.010)
        R2                           0.017       0.000       0.097      0.118       0.069
        Observations                   56         56          49         52           56


                                                   Panel B: ELA Results
                                       (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)           (10)
        Teacher Feedback             0.008
                                    (0.014)
        Data Driven Instruction                −0.009
                                               (0.015)
        Instructional Time                                  0.018
                                                           (0.016)
        High Expectations                                              0.051∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.018)
        Index                                                                      0.011∗
                                                                                  (0.006)
        R2                           0.004       0.005       0.026      0.164       0.037
        Observations                   56         56          49         52           56

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade with available site visit data. Regres-
sions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** = significant
at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                39
                                                                Figure 1
                                                   Lottery and Observational Estimates
                                                                       Math




                                       .6
                                       .4
                    Lottery Estimate
                                       .2                                               ! = 0.768
                                                                                           (0.428)
                                       0
                                       -.2
                                       -.4




                                             -.2           0              .2               .4        .6
                                                               Observational Estimate



                                                                       ELA
                                       .6
                                       .4
                    Lottery Estimate
                                       .2




                                                                                        ! = 0.526
                                                                                           (0.597)
                                       0
                                       -.2
                                       -.4




                                             -.2           0              .2               .4        .6
                                                               Observational Estimate

Notes: This figure reports school-specific treatment estimates using the lottery and observational
designs. The lottery sample is restricted to students in an elementary or middle school charter school
lottery, excluding students with sibling preference. All lottery specifications control for lottery risk
set, race, sex, free lunch eligibility, grade, and year. All observational specifications include match
cell, race, sex, free lunch eligibility, grade, and year. Middle school specifications also include
baseline test scores.




                                                                     40
                                        Appendix Table 1
                              Charter Schools in Survey Sample
                                             2010 - 2011     Year      Years in
                                               Grades      Opened lottery study           Survey   Video
                          Panel A: Elementary Schools (3rd - 5th Grades)
Amber Charter School                            K-5          2000    2005 - 2006           Yes      Yes
Bronx Academy of Promise                        K-3          2008                          Yes      No
Bronx Charter School for Children               K-5          2004        2006              Yes      Yes
Bronx Charter School for the Arts               K-6          2003                          Yes      Yes
Brooklyn Ascend Charter School                  K-4          2008        2008              Yes      Yes
Excellence Boys Charter School                  K-7          2004    2003 - 2006           Yes      Yes
Explore Charter School                          K-8          2000    2005 - 2006           Yes      Yes
Family Life Academy Charter School              K-8          2001                          Yes      No
Future Leaders Institute Charter School         K-5          2005                          No       Yes
Girls Preparatory Charter School                K-6          2005                          Yes      Yes
Grand Concourse Academy Charter School          K-5          2004                          Yes      Yes
Harbor Science and Arts Charter School          1-8          2002        2007              Yes      Yes
Harlem Children’s Zone Promise Academy          K-5          2004    2004 - 2006           Yes      Yes
Harlem Children’s Zone Promise Academy II       K-6          2005    2005 - 2006           Yes      Yes
Harlem Link Charter School                      K-5          2005    2005 - 2009           Yes      Yes
Harlem Success Academy Charter School           K-5          2006    2006 - 2008           Yes      Yes
Hyde Leadership Charter School Bronx            K-5          2009        2006              Yes      Yes
Manhattan Charter School                        K-5          2005        2008              Yes      No
Peninsula Preparatory Academy                   K-5          2004        2009              Yes      Yes
Renaissance Charter School                      K-5          2000                          Yes      Yes
Sisulu-Walker Charter School of Harlem          K-5          1999                          Yes      Yes
South Bronx Classical Charter School            K-5          2006                          Yes      Yes
South Bronx Int. Cultures and the Arts          K-5          2005                          Yes      No
                           Panel B: Middle Schools (5th - 8th Grades)
Bronx Preparatory Charter School               5-8          2000    2008 - 2009            Yes      Yes
Coney Island Preparatory Charter School        5-6          2009    2009 - 2010            Yes      Yes
Democracy Preparatory Charter School          6 - 10        2006    2006 - 2009            Yes      Yes
Equality Charter School                        6-8          2009       2009                Yes      Yes
Explore Charter School                         6-8          2000                           Yes      Yes
Harbor Science and Arts Charter School         1-8          2002       2007                Yes      Yes
Harlem Children’s Zone Promise Academy         6-8          2004    2005 - 2008            Yes      Yes
Hyde Leadership Charter School Bronx          6 - 10        2009    2006 - 2007            Yes      Yes
KIPP Infinity                                  5-8          2005                           Yes      No
Opportunity Charter School                    6 - 12        2004    2008 - 2009            Yes      Yes
Renaissance Charter School                     6-8          2000                           Yes      Yes
St. HOPE Leadership Academy                    5-8          2008                           Yes      Yes
Summit Academy Charter School                  6-7          2009       2009                Yes      Yes

Notes: This table lists all New York City charter schools participating in the survey study. Elemen-
tary schools include all schools that have their main admissions lottery in grades PK - 4. Middle
schools include all schools that have their main admissions lottery in grades 5 - 8. Eligible charters
serve a general student population with at least one tested grade in 2009 - 2010.


                                                41
                                   Appendix Table 2
                  The Correlation Between Traditional Resource Inputs
                      and School Effectiveness: Lottery Estimates

                                                          Panel A: Math Results
                                          (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)
   Class Size                          −0.142
                                        (0.096)
   Per Pupil Expenditures                           0.073
                                                   (0.096)
   Teachers with No Certification                              −0.118
                                                                (0.082)
   Teachers with MA                                                         −0.068
                                                                            (0.061)
   Index                                                                                −0.053
                                                                                        (0.033)
   R2                                    0.106         0.032     0.085        0.020      0.088
   Observations                            22           22        22           22          22


                                                          Panel B: ELA Results
                                          (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)           (10)
   Class Size                          −0.097
                                        (0.094)
   Per Pupil Expenditures                           0.015
                                                   (0.090)
   Teachers with No Certification                              −0.104
                                                                (0.064)
   Teachers with MA                                                          0.010
                                                                            (0.075)
   Index                                                                                −0.043∗∗
                                                                                        (0.018)
   R2                                    0.054         0.002     0.073        0.001      0.060
   Observations                            22           22        22           22          22

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                  42
                                  Appendix Table 3
           The Correlation Between Non-Traditional (i.e. “Within the School”)
                  Inputs and School Effectiveness: Lottery Estimates

                                                         Panel A: Math Results
                                  (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
   Teacher Feedback             0.170∗∗
                               (0.067)
   Data Driven Instruction                  0.134∗
                                           (0.065)
   High Quality Tutoring                                   0.079
                                                          (0.151)
   Instructional Time                                                0.079
                                                                    (0.064)
   High Expectations                                                              0.153∗∗∗
                                                                                 (0.055)
   Index                                                                                      0.088∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.023)
   R2                            0.154       0.137          0.012     0.046       0.138        0.184
   Observations                    22          14            22        22           22          22


                                                         Panel B: ELA Results
                                  (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)         (11)        (12)
   Teacher Feedback             0.078
                               (0.050)
   Data Driven Instruction                  0.173∗∗∗
                                           (0.046)
   High Quality Tutoring                                   0.114
                                                          (0.222)
   Instructional Time                                                0.042
                                                                    (0.049)
   High Expectations                                                              0.095∗∗
                                                                                 (0.044)
   Index                                                                                      0.057∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.019)
   R2                            0.037       0.344          0.018     0.014       0.058        0.088
   Observations                    22          14            22        22           22          22

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                    43
                                   Appendix Table 4
                 The Partial Correlation of Each Non-Traditional Input:
                                   Lottery Estimates

                                                    Panel A: Math Results
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)             (5)
        Teacher Feedback              0.116
                                     (0.087)
        Data Driven Instruction                  0.111
                                                (0.088)
        High Quality Tutoring                                0.041
                                                            (0.157)
        Instructional Time                                              −0.053
                                                                         (0.072)
        High Expectations                                                            0.094
                                                                                    (0.098)
        Index                         0.050      0.063∗∗     0.082∗∗∗    0.126∗∗∗    0.056
                                     (0.029)    (0.028)     (0.021)     (0.034)     (0.050)
        R2                             0.196      0.201       0.184      0.246        0.188
        Observations                     22         22         22          22           22


                                                     Panel B: ELA Results
                                        (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)            (10)
        Teacher Feedback              0.024
                                     (0.056)
        Data Driven Instruction                  0.147∗∗
                                                (0.056)
        High Quality Tutoring                                0.080
                                                            (0.241)
        Instructional Time                                              −0.070
                                                                         (0.066)
        High Expectations                                                            0.048
                                                                                    (0.056)
        Index                         0.051∗∗    0.027       0.050∗∗     0.102∗∗∗    0.042
                                     (0.019)    (0.019)     (0.023)     (0.032)     (0.025)
        R2                             0.090      0.137       0.090      0.148        0.089
        Observations                     22         22         22          22           22

Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics.
The sample includes all schools with at least one tested grade that completed the charter survey.
Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the estimated school impact. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                 44
                                                 Appendix Table 5
                             Testing Alternative Models of Schooling: Lottery Estimates

                                                                Panel A: Math Results
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)
     Non-Traditional Index                0.094∗∗∗                0.127∗∗∗               0.206∗∗∗              0.107∗
                                         (0.031)                 (0.027)                (0.036)               (0.057)
     Wrap-around Services     −0.025      0.013
                               (0.023)   (0.026)
     Teacher Selection                               −0.003     −0.071∗∗
                                                      (0.034)    (0.026)
     No Excuses                                                            −0.004       −0.307∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.074)       (0.084)
     Control Index                                                                                   0.046∗   −0.026
                                                                                                    (0.026)    (0.058)
     R2                         0.020     0.188        0.003      0.270      0.033       0.469        0.059     0.192
     Observations                 22        22           22         22         22          22           22        22




45
                                                                    Panel B: ELA Results
                                     (9)        (10)        (11)       (12)      (13)      (14)            (15)        (16)
         Non-Traditional Index                 0.058∗∗                0.072 ∗∗∗           0.123∗∗∗                    0.063
                                              (0.026)                (0.023)             (0.036)                     (0.042)
         Wrap-around Services     −0.023∗      0.002
                                  (0.013)     (0.015)
         Teacher Selection                                 0.012     −0.027
                                                          (0.026)     (0.025)
         No Excuses                                                               0.021     −0.162∗
                                                                                 (0.053)     (0.079)
         Control Index                                                                                    0.029∗    −0.005
                                                                                                         (0.015)     (0.031)
         R2                         0.020       0.088      0.004       0.102       0.529      0.696        0.042      0.089
         Observations                 22          22         22          22          22         22           22         22

     Notes: This table reports regressions of school-specific treatment effects on school characteristics. The sample includes all
     schools with at least one tested grade that took the survey. Regressions weight by the inverse of the standard error of the




46
     estimated school impact. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
     percent level.
