                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE INCIDENCE OF GEOGRAPHY ON CANADA'S SERVICES TRADE

                                        James E. Anderson
                                        Catherine A. Milot
                                          Yoto V. Yotov

                                       Working Paper 17630
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17630


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




We are grateful for research support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade,
Canada. Funding came from the Research Fund on North American Borders, Security and Prosperity
managed by Industry Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by James E. Anderson, Catherine A. Milot, and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Incidence of Geography on Canada's Services Trade
James E. Anderson, Catherine A. Milot, and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 17630
December 2011
JEL No. F1

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate geographic barriers to export trade in nine service categories for Canada's provinces from
1997 to 2007 using the structural gravity model. Constructed Home, Domestic and Foreign Bias indexes
(the last two new) capture the direct plus indirect effect of services trade costs on intra-provincial,
inter-provincial and international trade relative to their frictionless benchmarks. Barriers to services
international trade are huge relative to inter-provincial trade and large relative to goods international
trade. A novel test confirms the fit of structural gravity with services trade data.


James E. Anderson                                   Yoto V. Yotov
Department of Economics                             Drexel University
Boston College                                      LeBow College of Business
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467                             Department of Economics and International Business
and NBER                                            Matheson Hall, Suite 503-C
james.anderson.1@bc.edu                             Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                    yotov@drexel.edu
Catherine A. Milot
Department of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade, Canada
111 Sussex Drive
Ottawa, Canada K1N 1J1
catherine.milot@international.gc.ca
Introduction
Fog lying over services trade volumes and barriers has impeded progress in
understanding services trade, how policies affect it and how trade negoti-
ations can liberalize it. This paper pushes back some of the fog by quan-
tifying the effects of geographic barriers to the services trade of Canada’s
provinces from 1997 to 2007. New and exceptionally high quality bilateral
services trade data from Statistics Canada are used to estimate structural
gravity equations for nine service sectors. Novel Constructed Bias indexes
combine the bilateral and multilateral effects of geographic barriers on ser-
vices trade. A test based on the Constructed Bias indexes confirms the
validity of the restrictions of structural gravity for services trade.
    Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) is the ratio of predicted to hypothetical
frictionless foreign trade. CFB in services trade is huge, on average some
800 times smaller than Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB), the ratio of
predicted to hypothetical frictionless inter-provincial trade. Constructed
Home Bias (CHB), the ratio of predicted to frictionless internal trade,
measures the localization of trade. CHB is very large and varies much more
by province than does CDB, provincial localization is considerably damped
on inter-provincial services trade. In contrast, powerful forces other than
localization suppress international trade in services as measured by CFB.
    The ratio of the CFB and CDB indexes is a power function of the
relative sellers’ incidence of foreign and domestic trade costs. Relative
incidence complements the direct bilateral border trade cost inferred from
estimated gravity equations. The implied sellers’ incidence of foreign trade
costs is 2 to 4 times that for domestic trade costs, assuming an elasticity of
substitution between 6 and 10 (as standard in the literature) to infer trade
costs from the trade displacing effects of geographic barriers. This measure
of the full effects of geography on relative services sellers’ incidence is a
multiple of the overall bilateral direct border effect on trade costs estimated
from gravity below. A border cost factor equivalent of between 1.52 and
2.11 is inferred for elasticity of substitution between 6 and 10.
    The foreign trade-reducing forces of gravity are much stronger for ser-
vices than for goods — Canada’s provinces have lower CFB in services
than in goods by a factor exceeding 7. (The CFB calculations for goods
use Anderson and Yotov’s (2010) data for 19 manufacturing and primary
goods industries of Canada’s provinces from 1992 to 2003). Services on the
whole do not exhibit greater Constructed Home Bias (CHB) than do goods,
where CHB measures the excess localization of trade in goods and in ser-
vices, the ratio of predicted to frictionless within-province trade. In other
words, localization forces operate about equally on goods and services, so
they do not explain the much lower CFB in services than in goods. (On net
a higher CDB in services offsets the lower CFB in meeting the requirement
that a weighted average of CDB, CFB and CHB must always sum to 1.)
    Over time, though less than for the goods sectors, CHB in services
is mostly falling for Canada’s provinces; CFB rises dominate CDB falls.
Aggregating across provinces and sectors, CHB falls, CDB falls and CFB
rises: Canada’s service sector is becoming more outward oriented.
    Our method is to proxy trade barriers with geographic variables, in-
cluding the effect on provincial trade of crossing international borders. The
variation across provinces in their trade with the US allows an international
border effect on services trade to be identified, overcoming a limitation of
previous gravity model work on services using national data (Francois and
Hoekman, 2010, review the literature). An important subtlety is that the
size of the barrier is partly endogenous since private agents can invest in
reducing the impact of governmentally imposed regulatory and security
barriers. Thus our reduced form approach to barrier measurement risks
focusing on an unstable relationship between geographic proxies and bi-
lateral trade patterns. Despite the risk, our results indicate that gravity
works well in the case of services disaggregated into 9 sectors, yielding
stable coefficients over the period 1997-2007.
    We explore whether the security-related measures implemented since
September 11, 2001 have led to border thickening/thinning by estimating
border coefficients before and after 9/11. Direct evidence from a survey of
Canadian service providers (Vance, 2007) reports additional border-related
obstacles. (More complete survey evidence on regulatory barriers along
with direct measures of all other border barriers could in principle be used in
gravity modeling to convert implied security barriers into tariff equivalents.)
We find significant, large service border effects in each direction of service
trade flows. There is evidence for changes (mostly thickening) in the border

                                      2
effects in the post 9/11 period. Finally, we see some directional asymmetries
in both our border and thickening estimates. Such diversity arises due to
differences across sectors in the ability of private agents to invest in friction-
reducing activities, some linked to new border security measures and others
simply as a reaction to perceived market opportunities. We attempt to
interpret the differences in this paper with some success.
    The Constructed Bias indexes provide the basis for a novel test of the
structural gravity model applied to services data. Recently, for manufac-
tured goods trade Anderson and Yotov (2011a) provide a striking confir-
mation of structural gravity by showing the very close fit of estimated fixed
effects to their theoretically predicted structural gravity values. A related
test is developed and applied here using two different implied estimates of
the Constructed Bias indexes, potentially allowing differences to emerge in
the model’s performance on domestic vs. foreign services trade. The data
instead essentially show no difference in the estimates, confirming that the
restrictions of structural gravity apply quite precisely to services trade as
they do for manufactures trade.
    The chief caveat about our results concerns aggregation and its effects.
Due to the mixed nature of most of the nine service categories in our
sample it is still hard to interpret our findings of directional and sectoral
differences in border thickening/thinning. The magnitude and directional
symmetries of our border and thickening estimates point to the need for
further investigation of the factors behind these effects. Disaggregation to
firm level data is also important for better understanding services trade
barriers. Regulatory barriers are likely to pose important fixed costs on
potential exporters. The sector-province data used in this paper does not
permit the identification of selection of heterogeneous firms from sectoral
data developed by Helpman, Meltiz and Rubinstein (2008), but firm level
data might be able to shed light on the importance of fixed trade costs.
    The success of our methods in this paper suggests they are likely to be
useful on services trade more broadly. Since bilateral trade data is rife with
measurement error in any case, the good performance of the gravity model
here suggests that more dispersed measurement error in trade flows need
not preclude reasonably precise and reliable results.
    The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 reviews the structural grav-

                                        3
ity model. Section 2 presents the empirical analysis. Section 3 concludes.


1       Theoretical Foundation
The theoretical development of the gravity model reviewed here follows
Anderson and Yotov (2010). Their Constructed Home Bias index is com-
plemented here by two new general equilibrium trade cost indexes, Con-
structed Foreign Bias (CFB) and Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB), mea-
suring the ratio of predicted (Foreign and Domestic) trade to hypothetical
frictionless trade.
    Assume identical preferences or technology across countries for national
varieties of services differentiated by place of origin for every service cat-
egory k, represented by a globally common Constant Elasticity of Substi-
tution (CES) sub-utility or production function. The structural gravity
model that is implied is written as:1
                                                              !1−σk
                                      Ejk Yik          tkij
                             Xijk   =                                               (1)
                                       Yk             Pjk Πki
                                                      !1−σk
                                        X        tkij          Ejk
                       (Πki )1−σk =                                                 (2)
                                         j
                                                 Pjk           Yk
                                                      !1−σk
                                        X        tkij          Yik
                       (Pjk )1−σk =                                ,                (3)
                                         i
                                                 Πki           Yk

where Xijk denotes the value of shipments at destination prices from origin
i to destination j in services class k. Ejk is the expenditure at destination
j on services in k from all origins. Yik denotes the sales of services k at
destination prices from i to all destinations, while Y k is the total output,
at delivered prices, of services k. tkij ≥ 1 denotes the variable trade cost
factor on shipment of commodities from i to j in class k, and σk is the
elasticity of substitution across services in k.
    The right hand side of (1) comprises two parts, the frictionless value
    1
     See Anderson (2011) for details and discussion of two other theoretical foundations
for (1)-(3). For services, a plausible alternative foundation models buyers with hetero-
geneous preferences over varieties that make choices distributed as in the CES ‘love of
variety’ representative buyer model.


                                             4
of trade Ejk Yik /Y k and the distortion to that trade induced by trade costs
(tkij /Πki Pjk )1−σk . In the hypothetical frictionless equilibrium, i’s share of
total expenditure by each destination j is equal to Yik /Y k , i’s share of
world shipments in each sector k, the pattern of a completely homogenized
world. “Frictionless” and “trade costs” are used here for simplicity and
clarity, but the model can also reflect local differences in tastes that shift
demand just as trade costs do, suggesting “resistance” rather than costs.
      Πki and Pjk in (1)-(3) are multilateral resistance (MR) terms. Πki is the
outward multilateral resistance, which consistently aggregates the incidence
of all bilateral trade costs born by the producers of services k in origin
i. It is as if producers of a given commodity class from a given region
are shipping to a unified world market at markup Πki . Pjk is the inward
multilateral resistance (also the CES price index of the demand system),
which consistently aggregates the bilateral buyers’ resistances on flows from
i to j in class k. It is as if buyers at j pay a uniform markup Pjk for the
bundle of services purchased on the world market.
      Anderson and Yotov (2010) define an index of the general equilibrium
effects of the world-wide system of trade costs on local trade. Constructed
Home Bias (CHB) measures the ratio of predicted to hypothetical friction-
less internal trade within any given region i. For a generic service:
                                                        1−σ
                                X̂ii             tii
                      CHBi =          =                         .            (4)
                             Yi Ei /Y           Π i Pi

Theory posits that the unobserved true bilateral trade flow is equal to the
right hand side of (1) while the econometric estimate of the right hand
side gives an unbiased predicted value. Using (1), the middle expression in
(4) is the predicted value of internal trade, X̂ii , relative to the theoretical
value of internal trade in a frictionless world, Ei Yi /Y , and the rightmost
expression gives the direct plus indirect effect of all trade costs acting to
increase each province’s trade with itself above the frictionless benchmark.
Note that two regions i and j with the same internal trade cost tii = tjj
may have quite different CHB’s due to the general equilibrium incidence of
trade costs, because Πi Pi 6= Πj Pj .
    Aggregation of constructed bias across sectors or regions is convenient



                                       5
for describing results below. For aggregation across regions in sector k,

                X            X                     X  tk 1−σk Y k E k
                                                         ii
     CHB =  k         bk/
                      X ii        (Yik Eik /Y   )=      k k
                                                               P i ki k .
                  i           i                    i
                                                      Π  P
                                                        i i      i Y i Ei


For aggregation across sectors in region i

                X            X                     X  tk 1−σk Y k E k
                                                         ii
      CHBi =          bk/
                      X ii        (Yik Eik /Y   )=      k k
                                                               P i ki k .
                 k            k                    k
                                                      Π  P
                                                        i i      i Yi E i


Both aggregates are weighted averages of the region-sector CHBs of (4).
    The constructed bias idea extends readily to a family of constructed bias
indexes composed of subsets of bilateral trades that are of interest. This pa-
per focuses on Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) for province-international
exports and Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB) for inter-provincial (do-
mestic) exports. (The parallel measures for domestic and foreign import
trade are suppressed here for brevity.) Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB)
is defined for each province and sector as the predicted volume of interna-
tional export trade relative to the hypothetical frictionless volume of trade,
both for given sales and expenditures. Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB)
is analogously defined as the ratio of fitted to predicted inter-provincial
export trade, excluding internal trade. CFB and CDB complement CHB
by focusing on that part of non-internal trade that is respectively outside
and inside Canada.
    Let C̄ denote the set of destinations outside Canada. Constructed For-
eign Bias is defined for a generic service for region i as
                                                P
                                                       X̂ij
                                                    j∈C̄
                                  CF Bi ≡                   .               (5)
                                                Yi EC̄ /Y
              P
Here, EC̄ = j∈C̄ Ej . Using the right hand side of (1) for the predicted
value of bilateral trade we have
                                        X           t1−σ
                                                     ij     Ej
                             CF Bi =                            .
                                             Π1−σ
                                              i   Pj1−σ     EC̄
                                        j∈C̄


Recognizing that tij /Pj is the ith sellers’ incidence of bilateral trade costs
on sales to j, we define the (average) sellers’ incidence in province i on sales

                                                6
outside Canada:
                                       X                      Ej
                             Π1−σ
                              iC̄
                                  ≡           (tij /Pj )1−σ       , ∀i.                      (6)
                                                              EC̄
                                       j∈C̄

Then,
                                                     Π1−σ
                                                      iC̄
                                      CF Bi =         1−σ .                                  (7)
                                                     Πi
Expression (7) is intuitively appealing: CFB is determined by the ratio
of sellers’ average incidence externally to sellers’ average incidence overall.
Notice that we can explain the time series behavior of the CFB’s decom-
posed into external and overall sellers’ incidence (in power transforms),
and further decompose the changes in the (power transforms of) sellers’
incidence into that due to border thickening vs. other changes (such as
expenditure and supply changes over time).
    Turning to CDB, it is written as:

                                          X            t1−σ
                                                        ij        Ej
                            CDBi =                                   ,
                                        j∈C;j6=i
                                                 Π1−σ
                                                  i   Pj1−σ       EC

where C denotes the set of provinces of Canada. Then, analogous to (6)
and (7),
                                     Π1−σ
                            CDBi = iC     .                        (8)
                                     Π1−σ
                                       i

ΠiC is called Domestic Trade Cost by Anderson and Yotov (2011a).
    Substitutability exists among the Constructed Bias indexes because the
adding up condition implies that a weighted average of CHB, CFB and
CDB must always equal 1, CHBi Ei /E + CDBi EC /E + CF Bi EC̄ /E = 1.
The adding up condition also implies substitutability among i’s sellers’
incidences to various destinations. tii /Pi = Πii , the sellers’ incidence on
local sales, so CHBi = Π1−σ     1−σ
                           ii /Πi   , the same form as in (7) and (8).
    Aggregation of CFBs and CDBs has the same simple structure as ag-
gregation of CHBs. Two further properties of Constructed Bias indexes
are very appealing: (i) independence of the normalization needed to solve
system (2)-(3);2 and (ii) independence of the elasticity of substitution σ,
   2
     Note that (2)-(3) solves for {Πki , Pjk } only up to a scalar. If {Π0i , Pj0 } is a solution
then so is {λΠ0i , Pj0 /λ}. Therefore, in the empirical section, we need to impose a normal-
ization in order to solve for the multilateral resistances. CHB and CFB are independent


                                                 7
because they are constructed using the 1 − σk power transforms of t’s, Π’s
and P ’s.
    The constructed bias indexes below use (2)-(3) to calculate multilat-
eral resistances and then use (6) and its analog to calculated the sellers’
resistance on the subset of trades, all as inputs into the right hand sides of
(4), (7) and (8). A test of the performance of structural gravity applied to
services trade is based on comparing these Constructed Bias indexes with
an alternative measure that would ordinarily differ. In particular, gravity
equations estimated with fixed effects imply constructed bias as the ratio of
predicted to hypothetical frictionless trade. For example, CFB calculated
using (5) will differ from calculation using (7). In theory the two should
be identical, so the calculating the closeness of the two provides a test of
the theory. (This test complements a test reported in Anderson and Yotov
(2011a) for manufacturing trade.)


2     Empirical Analysis
2.1     Econometric Specification
We start our empirical analysis by estimating the gravity equation (1),
                                                            !1−σk
                                    Yik Ejk        tkij
                             Xijk =                                 .                        (9)
                                     Yk           Πki Pjk

Several steps complete the transformation of (9) into an econometric model.
First, to provide structure behind the unobservable bilateral trade costs,
we adapt the standard approach in the literature (of proxying the tij ’s with
a set of observable variables) to the specific features of Canadian trade and
geography. For a generic service category, we define:

t1−σ
 ij  = eγ1 DIST AN CEij +γ2 CON T IG P R P Rij +γ3 CON T IG P R STij +γ4 SAM E REGIONij ×
           eγ5 BRDR CA U S+γ6 BRDR U S CA+γ7 BRDR ROW                   CA+γ8 BRDR ROW U S
                                                                                             ×
           eγ9 T HICK    CA U S+γ10 T HICK U S CA
                                                     .                                             (10)
of this normalization.




                                              8
Here, DIST AN CEij is the logarithm of bilateral distance between trad-
ing partners i and j. CON T IG P R P Rij takes a value of one when two
provinces share a common border and is set to zero otherwise. CON T IG P R STij
is equal to one when a Canadian province neighbors a US state.3
     SAM E REGIONij takes a value of one when i = j and it is equal to
zero otherwise. Most of the existing gravity studies ignore SAM E REGION ,
however, we include it for the following reasons. First, the few studies
that do include some variant of this covariate always obtain large, posi-
tive and significant coefficient estimates.4 In addition, SAM E REGION
and its coefficient estimate are key components (along with internal dis-
tance) of internal trade costs, the tii ’s, which are needed for meaningful and
consistent calculation of the multilateral resistances and the constructed
bias (CB) indexes. Finally, from an econometric perspective, including
SAM E REGIONij facilitates the analysis of our results by allowing us
to interpret the estimates of all other border variables as deviations from
interprovincial trade.
     BRDR CA U S takes a value of one for Canadian exports to US and
BRDR U S CA equals to one when US exports to Canada.5 It is important
to emphasize that the interpretation of the estimates on BRDR CA U S
and BRDR U S CA in the case of services could be very different (in fact
even opposite) as compared to the corresponding analysis of the same two
variables in the case of merchandise. For example, consider the estimate
γ̂6 of BRDR U S CA, capturing US exports to Canada, for Health. Under
this scenario, BRDR U S CA will mostly account for the obstacles faced
by Canadian patients going to US to obtain health care and one should
   3
     Previous gravity studies investigating non-service trade suggest that trade between
contiguous provinces and states is much larger as compared to interprovincial trade,
while there is little evidence for significant differences in the volume of bilateral trade
between contiguous provinces as compared to interprovincial trade in general. We test
this predictions for services.
   4
     For example, Wolf (2000) finds evidence of US state border effects. Anderson and
Yotov (2010) find that internal provincial trade is higher than interprovincial and in-
ternational trade in the case of Canadian commodity trade. Finally, Jensen and Yotov
(2011) and Anderson and Yotov (2011a) confirm a significant SAM E REGION impact
for important agricultural commodities and for world manufacturing, respectively.
   5
     Previous studies employing aggregate data, e.g. Brown and Anderson (2002), and
disaggregated manufacturing data, e.g. Anderson and Yotov (2010), find that the border
between Canada and US is asymmetric. We test for asymmetric services border by
splitting the Canada-US border dummy into its directional components.


                                            9
interpret a negative and significant estimate of γ6 as a US border effect.
Compare with trade in Health merchandises, where a negative and signifi-
cant estimate of γ6 would be interpreted as a Canadian border effect.6
    The broad implication is that the characteristics of the main services in
a given category (a detailed description of each category is in the Appendix)
condition the interpretation of the gravity border estimates. It might not
always be possible to provide a meaningful interpretation of directional
borders for some composite service sectors. Aggregation bias contaminates
all gravity estimates to some degree (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004)
but for some services it blurs interpretation.
    BRDR ROW CA and BRDR ROW U S capture border effects be-
tween Canada and ROW and between US and ROW, respectively. In prin-
ciple, it is possible for these borders to be directional as well. However, due
to the rich fixed effects structure of our empirical specification (needed to
account for the unobservable multilateral resistances), and because US and
ROW are aggregated regions in our study, we are not able to include all
directional border dummies due to collinearity and identification concerns.
    The next two variables in (10), T HICK CA U S and T HICK U S CA,
should be of particular interest to the Canadian policy makers, because
they are intended to pick up any post 9/11 ‘thickening’ of the border be-
tween Canada and the US. As in the case of borders in general, we allow
for asymmetric thickening effects. Accordingly, T HICK CA U S is an in-
dicator variable that takes a value of one for post 9/11 Canadian service
exports to US. Similarly, T HICK U S CA is a dummy variable equal to
one for post-9/11 US exports to Canada.
    The econometric gravity specification is completed by substituting (10)
for the power transform of tij into (9) and then expanding the equation
with an error term. The error structure and implied estimation must ad-
dress several econometric challenges. First, to account for the zeros and for
the presence of heteroskedasticity in trade data, we follow Santos-Silva and
Tenreyro (2006) who advocate the use of the Poisson pseudo-maximum-
likelihood (PPML) estimator for simultaneously addressing both of the
   6
    In contrast, the broad category of Health services contains the visits of Canadian
doctors to perform important surgeries or to teach in the US. In that case, the interpre-
tation of γ6 will be similar for merchandise and services.



                                           10
above-mentioned challenges. Second, we add a time dimension to the
data in order to be able to gauge any thickening effects and we use time-
varying, directional, country-specific fixed effects to account for the unob-
servable multilateral resistance terms.7 Finally, “[f]ixed-effects estimations
are sometimes criticized when applied to data pooled over consecutive years
on the grounds that dependent and independent variables cannot fully ad-
just in a single year’s time.”(Cheng and Wall 2002, p.8).8 To avoid this
critique, we use 2- and 3-year lags.
    Taking all of the above considerations into account and applying the
definition of bilateral trade costs, from (10), for each service category in
our sample, we use the PPML technique to estimate a panel version of (9)
with time-varying, directional, country-specific fixed effects. We present
the service gravity results after we describe our data.


2.2     Data Description
We put significant effort to construct a comprehensive and reliable data
set for Canadian provincial service trade at the sectoral level, and we are
extremely grateful to Denis Caron at Statistics Canada without whose as-
sistance this project would not have been possible. Our study covers trade
in services for the period 1997-2007. Trading partners include all Canadian
provinces and territories,9 the United States (defined here as an aggregated
region of all the fifty US states and the District of Columbia) and the rest
of the world (ROW), which is an aggregated region consisting of all other
countries in the world. Data availability allowed us to investigate 9 ser-
   7
     See Olivero and Yotov (forthcoming) for formal discussion of the treatment of the
MR terms in a panel setting. It should be noted that, in addition to controlling for
the multilateral resistances, the fixed effects in our econometric specification will also
absorb regional output and expenditures. Using disaggregated manufacturing data,
Anderson and Yotov (2011a) show that the multilateral resistance component explains
about 32.3% of the variance of the fixed effects, while the size effect terms (output and
expenditures) account for about 57.7% of the fixed effects variability.
   8
     Trefler (2004) also criticizes trade estimations pooled over consecutive years. He
uses three-year lags. Olivero and Yotov (forthcoming) experiment with various lags to
find that estimates obtained with 3-year and 5-year lags are very similar, but the yearly
estimates produce suspicious gravity parameters.
   9
     We treat the Northwest Territories and Nunavut as one unit, even though they are
separate since April 1st, 1999.




                                           11
vices sectors.10 We also obtain aggregate gravity estimates by combining
all service categories.
    In order to estimate gravity and to construct the trade cost indexes
of interest in this study, we use data on bilateral trade flows, output and
expenditures for each trading partner, all measured in current Canadian
dollars for the corresponding year. It should be noted that using real trade
flows in the gravity estimates will not change our results. The reason is that
the time-varying, country-specific fixed effects employed in our estimations
in effect absorb any deflator index (as well as exchange rate changes) that
could affect trade values.11
    Trade data comes from two sources. Statistics Canada is the major
one. It provides data on intra- and inter-provincial trade flows as well as
province-World and province-US bilateral trade flows. Data on US-World
bilateral trade flows are from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
We construct trade between ROW and US as the difference between US-
World trade and US-Canada trade and trade between ROW and Canada as
the difference between Canada-World trade and Canada-US trade. Finally,
internal trade for each of the two aggregate regions (US and ROW) is
obtained as the difference between domestic output and total exports.
    We need production data for two reasons. First, as indicated above,
we use production data in order to construct internal trade for each of the
regions in our sample. Second, more importantly, we need output data to
calculate the multilateral resistance terms and to construct the Constructed
  10
      The services sectors selection was based on (but is not completely identical to)
the S-level of aggregation as classified in the Statistics Canada’s Hierarchical Struc-
ture of the I-O Commodity Classification (Revised: November 3, 2010). The 9 services
categories include (Abbreviated labeling used throughout the text is in parentheses):
Transportation and Storage Services, including transportation margins (Transporta-
tion); Communication Services (Communication); Wholesale Services, including Whole-
sale Margins (Wholesale); Finance, Insurance and Real Estate services (Finance); Pro-
fessional, Scientific, Technical, Computer, Administrative, Support, and Related Ser-
vices (Business); Education Services (Education); Health Care and Social Assistance
Services (Health); Accommodation Services and Meals (Accommodation); and, Miscel-
laneous Services (Other). Detailed description of each of the service categories in our
sample are presented in the Appendix.
   11
      Baldwin and Taglioni (2006) discuss in length the implications of inappropriate
deflation of nominal trade values, which they call “the bronze-medal mistake” in gravity
estimations. Their most preferred econometric specification is one with un-deflated trade
values and appropriate treatment of the multilateral resistance terms, the method we
employ here.


                                           12
Bias indexes. Statistics Canada provides provincial outputs. The US Bu-
reau of Economic Analysis is our source for US service production data.
Finally, we construct output for ROW from the GTAP database. GTAP
has two limitations: First, data are only available for 2004 and 2007. This
predetermined the years for which we will construct and analyze the Con-
structed Bias indexes.12 Second, the GTAP service classification is more
aggregated as compared to ours. In particular, GTAP aggregates the cat-
egories of Wholesale and Accommodation as well as those of Health and
Education. Given the nature and the importance of each of these subcat-
egories, we split the GTAP data in order to study them separately. To
do this, we use actual output levels for US and Canada and we assume
homogeneity, resulting in constant expenditure shares.13
    Given the specific geography and relationships among the regions in our
study, we are only able to include two of the standard gravity covariates
in our estimations: bilateral distance and contiguity. To calculate bilateral
distances we adopt the procedure from Mayer and Zignago (2006), which
is based on Head and Mayer (2000). The most appealing argument for the
use of this particular approach in constructing bilateral distance is that the
same procedure obtains consistent measures of internal distances and bilat-
eral distances for each pair of regions, including ROW. We apply the follow-
ing formula to generate weighted distances: dij = k∈i pop
                                                       P          P popl
                                                                   l∈j popj dkl .
                                                                k
                                                             popi
Here popk is the population of agglomeration k in trading partner i, and
popl is the population of agglomeration l in trading partner j. To calcu-
late population weights, we take the biggest 30 agglomerations (in terms
of population) in each trading partner when the partner is a province or a
territory, the 300 biggest cities when the partner is US, and the biggest 100
cities when the partner is ROW.14 Finally, dkl is the distance between ag-
  12
     We experiment by interpolating and extrapolating the GTAP data to cover the
whole period of investigation. This adds a single sectoral observation for each year in
our sample. While our sensitivity experiments reveal that the gravity estimates are
not sensitive to whether we use ROW data for 2004 and 2007 only, or ROW data for
the whole period, we find that the constructed bias numbers are quite sensitive to the
interpolation procedures. Therefore, we limit our CB analysis to the years of 2004 and
2007, for which we do have actual data.
  13
     As will become clear from our gravity estimates below, it is particularly important
to separate Health and Education because the post 9/11 border response for these two
categories is quite heterogeneous.
  14
     In the few instances when data were not available for 30 agglomerations within a


                                          13
glomeration k and agglomeration l, measured in kilometers, and calculated
by the Great Circle Distance Formula.15 All data on latitude, longitude,
and population are from the World Gazetteer web page.
   We also generate a series of indicator variables that pick up contiguity
(CON T IG P R P Rij and CON T IG P R STij ), regional borders (BRDR CA U S,
BRDR U S CA, BRDR ROW CA and BRDR ROW U S), internal trade
(SAM E REGIONij ), and directional post-9/11 thickening of the Canada-
US borders (T HICK CA U S and T HICK U S CA). Each of the above
mentioned covariates was defined in the previous section.


2.3     Gravity Estimation Results
Panel PPML gravity estimates are reported in Table 1. The first column,
TOTAL, presents aggregate estimates for all services, and the next nine
columns report results at the sectoral level. To allow for trade adjustment,
while at the same time keeping the number of degrees of freedom sufficiently
large, we use 2-year lags.16 All results are obtained with time-varying,
directional, country-specific fixed effects.
    Distance. Bilateral distance is a significant impediment to trade in
services. Without any exception, all coefficient estimates on DIST AN CE
are negative and significant. The services distance elasticity estimates are
on average somewhat smaller in absolute value than those for goods sectors
in Anderson and Yotov (2010), as is intuitive. The sectoral variation of
services distance elasticities makes intuitive sense for the most part. The
lowest estimate of -0.3 (std.err. 0.163) is for Communication, where the core
of services (telecommunication, radio and television broadcasting and cable
programming) are provided through wireless channels, and are therefore
not subject to transportation costs. The largest estimates of -1.01 (std.err.
0.205) and -1.42 (std.err. 0.187) are for Education and Health services,
respectively. In both cases, pronounced localized consumption explains the
large numbers.
single trading partner (NT, PE and YT, for example), we included all the cities for
which data were available.
   15
      Following Mayer and Zignago (2006), we use 32.19 kilometers as inner-city distance.
   16
      Estimates obtained with 3-year lags, available upon request, are virtually identical
to the ones presented and discussed here.



                                           14
    Contiguity. Contiguity matters, but only when the common border is
between a province and a state: The only positive and (marginally) signif-
icant estimate on CON T IG P R P R, capturing the presence of a common
border between provinces, is for Wholesale. In contrast, all coefficient esti-
mates on CON T IG P R ST , capturing contiguity between a province and
a state, are positive, large and significant. The explanation is that almost
every province is contiguous to at least one US state, and this is likely to be
a major trade and business partner as well. Our province-state contiguity
estimates resemble but are smaller than those for goods in Anderson and
Yotov (2010), who study 19 non-service Canadian sectors. See also Brown
and Anderson (2002), who use aggregate Canadian data. The absence of
a province-province contiguity effect is more notable for services where we
might anticipate informal arrangements that mitigate regulatory barriers.
    Internal Trade (Provincial Borders). Given the structure of the border
dummies employed in our estimations, the coefficient estimate on SAM E REGION
should be interpreted as deviation from interprovincial trade. In volume
terms, the coefficient of 1.4 (std.err 0.629) on SAM E REGION for to-
tal services, for example, implies that internal provincial trade is about
3.06 (exp(1.4) − 1) times larger as compared to interprovincial trade, ce-
teris paribus. We estimate very significant (economically and statistically)
provincial borders. The largest estimates are for Health, Communication,
Other services and Education. In the case of Health and Education this
means that, in addition to the large distance barriers, there are other,
province-specific incentives for internal trade. Possible candidates include
provincially issued and managed health insurance and education credential
recognition. The category of Other services includes the subcategories of
beauty and personal care, funeral, child care, household, automobile re-
pairs to recreation. Thus, the large estimate that we obtain is intuitive
and reflects the fact that consumption in this category is strongly locally
biased, probably due to the frequent usage that this type of services re-
quires but also because of their personalized nature. The large estimate for
Communication may be due to high volume of local radio and television
broadcasting. On average, the provincial border barrier is higher in services
than for goods as reported in Anderson and Yotov (2010).
    Business is the only category with a small and not statistically sig-

                                  15
nificant estimate. Even though the estimate for Business as a whole is
insignificant, it is possible that intra-provincial trade is different than inter-
provincial trade for some of heterogeneous services (Professional, Scientific,
Technical, Computer, Administrative, etc.) included in this category. This
points to the potential benefits and need for analysis based on more dis-
aggregated services data. Overall, the internal trade estimates for services
presented in this section are in accordance with the findings from several
recent studies, described in footnote 12, and our results reinforce the need
and importance of accounting for internal trade in gravity-type estimations.
    International Borders. Our estimates show that international borders
have a strong depressing impact on Canadian trade in services. For every
service category, the point estimates of the coefficients on BRDR CA U S
and BRDR U S CA, capturing directional Canadian borders with US, and
BRDR ROW CA, standing for Canadian border with the rest of the
world, are economically large, negative and statistically significant at any
level. The trade cost factor implied by the border coefficients is exemplified
by the point estimate for BRDR CA U S in column (1) of Table 1. The
implied border tax factor is equal to exp [−3.744/(1 − σ)] for σ evaluated
at 6 and 10, yielding 1.52 and 2.11, a tax rate between 52% and 111%.
    The estimated magnitude of the Canadian-US border effect on services
is larger (in absolute value) on average than those for goods in Anderson
and Yotov (2010). Canadian border effects with the rest of the world
are similar in magnitude, slightly smaller for most categories.17 Finally, we
estimate the border between US and the rest of the world to be significantly
smaller for each service category, even insignificant in the case of Education.
The latter reflects the large numbers of foreign students and scholars in US.
    The estimates of the Canada-US border vary at the sectoral level. Ac-
commodation stands out with lower, in each direction, but still large and
significant, CA-US border estimates, while Wholesale is the category with
clearly larger CA-US border estimates. In addition, we do find some evi-
dence for directional border asymmetries between Canada and US.18 With
  17
     Finance is a notable exception, where the CA-ROW border is significantly lower as
compared to the CA-US border.
  18
     Note that the TOTAL estimates from column one do not capture any asymmetries.
This points to (i) aggregation bias in the total service estimates, and (ii) the need for
even more disaggregated service data.


                                           16
only the exception of financial services, all BRDR U S CA estimates are
lower, in absolute value, as compared to their BRDR CA U S counterparts.
Health is the category for which the difference between the BRDR CA U S
estimate and its BRDR U S CA counterpart is most pronounced.
    These findings should be interpreted with caution. Given the nature of
services trade, the fact that the coefficient on the dummy variable standing
for the border on Canadian exports to US is larger should, in most cases,
be interpreted as evidence of a thicker border facing Canadian exports.
To illustrate, we consider the case of Health services. Canadian exports
of Health services consist mostly of US patients going to Canada. Thus,
a larger BRDR CA U S estimate (as compared to BRDR U S CA esti-
mate) suggests that it is significantly harder for a US citizen to cross the
border in order to obtain health care in Canada. This result is intuitive,
given the differences between the health systems in the two economies. On
the one hand, the substantial waiting time for non-life threatening surg-
eries and for access to most new technologies, combined with limited access
to specialists (which is only by referral and may take months), have lead
Canadians to look for alternatives to the services offered by their provincial
health system. Given its proximity and high quality, the US offers both an
attractive substitute and a much needed complementary option. In con-
trast, as noted by the Bureau of Consular Affairs, U.S. Department of State,
Canada’s medical care is of a high standard but government-controlled and
rationed. Access to ongoing medical care is very difficult for anyone who
is not a member of the government-run, provincial health care plans, and
no Canadian health care provider would accept U.S. domestic health insur-
ance. Furthermore, Medicare coverage does not extend outside the United
States. In combination, these facts may explain the disproportional border
estimate on the Canadian side in the case of Health services.
    Overall, the estimates from this section suggest that there are large
and significant international borders in services trade. On the one hand,
based on the nature of production and supply of services, this should be
expected. On the other hand however, the magnitude of the border esti-
mates presented here is striking. This suggests that there are significant
opportunities for globalization gains in the services area. In addition, our
results emphasize the importance of knowing well the specific nature of a

                                     17
traded service when analyzing it, and to the need for more disaggregated
data that will allow for better understanding of the main causes behind the
large border effects in services trade.
    Post 9/11 Thickening. Many business owners, especially on the Cana-
dian side, have indicated that the CA-US border has ‘thickened’ as a result
of stricter post 9/11 security-related measures. Our estimates provide rea-
sonable empirical evidence that the US border has indeed thickened for
some services in the post 9/11 period. We obtain negative and significant
coefficient estimates on T HICK U S CA for five of the nine service cate-
gories in our sample, which add up to a negative and significant TOTAL
estimate on T HICK U S CA for services trade (see column 1 of Table 1).
The opposite is true on the Canadian side, where we estimate border ‘thin-
ning’ for four of the nine services in our sample and an overall ‘thinning’
for all services. Education and Finance are the only two categories for
which our estimates suggest thinning of the US border and thickening of
the Canadian border after 2001. We discuss possible explanations next.
    We offer two explanations for the negative and significant estimate on
T HICK CA U S for Education. First, it may reflect the trend that it is
harder (or less attractive) for American students to obtain higher educa-
tion in a Canadian University. Second, it may be driven by the fact that
Canadian scholars working temporarily (less than 1 year) in the US are fac-
ing additional security requirements imposed since 2001 on all foreigners
entering the US. While both sources are potentially reasonable candidates
to explain this result, we believe that the former has more weight. The
positive estimate on T HICK U S CA suggests that, all else equal, it is
easier for American scholars to provide services on Canadian soil and/or
that it is easier for Canadian students to obtain Education services in the
US after 2001. The latter reflects an overall trend of relatively easier access
for foreign students, as compared to any other constituencies, to the US.19
  19
    According to the Bureau of Consular Affairs, U.S. Department of State, before ap-
plying for visa, all student applicants are required to be accepted and approved for their
program. When accepted, educational institutions and program sponsors provide each
applicant the necessary approval documentation for the visa. This process significantly
reduces the additional security requirements and impediments faced by foreign students
entering the US. In addition, the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System
(SEVIS) was created in 2003 as a web-accessible database used by the Department of
Homeland Security to collect, track and monitor information regarding exchange vis-


                                           18
    We attribute our findings for Financial services (thinning on the US side
and thickening on the Canadian side) to (i) the disproportionate progress
in the provision of these services that was made in the US over the past
decade. At the same time, (ii) border security and other impediments to
trade that apply to physical crossing of the border, as in the case of Health
and Education services for example, do not apply to most services included
in the Finance category.
    We view our results as modest support of the claims of Canadian busi-
nessmen for significant increase in the efforts to cross the US border,20 and
we attribute the small thickening estimates to joint and unilateral efforts on
behalf of the US and the Canadian governments to facilitate bilateral trade
in the post 9/11 period. Examples of unilateral efforts on each side of the
border include the US Homeland Security in 2002 and the Canadian Border
Services Agency in 2003 as well as some border measures such as the U.S.
Customs and Border Protection’s cargo enforcement strategy. Joint pro-
grams include the Container Security Initiative (CSI), the Customs-Trade
Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT)/ Partners in Protection and the
Nexus program.21


2.4     Constructed Bias Results
All three provincial CB indexes are useful to understanding the economic
effects of Canadian political and geographic structure. CFB is the ratio of
predicted foreign shipments to the frictionless foreign shipments benchmark
for each province. CHB is the ratio of predicted internal shipments to
itors, international students and scholars who enter the United States on visas. This
further simplified the application and entering process for foreign students in the US.
   20
      The category of Transportation services (rail, bus, truck and air), where trade only
takes place through one mode of supply, cross border supply, is a good representative
example with an insignificant thickening estimate of -0.076 (std.err 0.064) on the Cana-
dian side and a statistically significant but economically small estimate of -0.134 (std.err
0.054) on the US side.
   21
      CSI was set up, based on reciprocity between partners, shortly after 9/11 to address
threats posed by a potential terrorist use of a maritime container to deliver a weapon.
C-TPAT/PIP are partnerships between the American and the Canadian governments,
respectively, and the private sector to protect supply chains from concealment of terrorist
weapons. Finally, the Nexus program is a collaboration of the CBSA and the Custom
and Border Protection in order to simplify the border-crossing process for members
while enhancing security.



                                            19
the frictionless internal benchmark, a measure of excess localization, while
CDB is the ratio of predicted inter-provincial shipments to frictionless inter-
provincial shipments, a measure of excess domestic trade.
    Services trade has some 7 times smaller CFB on average across sectors
and provinces than does goods trade (the latter based on new calculations
for this paper from the data used in Anderson and Yotov, 2010). In con-
trast, the CHBs for goods and services trade are broadly similar because
services’ higher CDBs than in goods trade offset their lower CFBs. This
means that the lower CFB in services relative to goods trade is not due
to greater localization forces in services. Equations (7) and (8) imply that
the results are mainly due to differences in the direct and indirect effects
of trade costs on sellers incidence on inter-provincial (ΠiC ) as compared to
international trade (ΠiC̄ ). In turn, we show below that the difference in
CFB results are mainly due to direct effects of differences between services
and goods in the estimated coefficients for SAM E REGION (home bias)
and CA U S BORDER (the international border barrier). Finally, services
CDBs have smaller variation across provinces than CHBs, localization is
damped within the Canadian confederation.

2.4.1    Constructed Home Bias (CHB)

Table 2 presents constructed home bias indexes and their evolution over
time for each region and each service category in our sample. Standard
errors are suppressed for brevity, but due to the precision of gravity coef-
ficients they are sufficiently small to ensure that all indexes and relation-
ships discussed in this section are statistically significant.22 Sectoral CHB
indexes are presented in columns (1)-(9) of Table 2, while column (10)
reports CHB numbers for all services. Regional CHB numbers for 2004,
the year for which these indexes are constructed, are reported in the rows
labeled ‘2004’. CHB percentage changes over the period 2004-2007 are in
rows ‘%∆04/07’.23 Toward the bottom of the table (row ‘All’), we aggre-
  22
     Extended tables, including standard errors (SEs) for each of the CB indexes re-
ported in Tables 2-4, are available by request. The SEs are obtained from one hundred
bootstraps of the PPML gravity estimates. See Anderson and Yotov (2010) for further
details.
  23
     The reason for choosing the period 2004-2007 to construct and to analyze the CB
numbers is that 2004 and 2007 are the only two years for which we have actual output


                                         20
gate CHBs across all regions for each category to obtain constructed home
biases for the world. Finally, the last two rows of Table 2 report aggregate
Canadian CHBs and their percentage changes, respectively.
    Overall, we find significant home biases in services trade. The CHB
indexes vary across regions and across service categories in a sensible way.
Several clear patterns stand out. Most prominently, we estimate massive
home biases for each province and territory and each service category in
our sample. The implication is that internal provincial trade is significantly
larger as compared to the theoretical value of internal trade in a frictionless
world. At the province-service level, the CHB numbers vary between 40.8,
for Wholesale services in the case of Ontario, and 163,852, for Health ser-
vices in the case of the Yukon Territories. As compared to the provincial
indexes, the estimates for US and ROW are significantly smaller (vary-
ing between 1.2 and 5.8), and much more homogeneous across the sectors.
These differences are due to size (outward multilateral resistance falls and
thus CHB rises with size on average; see Anderson and Yotov, 2010) and
aggregation (the US states and the ROW are very large composites relative
to any of Canada’s provinces).
    There is large, but intuitive, variation of the CHB numbers across the
Canadian provinces and territories. The remote regions of the Yukon Terri-
tories (YT), the Northwest Territories and Nunavut (NT) and Newfound-
land and Labrador (NL), and the small region of Prince Edward Island
(PE), with overall CHB estimates ranging from 1685 (for NL) to 8897 (for
YT), are the four regions with the largest CHB numbers. See column (10)
of Table 2, where we aggregate CHBs across all sectors for each province
or territory. On the opposite side of the CHB spectrum, we find the cen-
tral, most industrialized and economically diversified regions of Ontario
(ON) and Quebec (QC). These are the two provinces with the lowest CHB
numbers of 75 for Ontario and 145 for Quebec (see column 10), revealing
the least, but still very large, deviation of predicted internal trade from
data for the rest of the world. As discussed in the data section, our gravity estimates
are not at all sensitive to interpolating and extrapolating the ROW data, needed to
construct internal trade in order to obtain a complete trade data set. However, the
general equilibrium indexes (MRs and CBs) showed significant sensitivity (probably
due to the large size of the ROW region) and, therefore, we decided to only use the
years for which we have actual ROW data.



                                          21
predicted frictionless internal trade.
    Our CHB indexes for services as a whole are close to the results from
Anderson and Yotov (2010), who construct provincial CHB indexes for the
resource and manufacturing sectors of the Canadian economy. On average,
provincial home bias is around 9% larger for services (with much of this dif-
ference due to the outlying provinces) while the correlation of services and
goods CHBs across provinces is 0.95. The somewhat surprisingly small dif-
ference between services and goods CHBs arises because some gravity coef-
ficient estimates are larger in absolute value for goods (distance, contiguity
between province and state) while others are smaller for goods (provincial
border, international border). In the calculations of CHBs the differing
distribution of sales and expenditure shares also plays a role.
    CHB variation across service categories is large but intuitive. As ex-
pected, we estimate the largest home biases for Health and for Education
services. As can be seen from the last panel of Table 2, we obtain an overall,
across all provinces, CHB index of 367 for Education and a corresponding
number of 732 for Health. The explanation is in the nature of these services
(personalized and credential related) and could be due to province-based
regulations (such as health insurance and learning curriculum). Wholesale
is the service category with the smallest CHB estimates for each province,
which translate into an overall index of 60 for Canada. Transportation
services follow closely with low provincial estimates and an overall CHB
number of 129. The fact that the regulations for Wholesale and for Trans-
portation services are mostly nationally (as opposed to locally) imposed,
combined with significant international interdependence, coordination and
regulation in these sectors, may explain our findings.
    Most service sectors experience falls in CHB over the 2004-2007 period.
Accommodation, Finance and Health services are the categories with the
largest overall CHB decrease of 33.3% , 10.4% and 10.1%, respectively,
across all Canadian regions. See the last row of Table 2. Since the main
gravity coefficients are constant (and the border thickening for Canadian
services exports is offset by border thinning for Canadian imports), the
CHB changes are due to reallocation of shipment and expenditure shares.
As in Anderson and Yotov (2010) these have shifted consistently with low-
ering the overall trade cost bill

                                     22
    Wholesale is the only category with CHB increase in each province,
which translates into an overall increase of 26.3% for Canada as a whole.
This suggests that the Wholesale industry has not been subject to the in-
tense ‘globalization’ forces experienced in other industries. A contributing
factor is the large CHB increase for the US, which is the main Canadian
trading partner.
    At the provincial aggregate level, CHB changes over the period 2004-
2007 are relatively small according to rows ‘%∆04/07’ of column 10. One
explanation is that the period of investigation is too short to reflect larger
effects in a period when there were no major changes in the Canadian
economy nor in its main trading partner US.24 Alberta (AB) and British
Columbia (BC) are the two provinces that experience the largest overall
CHB decrease of 11% and 6%, respectively. The economic growth of these
regions may explain our findings. Newfoundland and Labrador (NL) and
Nova Scotia (NS) are the two regions with largest CHB increase. Notably,
the most developed provinces, Ontario and Quebec, have the most stable
CHB indexes. An interesting regional pattern is that the West Canada
provinces enjoy CHB decrease during the period 2004-2007, whereas the
East-Canadian provinces see their CHBs increase.
    The world as a whole enjoyed a CHB decrease in all service sectors
but Accommodation and Finance. See panel ‘All’ of Table 2. Our results
indicate that the increase in the case of Accommodation services is driven
by the index for the rest of the world, while the increase in Finance is due
to the US.

2.4.2   Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB)

Table 2 presents Constructed Foreign Bias indexes and their evolution over
time for each region and each service category in our sample. Sectoral
CFBs are presented in columns (1)-(9) of Table 3. Column (10) reports
aggregate CFB numbers for all services. Regional indexes for 2004 are
reported in the rows labeled ‘2004’, and CFB percentage changes over the
period 2004-2007 are presented in rows ‘%∆04/07’. Toward the bottom of
the table (row ‘All’), we aggregate CFBs across all regions for each category
  24
    In contrast, Anderson and Yotov (2010) report larger drops in CHB but over a
longer horizon, 1992-2003.

                                      23
to obtain constructed foreign biases for each service in the world. Finally,
the last two rows of Table 3 report aggregate Canadian CFBs and their
percentage changes, respectively.
    Overall, our estimates suggest significant provincial biases in services
trade that vary across regions and across service categories. Several pat-
terns stand out. First, we obtain very small CFB numbers for each province
and territory in each service category in our sample. The interpretation
is that provincial international trade is much smaller than its frictionless
value, i.e. much of the provincial international trade is missing in each ser-
vice industry. At the province-service level, the CFB numbers vary between
0.001, for Health in the case of Quebec, and 0.586, for Accommodation in
the case of the Yukon Territories.25
    Our CFB indexes for services are on average around 7 times smaller
overall than CFBs for the agricultural, mining and manufacturing sec-
tors of the Canadian economy constructed from data in Anderson and
Yotov (2010). The explanation is mainly in the direct effects of the dif-
ferences in coefficient estimates: services have larger SAM E REGION
and CA U S BORDER coefficients. Use the definition of CFB26 and the
notation (G) and (S) to denote Goods and Services. Suppose (falsely)
that all coefficients other than those affecting borders are equal for ser-
vices and goods. Then t1−σ          1−σ
                           ii (G)/tii (S) = exp γ5 (G)/ exp γ5 (M ). Taking
the arithmetic average of point estimates of γ5 reported for goods in An-
derson and Yotov (2010) and the average estimate for services reported
here, t1−σ       1−σ
        ii (G)/tii (S) = 1/4.8. The empirical finding that CHB(S) =
1.09CHB(G) implies that for a representative province and generic sector
1.09t1−σ       1−σ
      ii (G)/tii (S) = Πi
                          1−σ
                              (G)/Π1−σ
                                     i  (S) = 1.09/4.8. Turning to CFB, its
  25
      The two aggregate regions in our sample (US and ROW) also register significant
foreign biases.
   26
      CFB is defined as the ratio of predicted international trade to hypothetical friction-
less international trade. Repeating (7) for a generic sector and region i,

                                                 Π1−σ
                                                  iC̄
                                     CF Bi =            .
                                                 Π1−σ
                                                  i




                                            24
definition implies

               CF Bi (G)  Π1−σ
                           iC̄
                               (G) Π1−σ
                                    i   (S)  Π1−σ  (G) 4.8
                         = 1−σ      1−σ     = i1−σ
                                                C̄
                                                           .
               CF Bi (S)  ΠiC̄ (S) Πi (G)    ΠiC̄ (S) 1.09

Attributing all difference in the sellers incidence on foreign sales to differ-
ence in the average estimated CA-US border coefficients (exponentiating
as before to obtain 1.83 as the relative difference), the right hand side of
the equation yields the value 8.06, close to the actual estimated value of
around 7.
    To focus on the variation across sectors, we construct overall CFBs by
sector for Canada. As can be seen from the last panel ‘CAN’ of Table 3,
Accommodation and Transportation are among the service sectors with the
largest CFB estimates. We find these results intuitive because many of the
Accommodation services are sold to foreigners, who use various Transporta-
tion modes to come to Canada. On the other side of the CFB spectrum are
Health and Wholesale services with CFB estimates that are close to zero.
Local consumption and government regulations can explain our findings in
the case of Health services, and there is plenty of anecdotal evidence for
huge price differences and price discrimination between Canada and US, for
example, which are reflected in the low CFB index for Wholesale services.
    Sectoral CFBs have increased for most service categories in our sample
during the period 2004-2007.27 Accommodation, Other services and Trans-
portation services experience the largest increases of 27 percent, 24 percent
and 18 percent, respectively. See the last row of Table 3. A possible ex-
planation for these results could be the tightening of the US border in the
post 9/11 period. Note that Accommodation, Other and Transportation
were three of the industries for which we estimate significant ‘thickening’
on the US side.
    Notably, Health and Education are the two service categories with the
largest foreign bias decreases (captured by increases in the CFB index over
time) of 16 percent and 14 percent, respectively, during the 2004-2007
period. Combined with the estimated fall in the constructed home biases
for each of these sectors, our CFB results suggest that the increase in
  27
    Note that a negative change in the CFB index, i.e. a smaller 2007 value, implies an
increase in the foreign bias.


                                          25
the inflows of foreign patients and foreign students have been much larger
as compared to the inflow of Canadian patients and students from other
provinces and territories. It is also worth noting that while the increase
in the Health CFB index is more or less homogeneous across provinces
(Alberta is the only province suffering a CFB fall), the increase in the
overall constructed foreign bias for Education is driven almost exclusively
by Ontario and Quebec. Industry concentration is the natural cause for
these differences.
    The last column of Table 3 focuses on CFB variation across provinces.
The indexes for the more remote and the smaller provinces and territories
are larger than the corresponding numbers for the more developed regions.
For example, YT and NT are the territories with the largest CFB estimates
of 16 percent and 12 percent, respectively. PE has the fourth largest index
of 8 percent. Quebec is the province with the smallest CFB estimate of
3.8 percent, followed by Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario with 4.1
percent each. Combined with the CHB estimates from the pervious section,
the CFB findings from this section imply that the more developed regions
are trading more actively with the rest of Canada, while the more remote
regions are relatively more open to the rest of the world. CFB changes are
consistent with this result. As can be seen from the last column of Table
3, the more remote and the smaller regions experience further increase
in CFB, while the more developed regions suffer CFB falls. Ontario is a
notable exception with an overall CFB increase of 5 percent, mainly due
to the large increase in the Education index for this province.
    For comparison, Tables 6 and 7 from Appendix B report CFBs for
goods trade constructed using the data of Anderson and Yotov (2010).
Goods CFBs are well below 1; foreign trade is less than in the frictionless
benchmark equilibrium, but much larger than for services trade, by an
average factor greater than 7 based on comparing the bottom right hand
cells of the two tables. In other words the services trade of Canada’s
provinces on the whole would be more than 7 times larger if it were to be
only as biased against foreign trade as is Canada’s goods trade. Moreover,
over time CFB is rising considerably faster in goods trade as well, by a
factor greater than 10 over a period only about 3 times longer.
    Another interesting experiment is to break the provincial foreign bi-

                                    26
ases into CFBs with the US and CFBs with ROW. Tables 8 and 9 from
Appendix B report provincial CFBs and their percentage changes over the
period 2004-2007 against the rest of the world and against US, respectively.
Several findings stand out. First, the difference in the CFBs vary per prod-
uct. As one would expect, the US indexes are larger (i.e. less foreign bias
toward the US) for most services. The difference is most pronounced for
Accommodation and Transportation. An interesting result is that the CFB
indexes for ROW are larger, i.e. the foreign bias to the rest of the world is
smaller, for two categories, namely Finance and Education. Second, there
is a pattern in the CFB differences across provinces. In particular, we find
that the ROW CFB numbers are larger relative to the US CFBs for the
more remote and the smaller regions, i.e. these regions are relatively more
open to trade with the rest of the world. Finally, the difference in CFB
changes also varies per product, but we do not find an overall pattern.28
In sum, the results from this experiment suggest heterogeneous response
and/or treatment in the foreign biases against US and ROW, which might
be of interest to policymakers.
    Overall, the constructed foreign bias indexes, presented in this section,
and the constructed home bias indexes, discussed in the previous section,
reveal significant opportunities for gains from more internal trade with
the rest of Canada and from more international trade for each Canadian
province and territory.

2.4.3    Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB)

Domestic bias raises inter-provincial services trade in Canada to more than
six times its frictionless benchmark value overall as revealed in our CDB
results. Domestic bias is much smaller than home (intra-provincial) bias
CHB but some 800 times larger than foreign bias CFB.
    Constructed Domestic Bias indexes along with their evolution over time
are presented in Table 4 for each Canadian province and territory and each
service category in our sample. Sectoral CDBs are presented in columns
(1)-(9) of Table 4. Column (10) reports aggregate CDB numbers for all
  28
    For example, the foreign bias against the US has risen faster for Transportation,
Finance and Communication, and has fallen slower for Health. The foreign bias against
ROW increased by more for Communication and decreased by less for Business.


                                         27
services. Provincial indexes for 2004 are reported in the rows labeled ‘2004’,
and CDB percentage changes over the period 2004-2007 are presented in
rows ‘%∆04/07’. In the last two rows of the table report aggregate CDBs
for Canada and their percentage changes, respectively.
    The large ratio of CDB to CFB comes from the large ratio of sellers’
incidence of trade costs for foreign vs. domestic sales. Using (7) and (8),
solve for relative incidence as a function of relative CBs using elasticities
of substitution σ ranging from 6 to 10. The results from column (10) of
Table 4 imply that overall services sellers’ incidence on foreign sales is 2
to 4 times larger than sellers’ incidence on domestic sales. This relative
sellers’ incidence comparison is a useful complement to the direct bilat-
eral estimate of the international border effect inferred from the estimated
gravity equation. Section 2.3 reports the trade cost factor equivalent of
the border as ranging from 1.52 to 2.11. The difference is attributable to
the relative incidence measure (i) including relative distance and contiguity
as components of bilateral relative trade costs and (ii) general equilibrium
multilateral effects of trade costs.
    Notably, CDB variation across provinces is much lower than is the vari-
ation of CHB, provincial localization is damped on inter-provincial trade.
Compare column (10) of Table 4 with column (10) of Table 2. The con-
siderable variation of CDB across provinces in column (10) of Table 4 is
not due to direct inter-provincial barriers (our gravity estimates find no
province-province contiguity effects) but to the other direct influences of
geography along with general equilibrium effects that affect provinces dif-
ferently. Some remote (e.g. YT) and small (e.g. PE) provinces are the
regions with the highest domestic bias. Over time, CDB has fallen for each
of the provinces except NB, though overall considerably less than the fall
in CHB (−2.6% vs. −7.2% using on the bottom right figures in Tables 2
and 4), both changes reflecting Canada’s outward turn also shown in the
rise in overall CFB of 1.3%, the bottom right figure in Table 3.
    Turning to variation across sectors, the aggregate sectoral indexes to-
ward the bottom of Table 4 reveal that the ratio of predicted to frictionless
inter-provincial trade ranges from Business and Communication on the up-
per bound with CDB estimates of 12 and 11.5 to Health at 1.9 on the lower
bound. This is a much smaller range than for CHB reported above.

                                     28
    Constructed domestic bias fell for most service categories between 2004
and 2007. Wholesale and Education are the two exceptions, but while the
increase in the Wholesale CDB is across all provinces, the increase in the
average Canadian index for Education is driven by Quebec and, especially,
by Ontario. One interpretation of these findings is that more and more
students from the rest of Canada choose to go to ON and QC to obtain
higher education (Note that the CDBs for education have fallen for the
rest of the Canadian provinces and territories). Concentration of good
quality higher education services in ON and QC may explain our results.
Accommodation is the sector that experiences the largest aggregate fall of
36.6 percent, which is consistent across all provinces.
    Interestingly, Accommodation was the sector with the largest, across
all provinces, CHB and CFB falls as well. The simultaneous decrease in all
CB indexes seems odd at first sight, because, as suggested by our theory,
the weighted sum of the three bias indexes should always be equal to one
for each province and for each service category. As a check on calculations,
we confirmed this restriction for each province-service combination. This
implies that the expenditure weights on the CBs should have moved signif-
icantly and in opposite directions between 2004 and 2007. Table (5) shows
this for Accommodation in the case of Ontario.29 As can be seen from the
table, Canadian expenditures and Ontario’s own expenditures have risen
during the period 2004-2007, but the rest of the world, including US, has
spent significantly less on Ontario’s accommodation services. This is what
makes the simultaneous decrease in all three constructed bias numbers pos-
sible and, at the same time, consistent with our theory.

2.4.4       Test of Structural Gravity

As discussed in the theoretical section 1, Constructed Bias indexes can be
calculated in two ways. The one reported above calculates buyers’ and
sellers’ incidences from (2)-(3) and then calculates the relevant subset of
sellers incidences using (6) and its analogs. The ratio of the subset of sellers
incidences to the overall sellers’ incidence (raised to the power 1 − σ) gives
the Constructed Bias. The alternative measure is based on the ratio of pre-
  29
       The numbers for the rest of the provinces are qualitatively identical.



                                             29
dicted to predicted frictionless trade on any bilateral flow, X    bij /(Ej Yi /Y ),
where X bij is the predicted value from the econometric estimation of the
gravity equation using fixed effects to control for Ej /Pj1−σ and Yi /Π1−σ      i  .
The fixed effect procedure is in principle agnostic about whether the re-
strictions of structural gravity hold, and one might anticipate that the very
different characteristics of services trade would make structural gravity fit
less well so that the fixed effects pick up other forces. The Constructed Bias
indexes based on the X   bij /(Ej Yi /Y )s were calculated to see if they differed
from the indexes based on terms such as the right hand side of (7). In
practice the two sets of estimates are essentially identical, both overall and
subdivided into CHBs, CFBs and CDBs; and the correlation coefficient is
equal to 1.


3     Conclusion
This paper measures the major geographic impediments to Canadian ser-
vice trade by sector and province during the period 1997-2007. Border
fixed effects for local, interprovincial and international trade reflect differ-
ential treatment of outsiders by regulators as well as a host of other policy
and non-policy barriers to trade. These and other geographic determi-
nants deflect trade from its hypothetical frictionless benchmark, measured
by Constructed Bias indexes defined using the structural gravity model.
    Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) is some 7 times lower on average for
services than for goods trade, quantifying the widely held qualitative judg-
ment that the direct and indirect effects of barriers to trade in services are
much larger than for goods. Constructed Home Bias (CHB) is large for all
services, on the whole only slightly larger than for goods, drawing on the
results of Anderson and Yotov (2010). Thus the lower CFB in services is
not due to greater home bias at the provincial level. Instead, Constructed
Domestic Bias is higher for services than for goods, accounting for the lower
CFB. There is large variation in Constructed Bias across sectors, much of
it intuitively explained by the characteristics of the various service sectors.
    Our results indicate that disaggregated gravity works well in the case of
services and we view the service gravity estimates presented here as inter-
esting and useful. In some cases, our results are similar to commodity-level

                                        30
estimates, while in other instances we see that the specific characteristics
of service trade play an important role. Overall, we find the estimates to
be reasonable and intuitive.
    Several results stand out in regard to the Canada-US border effects and
their changes in the post 9/11 period. We find significant and large service
border effects that are present in each direction of service trade flows. We
also provide evidence for changes (mostly thickening) in the border effects
in the post 9/11 period. Finally, we see some directional asymmetries in
both our border and thickening estimates. Even though our data is at the
sectoral level, it is still hard to interpret our directional findings due to
mixed nature for most of the nine service categories in our sample. This
points to the need for analysis of more disaggregated service data that will
not only enhance better qualitative understanding of the border effects,
but could also allow for more rigorous qualitative analysis.
    The magnitude and directional symmetries of our border and thickening
estimates point to the need for further investigation of the factors behind
these effects. In particular, with the use of firm level data it may be possible
to separate the effects of service trade barriers on fixed and variable trade
costs.
    The magnitude of services trade barriers found in our study suggests
potential large gains from globalization over time, especially if speeded
up by deliberate policy efforts to liberalize services trade. The similar
CHBs of services and goods trade suggest the potential for CFBs to also be
similar, implying a seven-fold potential rise in services trade across borders.
Large welfare improvement for the Canadian economy would result from
even a partial fall of the services border barrier toward that for goods.
With more understanding of border barrier reductions achievable by policy
liberalization, it would be straightforward to simulate changes in the terms
of trade and gains from trade following Anderson and Yotov (2011b).




                                      31
References
Anderson James E., 2011. ’The Gravity Model’, Annual Review of Eco-
nomics, 3, 133-160.
Anderson James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2003. ’Gravity with Gravitas:
A Solution to the Border Puzzle’, The American Economic Review, 93(1),
170-192.
Anderson James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2001. ’Borders, Trade and
Welfare’, Working Papers in Economics, Boston College.
Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. 2008. “The Changing Incidence
of Geography”, NBER Working Paper 14423.
Anderson James E. and Yoto V. Yotov, 2010 ’The Changing Incidence of
Geography’, American Economic Review, 100, 1: 106-116.
Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. 2011a. “Specialization: Pro- and
Anti-Globalizing, 1990-2002,” NBER Working Paper 14423.
Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. 2011b. “Terms of Trade and
Global Efficiency Effects of Free Trade Agreements, 1990-2002,” NBER
Working Paper No. 17003.
Baldwin, Richard and Daria Taglioni. 2006. “Gravity for Dummies and
Dummies for Gravity Equations,” NBER Working Papers 12516.
Brown, Mark W. and William P. Anderson. 2002. “Spatial markets and
the potential for economic integration between Canadian and U.S. regions”,
Papers in Regional Science, 81, 99120.
Cheng, I.-Hui and Howard J. Wall. 2002. “Controlling for heterogeneity
in gravity models of trade”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working
Paper vol. 1999-010C.
Copeland Brian and Aaditya Mattoo, 2008. ’The Basic Economics of Ser-
vices Trade’, A Handbook of International Trade in Services, The World
Bank, 84-132.
Francois Joseph and Bernard Hoekman, 2010. ’Services Trade and Policy’
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(3), 642-692.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. 2000. “Non-Europe : The Magnitude and
Causes of Market Fragmentation in Europe”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv
136, 285-314.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Yona Rubinstein, 2008. ’Estimating


                                   32
Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes’, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 123(2), 441-487.
Jensen, Paul and Yoto V. Yotov. 2011. “Agriculture, Gravity and Welfare”
Manuscript, Drexel University.
Mayer, T. and S. Zignago. 2006. “Notes on CEPIIs distances measures”,
CEPII.
McCallum, John, 1995. ”National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional
Trade Patterns,” American Economic Review, vol. 85(3), pages 615-23,
June.
Olivero, Maria and Yoto V. Yotov. 2011. “Dynamic Gravity: Theory and
Empirical Implications,” Canadian Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Santos Silva, Jorge and Sylvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 88, No. 4: 641-658.
Trefler Daniel, 2004. ’The Long and Short of the Canada-US Free Trade
Agreement’, American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No.4: 870-895.
Vance Anneliese, 2007. ’Strategic responses by Canadian and U.S. ex-
porters to increased U.S. border security measures: a firm-level analy-
sis’, Canada-United States Trade Center occasional paper, no 36, Canada-
United States Trade Center, 35 pages
Wolf, Holger. 2000. “Intranational Home Bias in Trade”, Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 82 (4), 555-63.




                                  33
                                       Table 1: PPML Panel Gravity Estimates, Services, 1997-2007
                                (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)            (9)            (10)
                            TOTAL        TRNSP       CMNCN          WHLSL         FNNCE        BUSNS        EDCTN       HELTH        ACMDN             OTHER
     DISTANCE                 -0.671       -0.617      -0.297         -0.563        -0.678      -0.928       -1.010      -1.420         -0.927          -0.724
                           (0.191)**    (0.160)**    (0.163)+      (0.162)**      (0.276)*    (0.226)**    (0.205)** (0.187)**       (0.168)**        (0.168)**
     CONTIG PR PR             -0.034        0.084       0.216          0.341        -0.328      -0.420       -0.394      -0.228          0.008           0.129
                             (0.264)      (0.235)     (0.251)       (0.171)*       (0.401)     (0.337)      (0.278)     (0.295)        (0.246)         (0.248)
     CONTIG PR ST              1.144        1.128       0.665          0.482         1.336       1.069        0.835       0.792          0.757           1.287
                           (0.213)**    (0.267)**    (0.191)**     (0.283)+      (0.298)**    (0.235)**    (0.265)** (0.307)**       (0.225)**        (0.172)**
     SAME REGION               1.405       1.044        2.377          1.199        1.653        0.333        1.823      2.536           1.134           1.886
                            (0.629)*     (0.532)*    (0.551)**      (0.505)*     (0.944)+      (0.794)     (0.549)** (0.586)**        (0.574)*        (0.541)**
     BRDR CA US               -3.744       -3.569      -3.719         -5.302        -4.045      -3.777       -3.551      -5.099         -2.236          -2.893
                           (0.295)**    (0.276)**    (0.221)**     (0.389)**     (0.460)**    (0.365)**    (0.344)** (0.500)**       (0.215)**        (0.313)**
     BRDR US CA               -3.416       -3.014      -3.013         -5.124        -4.351      -3.009       -2.409      -1.408         -1.878          -2.586
                           (0.231)**    (0.279)**    (0.194)**     (0.344)**     (0.301)**    (0.270)**    (0.293)** (0.338)**       (0.221)**        (0.231)**




34
     BRDR ROW CA              -2.433       -2.786      -3.170         -4.839        -1.750      -2.648       -1.268      -3.233         -1.041          -2.212
                           (0.279)**    (0.261)**    (0.217)**     (0.246)**     (0.323)**    (0.310)**    (0.343)** (0.330)**       (0.227)**        (0.316)**
     BRDR ROW US              -0.908       -0.676      -2.530         -0.041        -0.312      -1.705        0.297      -0.717         -0.865          -1.236
                           (0.238)**    (0.204)**    (0.222)**       (0.181)       (0.334)    (0.314)**     (0.216)    (0.230)**     (0.220)**        (0.234)**
     THICK CA US               0.161       -0.076       0.091          0.224        -0.175       0.306       -0.170       1.028          0.416           0.513
                           (0.019)**      (0.064)     (0.075)        (0.197)     (0.046)**    (0.048)**    (0.037)** (0.083)**       (0.049)**        (0.114)**
     THICK US CA              -0.138       -0.134       0.023         -0.244        0.330       -0.348        0.390      -1.119         -0.502          -0.540
                           (0.037)**     (0.054)*     (0.042)        (0.200)     (0.030)**    (0.096)**    (0.033)** (0.078)**       (0.056)**        (0.113)**
      cons                     6.241        4.094      0.584           3.172         4.789      6.211         2.635      6.724          5.236           4.565
                           (1.746)**    (1.532)**     (1.835)       (1.608)*      (2.372)*    (2.026)**    (1.549)+ (1.237)**        (1.350)**        (1.393)**
     N                         1173         1173        1173           1173          1173        1173         1173        1173           1173            1173
     ll                   -259346.535 -36914.246 -14931.003 -150530.828 -80497.699 -53542.761 -3518.936 -3260.472 -25835.737                         -28734.000
     Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. Huber-Eicker-White robust standard errors (clustered by country pair) are reported in parentheses. Dependent
     variable is always nominal trade. Each estimation is performed with directional (source and destination), time-varying fixed effects. Fixed effects estimates
     are omitted for brevity. The years employed in the estimations are 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005 and 2007. See main text for further details.
                     Table 2: Constructed Home Bias (CHB) Indexes and Their Evolution Over Time
                              (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)      (9)       (10)
     RGN         Year     TRNSP CMNCN WHLSL FNNCE BUSNS EDCTN HELTH ACMDN OTHER                                                ALL
      AB         2004      178.2       384.6       123.6      264.2    367.4       851.4      1725.2        522   263.7        232.7
              %∆04/07       -14.1      -16.7         7.3      -17.2    -16.3         -.7       -13.1       -39.5   -15.1       -11.1
      BC         2004      187.8        363        135.6      229.1    468.1       664.8      1292.9       470.5  262.2        239.7
              %∆04/07       -10.1      -11.8        18.5      -13.4    -15.1        -4.8       -13.8       -35.6   -10.3        -5.5
      MB         2004        472      1030.9       322.8      873.2   1595.2      3235.7      5195.8      1767.7  1017.4       667.4
              %∆04/07        -9.7      -11.3        19.9      -10.8       -9        -2.1        -7.1        -31       -7        -1.7
      NB         2004      563.3       1305         338      1180.6   1265.1      3946.4      8651.1      1708.6  1215.5       811.4
              %∆04/07        -5.2       -8.5        24.6       -9.1       -4          .3       -10.5       -27.9      -5        4.6
      NL         2004      1268.5     1926.9       692.5     2370.6   3159.1      7552.3     13761.5      4017.6  2358.1      1685.2
              %∆04/07        -6.4         .7        24.4      -11.3     -4.6          -2        -8.8       -27.3    -3.2         5
      NS         2004      744.6       1265        398.5     1107.8   1596.8      2553.8      6553.2      1997.6  1169.2       910.7
              %∆04/07        -3.8      -14.4        26.6       -9.2     -4.4         3.6        -12        -28.4    -1.2        5.8
      NT         2004      1414.8     3586.8       969.2     4325.7   5140.4     28621.3 67085.3          5596.3  4803.3      2981.4
              %∆04/07        -8.5       -7.2        16.7      -11.2    -12.7        -11        -11.5       -22.7    -2.3        -5.2
      ON         2004       87.1       112.8        40.8      70.2     119.1       226.2        436        190.5   86.2        75.3
              %∆04/07        -2.7       -9.2        26.1      -10.8     -8.5        -4.8       -10.4       -34.3    -4.9        1.3




35
      PE         2004      2039.5     4063.6      1153.5     4231.6   4450.6     15990.8 40101.7          6774.4  5426.1      3739.7
              %∆04/07        -6.2      -10.2        23.3       -10      -7.2        -4.4        -9.5       -25.2    -2.7        3.1
      QC         2004      150.2       208.4        71.8      157.5    247.1       567.7       1016        359.8  159.5        144.7
              %∆04/07          -4        -7         23.3       -10      -7.4        -3.8         -7        -30.9    -4.1        1.8
     ROW         2004         1.2          2         1.5       2.8       1.3         1.2        1.2         1.2      1.2        1.3
              %∆04/07        -2.2        -8         -15        -6.7      -.9        -1.8        -2.1        6.6       -2        -2.2
      SK         2004      433.5      1078.7       297.3      902.4   1412.9      3268.2      6657.8      1600.1    977        609.8
              %∆04/07        -6.2       -7.9        13.6      -15.4    -15.9           4       -11.9       -31.4   -13.4        -2.4
      USA        2004         5.2          2         2.9       1.6       4.1         5.8        5.6         5.4      5.7        2.5
              %∆04/07         13        9.8         50.5       4.7       3.6        11.1        11.4       -20.5   12.5          7
      YT         2004      3774.3     6345.2       2753     10921.8 13836.8 89625.5          163852      13333.6 12479.3      8897.1
              %∆04/07        -9.7       -9.4        17.7      -12.3    -11.6        -6.6       -13.9       -23.9      -7        -3.9
      All        2004         1.4       2.1          1.8       1.9       1.6         1.4        1.4         1.4      1.5        1.6
              %∆04/07        -3.4        -.3       -17.3       3.3        -1        -2.8        -3.2        9.6     -3.1         -2
     CAN         2004      129.4       167.7        60.2      107.7     177        366.9       732.4       293.6    134        161.8
              %∆04/07        -3.8       -8.6        26.3      -10.4       -8        -5.3       -10.1       -33.3    -4.8        -7.2
     Notes: This table reports Constructed Home Bias (CHB) indexes by region and service sector in 2004. It also lists the   CHB
     percentage changes over the period 2004-2007. See text for description of the CHB index and discussion of results. An   extended
     table, including standard errors for each of the CB indexes reported here, is available by request.
                    Table 3: Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) Indexes and Their Evolution Over Time
                             (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)     (9)         (10)
     RGN         Year     TRNSP CMNCN WHLSL FNNCE BUSNS EDCTN HELTH ACMDN OTHER                                               ALL
      AB         2004       .083         .05       .007       .034      .104        .07        .003       .222    .081         .041
              %∆04/07      -15.2        -6.2          -3        -6     -13.6        -7.8       -3.9      -28.7    -27.7        -5.1
      BC         2004       .095        .049       .007       .033      .124       .068        .002        .21    .072         .041
              %∆04/07      -16.6       -13.3         1.8     -10.2      -2.2        -6.3       22.7      -18.3    -22.9        -4.1
      MB         2004       .129        .087       .011       .065      .179       .107        .003       .276    .106         .065
              %∆04/07      -18.5        -5.1         7.1      -9.1      -4.6        -7.5        1.6      -19.9     -24         -1.5
      NB         2004       .158        .114       .013       .102      .259       .164        .004       .385    .162         .091
              %∆04/07      -16.1        -6.3         9.4       -.8        -1        6.9        30.1      -18.1    -23.4         4.3
      NL         2004        .12        .092       .012        .08      .173       .174        .002       .369     .11         .069
              %∆04/07       -9.9        -3.7       19.1       -3.9        8         -7.1       27.8      -17.2    -20.7         7.8
      NS         2004       .103        .072       .011       .064      .158       .106        .002       .313     .09         .058
              %∆04/07      -12.7        -4.8       17.8         .3       4.8        4.3        33.1      -18.7    -24.3         7.9
      NT         2004       .163        .127       .017       .149      .301       .407        .005       .583    .175         .123
              %∆04/07      -11.2        -7.7       14.2         -3      -3.8        -8.1       27.8      -14.1    -15.9         1.7
      ON         2004       .075        .043       .007        .04       .13       .053        .003       .137    .077         .041
              %∆04/07        -20         -10         8.1       4.2       1.9       25.7         14       -32.4    -23.5         4.8




36
      PE         2004       .128        .118       .014       .093      .179       .182        .002       .369    .156         .082
              %∆04/07      -13.1        -5.8          16        .3       1.4         5         28.6      -16.6    -24.3         7.5
      QC         2004       .081        .048       .006       .034      .122       .055        .001       .141     .07         .038
              %∆04/07      -19.3        -5.7          9       -6.5       -.2       15.7        22.1      -21.3    -23.3         -.5
     ROW         2004       .111        .008       .127       .047      .024       .025        .007       .038     .01         .049
              %∆04/07       -5.4           0        -4.7      -6.4        0          12           0      -26.3      10          8.9
      SK         2004       .135        .094       .012       .076        .2       .153        .004       .358    .127         .069
              %∆04/07      -14.2        -8.3         2.7     -11.2      -9.1       -11.4        1.9      -19.2    -27.2        -3.7
      USA        2004       .087         .01       .145       .067      .046       .093        .002       .045    .048         .057
              %∆04/07       16.1          10          31         6       4.3        -4.3          0       33.3     6.3          8.2
      YT         2004        .26        .194       .025       .203      .374       .404        .003       .586    .309         .164
              %∆04/07      -14.5        -7.7         8.4      -6.2      -4.4        -9.1          5      -12.3    -18.8         3.8
      All        2004       .107        .009         .13      .062      .028       .031        .005        .04    .013         .052
              %∆04/07       -2.4          .3         -.7        .8       -.5        6.8          -1      -15.4      8           7.4
     CAN         2004       .084        .048       .007       .039      .127        .06        .002       .161    .077         .042
              %∆04/07      -17.9        -8.8         6.7      -1.8      -1.4       13.9        16.3      -27.1    -23.9         1.3
     Notes: This table reports Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) indexes by region and service sector in 2004. It also lists the CFB
     percentage changes over the period 2004-2007. See text for description of the CFB index and discussion of results. An extended
     table, including standard errors for each of the CB indexes reported here, is available by request.
                   Table 4: Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB) Indexes and Their Evolution Over Time
                            (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)    (9)         (10)
     RGN        Year      TRNSP CMNCN WHLSL FNNCE BUSNS EDCTN HELTH ACMDN OTHER                                              ALL
      AB        2004       9.456      10.413       5.985     3.467     9.575      3.955       2.186      10.353  4.569       5.743
              %∆04/07       -3.4        -5.8       12.7      -10.2     -18.7      -10.3       -24.2       -38.3  -10.2        -4.3
      BC        2004       9.37       9.369        4.862     3.029     9.763      3.526        .992        7.66  3.126       4.752
              %∆04/07       -5.8       -15.6        22       -15.5       -3        -7.4         5.7       -25.3    -3         -5.4
      MB        2004      14.564      18.469       8.901     6.941     16.78      6.545       1.806      12.706  5.422       9.604
              %∆04/07       -8.3        -6.2       23.9      -14.5      -8.2       -11        -17.9       -28.4   -5.8        -1.2
      NB        2004      20.553      25.619      12.797    12.326    31.323     15.846       7.317      26.709 10.678      15.542
              %∆04/07        -5         -8.5       21.6       -8.8     -11.9       -4.5        -4.8       -28.9   -6.2         .6
      NL        2004      18.555      26.058      11.027    10.095    20.159       9.55         2.5      19.043  7.248      13.232
              %∆04/07       -3.6          -9        22       -15.3      -2.6      -16.2       -12.6       -30.6   -3.6        -1.8
      NS        2004      18.518      20.545      10.356    10.118    25.224      8.533       5.847      22.614  7.479      12.288
              %∆04/07       -6.4        -9.6       22.1      -11.4      -6.2       -7.2        -8.9       -32.1   -8.2         -.4
      NT        2004      25.872      39.273      17.261    17.288    30.849     16.207       3.868      26.245 11.519      21.158




37
              %∆04/07       -5.9       -12.4       21.1      -13.1     -10.6      -13.1        -5.6       -27.6   3.1         -3.9
      ON        2004       8.017      11.142       6.241     4.966    12.068      4.275       2.164       6.939  4.435       6.383
              %∆04/07      -10.5       -12.8       22.5       -1.5       -7        17.4       -14.3        -43    -7.6         -.4
      PE        2004      28.607      36.534      16.065     20.01    45.798     28.239      10.429      36.664 17.532       21.52
              %∆04/07       -6.7       -10.7       21.1      -11.4     -10.9       -4.9       -12.7        -30    -7.9         -.4
      QC        2004      10.638      11.457       6.485      3.69    12.721      4.866         1.3       9.959  4.537       6.163
              %∆04/07       -8.2        -7.5       23.7      -15.1     -10.1        1.4        -7.6       -27.5   -6.8        -3.9
      SK        2004      16.353      20.651      10.467     8.727    21.434     10.239       3.089      17.939  7.104      11.476
              %∆04/07       -3.5       -10.4        21       -16.9     -12.8      -14.5       -16.2       -27.8   -10         -2.6
      YT        2004      24.947      39.113      17.088    18.549    30.445     15.564       1.981      19.174 13.291      20.513
              %∆04/07       -5.7        -9.5       20.9      -12.8      -8.1      -10.7       -19.4       -24.5    -.8         -.2
     CAN        2004       9.59         11.5       6.394     4.464    12.076      4.546       1.894       8.529  4.465       6.362
              %∆04/07       -7.6       -11.2       21.3       -8.1      -9.5        6.1       -11.6       -36.6   -7.5        -2.6
     Notes: This table reports Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB) indexes by region and service sector in 2004. It also lists the CDB
     percentage changes over the period 2004-2007. See text for description of the CDB index and discussion of results. An extended
     table, including standard errors for each of the CB indexes reported here, is available by request.
Table 5: CBs, Accommodation-Ontario
  Index   Year      CB     Expenditures
  CDB     2004    6.939      28096.36
          2007    3.957      34429.68
   CFB    2004     .137      4447077
          2007     .092      3401265
  CHB     2004   190.488     19383.64
          2007   125.121     24053.15




                   38
Appendix A: Service sectors description
Transportation and Storage Services: Air, water and rail passenger and
freight transportation; Bus (including school), ambulance and truck trans-
portation; Urban transit and taxi transportation; Pipeline transportation
of natural gas and oil; Grain and other storage; Warehousing. Communi-
cation Services: Radio, television broadcasting; Cable programming; Tele-
phone and telecommunication; Postal and courier. Finance, insurance and
real estate services: Paid charges to financial institutions; commissions and
investment banking; Mutual funds, Other securities and royalties; Real es-
tate commissions; Life and non-life insurance; Pension funds; Paid residen-
tial and non-residential rent and lodging.Professional Services: Architect,
engineering, scientific, accounting, legal, advertising and other professional
services; software, computer lease, data processing and other information
services; Investigation and security services; Other administrative and per-
sonal services. Education Services: Elementary, Secondary, College and
University fees and tuition. Other education fees. Health care and Social
assistance Services: Private hospital, private residential care and other
health and social services; Child care outside the home; Laboratory, physi-
cian and dental services; Other health practitioner services. Accommoda-
tion Services and Meals: Hotel, motel and other accommodation; Meals
outside the home; Board paid. Wholesale Services: Wholesale trade and
wholesaling margins. Miscellaneous Services: Beauty and other personal
care services; Funeral services; Child care in the home; Private household
services; Photographic, laundry and dry cleaning, services to building and
dwellings; Automotive and other repair and maintenance; Rental of office,
machinery, equipment, automobile and truck; Trade union and other mem-
bership organization dues and political parties contribution; Motion pic-
ture production, exhibition and distribution; Lottery, gambling and other
recreation services.


Appendix B: Constructed Foreign Bias Goods
The data used to construct the goods CFB numbers from Tables 6 and 7
are from Anderson and Yotov (2010a). Their study covers the period 1992-


                                     39
2003 for 19 commodities.30 , The trading partners in their sample include
all Canadian provinces and territories, the fifty US states and the District
of Columbia, and the rest of the world (ROW). See Appendix A from
Anderson and Yotov (2010a) for a detailed description of the data, the
data sources, and the data procedures.




  30
     Commodity selection is based on (but is not completely identical to) the S-level
of aggregation as classified in the Statistics Canada’s Hierarchical Structure of the I-O
Commodity Classification (Revised: January 3, 2007). The 19 commodity categories
include: Agriculture (crop and animal production); Mineral Fuels (coal, natural gas,
oil); Food; Leather, Rubber and Plastic Products; Textile Products; Hosiery, Cloth-
ing and Accessories; Lumber and Wood Products; Furniture, Mattresses and Lamps;
Wood Pulp, Paper and Paper Products; Printing and Publishing; Primary Metal Prod-
ucts; Fabricated Metal Products; Machinery; Motor Vehicles, Transportation Equipment
and Parts; Electrical, Electronic, and Communications Products; Non-metallic Mineral
Products; Petroleum and Coal Products; Chemicals, Pharmaceutical, and Chemical
Products; Miscellaneous Manufactured Products. The few commodities missing from
the complete S-level I-O Commodity Classification spectrum are Forestry Products,
Fish, Metal Ores, and Tobacco and Beverages. Reliable bilateral trade data ware not
available for those products.


                                           40
       Table 6: Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) Indexes and Their Evolution Over Time
                            (1)     (2)    (3)    (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)     (8)     (9)       (10)
      AB          1996     .311    .805   .259   .071    .049    .025   .566    .104 .456          .003
               %∆92/03 -57.7 187.7 -11.4 50.1            86.8 402.5 -26.6 -40.5 32.4              169.6
      BC          1996     .306    .861   .318   .267    .108     .16   .706    .241 .737          .011
               %∆92/03      7.2   716.7 38.3 146.3 153.4 697.8 -22.5 51.4 53.4                     94.9
      MB          1996     .411     .76    .31     .2    .067    .102   .562    .272 .495          .009
               %∆92/03 -5.3 240.5 -6.4 117.8 88.4 756.4 -23.5                    8.1    42.7      208.5
      NB          1996      .35     .47   .386    .24    .114    .111   .582     .27    .607       .011
               %∆92/03 -7.4 191.1 -16.8 143.6 64.5 649.5 -39.6 -45.3 34.3                         228.8
       NL         1996     .619    .337   .478   .213    .099    .043   .692    .294 .671          .014
               %∆92/03       1    126.6 -14.2 99.2       60.3 338.4 -26.6        -52    48.6      244.6
       NS         1996     .352    .388   .365   .144    .063    .036   .563     .18     .52       .008
               %∆92/03 -14.5 173.2 -23.3 87.4            52.8 269.4 -25.1 -37.3 28.8                215
      NT          1996     .879    .682   .575   .285    .128    .049   .805    .499 .795          .025
               %∆92/03      3.2   178.2     .3  140.5 63.3 513.3         -23   -65.1 58.9           209
      ON          1996     .116    .553   .218   .198    .071    .101   .413    .312 .452          .009
               %∆92/03      7.5   400.4 -2.3 184.6 123.1 735.2 -9.5              -.1    29.5      183.1




41
       PE         1996     .405    .057   .427   .127    .057    .041   .576    .195 .435          .009
               %∆92/03 -21.3 77.4          -32   62.3    24.4 176.9 -26.1 -47.2 9.4                 182
      QC          1996     .109    .562   .213   .158    .067    .155   .437    .261 .495          .009
               %∆92/03 -6.6 324.4          -.1  133.6 124.9 581.2 -24.4 -32.4             24      172.9
     ROW          1996     .057    .348   .296   .331    .426    .738   .187    .194 .089          .176
               %∆92/03 30.9 115.6 -6.8 245.4 103.1 1229                 92.5    75.4      58      136.3
       SK         1996     .505    .711   .349   .125    .067    .078   .618    .137 .529          .006
               %∆92/03 -25.3 166.9 -10.6 89.3            54.4 741.7 -28.5 -10.9 45.1                174
      USA         1996     .278    .022   .387   .224    .471    .619   .277    .091 .249          .204
               %∆92/03 -9.2         2.8  -34.7     6     55.1    74.4 -52.5      -82    47.8      153.2
      YT          1996     .817     .76   .623   .387    .153    .123   .799    .356     .74       .022
               %∆92/03      1.6   176.6    2.5  179.2 78.9 831.2 -51.3 -76.8 44.6                 163.3
       All        1996     .091     .03    .31   .299    .423    .701   .227    .137 .165          .181
               %∆92/03 29.9        43.5 -11.5      78    89.4 500.4 -10.6 -58.4 91.1              129.5
     CAN          1996     .195    .792   .241   .186    .069    .131   .577     .28    .527       .009
               %∆92/03 -15.3 259.2         -.7  161.2 124.7       648   -27.9 -6.5 29.7           152.2
     Notes: This table reports Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) indexes by region and commodity in 1996
     It also lists the CFB percentage changes over the period 1992-2003. See text for description of the
     CFB index and discussion of results.
       Table 7: Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) Indexes and Their Evolution Over Time
                           (11)   (12)    (13)   (14)    (15)   (16)    (17)   (18)     (19)        (20)
      AB          1996     .178   .036    .047   .072    .231   .094      .4    .23     .012        .295
               %∆92/03 -12.6       -1.4   86.6 -12.9 -49.3 -51.1 -53.8 -52.7 69.6                    9.6
      BC          1996     .364   .154    .146   .307    .471   .456    .792   .348      .03         .58
               %∆92/03 32.5       67.7 276.8 90.6 -15.3 46.8            14.8 -34.1 251.1            34.4
      MB          1996     .368   .118     .17   .312    .419   .258    .436   .255     .028         .32
               %∆92/03 28.6       19.1 105.5 29.5 -37.7 -34.2 -20.4 -36.7                 76        10.2
      NB          1996     .505   .196    .148   .301    .422   .317     .54   .261     .054        .493
               %∆92/03 38.7       29.1    61.8 -13.7 -28.2 20.4         21.3 -51.4 71.5              8.4
       NL         1996     .618   .178    .228   .319    .503   .362    .293   .428     .063        .481
               %∆92/03 74.2 -23.1 -22.1           -51   -58.5 -46.7 -27.4 -65.2          4.9         -39
       NS         1996     .518    .11    .096   .171    .363   .198    .153   .215     .039         .34
               %∆92/03 46.3 -10.9          29     -40   -44.6 -32.2 -23.6 -64.1            9         2.4
      NT          1996     .564   .294    .354   .383    .597    .54    .652   .612     .115        .537
               %∆92/03 84.6 -33.4 -37.7 -49.2 -58.5 -23.9 -42.6 -49.5 -16.8                         41.1
      ON          1996     .325   .133    .091   .299    .317   .257    .325    .19     .018        .244
               %∆92/03 18.9       39.9 255.2 10.7        -4.9   18.8 -33.3 -54.2        290         10.8




42
       PE         1996     .584   .122    .152   .191     .4    .128    .107   .173     .054        .403
               %∆92/03 33.6 -21.5 -28.2 -45.3 -59.5 -25.8               -8.2 -61.2 -32.7           -26.5
      QC          1996     .337    .14    .067   .266    .409   .238    .449   .167     .027        .278
               %∆92/03 25.7       34.1 251.1        6     17    19.5    20.3 -58.2 207.1            27.8
     ROW          1996     .252   .127    .197   .196    .403    .16    .069   .089     .221        .253
               %∆92/03 158.2 18.1         95.8   69.6    -9.2 112.9 -77.9       5.4    319.7        42.8
       SK         1996     .269    .08    .101   .197    .361   .169    .502   .266     .027        .415
               %∆92/03 13.2       14.6 118.9 25.2 -50.7 -40.1            -10   -45.2 53.8             .4
      USA         1996     .171   .166    .148   .112    .319   .094    .376   .235     .066        .262
               %∆92/03 26.9 -54.9 -78.3 -43.8 -43.6 -47.4 -31.2 -59.5 -60.6                        -23.5
      YT          1996     .622   .245    .334   .432    .565   .535    .757   .624     .109        .548
               %∆92/03 53.6        -16   -55.2 -28.3 -69.4        67    30.4    6.3      5.8        -9.2
       All        1996     .232   .145    .171   .163    .377   .132    .146    .14     .089        .257
               %∆92/03 114.2 -28.7 -27.1           .1   -32.8 -14.4     -5.7 -22.1 -27.9             3.1
     CAN          1996     .326   .126    .088   .293    .354   .266    .419   .194     .021         .31
               %∆92/03 20.5       39.7 237.1 12.5         1.4   15.5 -13.3 -54.6 250.4              16.7
     Notes: This table reports Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) indexes by region and commodity in 1996
     It also lists the CFB percentage changes over the period 1992-2003. See text for description of the
     CFB index and discussion of results.
                             Table 8: Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) against ROW
     RGN       Year      TRNSP CMNCN WHLSL FNNCE BUSNS EDCTN HELTH ACMDN OTHER
      AB       2004       .043        .038       .005      .055      .066      .074       .001        .15      .049
            %∆04/07        -9.2       -4.9        4.5        -8      -12.8      -9.7       7.8      -18.9      -28.3
      BC       2004       .046        .036       .004      .051      .071      .071       .001        .13      .041
            %∆04/07       -10.3      -11.8        11       -11.8      -1.2      -8.2       39        -6.5      -23.4
      MB       2004       .063        .064       .007        .1      .104      .111       .001       .172       .06
            %∆04/07       -12.4       -3.5       16.8      -10.7      -3.6      -9.4      15.1       -8.2      -24.6
      NB       2004       .081        .086       .009      .161      .158      .174       .001       .252      .096
            %∆04/07        -10        -4.9       18.4       -2.8       -.1       4.7      46.5       -6.6       -24
      NL       2004         .11       .106       .011      .194      .181         .2      .001       .357       .11
            %∆04/07        -8.7       -5.5       17.8       -9.6      7.7       -8.8      34.4       -9.5      -22.1
      NS       2004       .091        .081       .009      .151      .159      .121       .001       .289      .088
            %∆04/07       -11.1       -6.3       18.2       -5.4      4.6        2.3      42.2      -10.6      -25.6




43
      NT       2004       .152        .148       .016      .363       .32        .47      .003       .572      .177
            %∆04/07       -10.2       -9.4       12.4       -8.8      -4.1      -9.8      33.8       -6.3      -17.5
      ON       2004       .031        .029       .004      .053      .059      .052         0        .069      .037
            %∆04/07        -13        -8.1       21.3       3.3       3.3      22.9       31.5      -21.3      -23.9
      PE       2004       .111         .13       .012      .217      .175      .206       .001       .331       .15
            %∆04/07       -11.3       -7.1       17.3       -5.2      1.3         3       38.5       -7.9      -25.5
      QC       2004       .036        .034       .004      .048      .062      .056         0        .078      .036
            %∆04/07       -12.7       -3.9       20.8       -7.6        1      13.2       39.9         -9      -23.8
      SK       2004       .069        .071       .008       .12      .122      .162       .001       .234      .075
            %∆04/07          -8       -6.9       11.1       -13       -8.3     -13.3      14.7       -7.8      -27.8
      YT       2004       .162        .163       .019      .375      .297        .45      .002       .477      .223
            %∆04/07        -9.8         -7       12.5       -9.2       -4      -10.9      13.9       -2.1      -19.7
     Notes: This table reports provincial Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) indexes, and the corresponding percentage
     changes 2004-2007, against the rest of the world.
                              Table 9: Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) against US
     RGN       Year      TRNSP CMNCN WHLSL FNNCE BUSNS EDCTN HELTH ACMDN OTHER
      AB       2004       .257        .061       .012      .022      .225      .046        .01       .556      .233
            %∆04/07       -10.3       -3.8       22.1       -9.4     -12.1      4.3          1      -48.3      -19.8
      BC       2004       .308        .062       .012      .023      .291      .053       .008       .574      .221
            %∆04/07       -11.3      -10.8       29.7      -13.1       -.4       6        30.2      -40.4      -14.4
      MB       2004       .421        .109       .019      .046      .421      .084       .011       .756      .326
            %∆04/07       -13.4       -2.3       36.5      -12.1      -2.8      4.6        7.8      -41.5      -15.7
      NB       2004       .501        .142       .023      .068      .581      .117       .016         1       .479
            %∆04/07       -11.1       -3.8       38.4       -4.3        .7     20.9       37.2      -40.5       -15
      NL       2004       .164        .078       .014      .015      .145      .036       .004       .422      .107
            %∆04/07        -9.8       -4.3       37.7      -10.9      8.6       5.3       25.9      -42.4      -12.9
      NS       2004       .155        .064       .013      .014      .157      .027       .005       .423      .101
            %∆04/07       -12.2       -5.1       38.2       -6.8      5.5      18.1       33.2      -43.1      -16.8




44
      NT       2004       .216        .106       .019      .027      .239      .078       .009       .634      .163
            %∆04/07       -11.2       -8.3       31.4      -10.1      -3.3      4.1       25.3      -40.3       -7.7
      ON       2004       .269        .056       .013      .032      .356      .059       .013       .447      .269
            %∆04/07       -14.1        -7        41.7       1.8       4.1      41.9       23.3      -49.9      -14.9
      PE       2004       .206        .106       .018      .022      .195      .053       .005       .546      .188
            %∆04/07       -12.3        -6        37.1       -6.6      2.1       19        29.8      -41.3      -16.8
      QC       2004       .279        .062       .012      .025      .314      .053       .006       .427      .234
            %∆04/07       -13.7       -2.8       41.2        -9       1.9      30.7         31      -42.1      -14.8
      SK       2004       .427        .117        .02      .051      .448      .108       .016       .927      .375
            %∆04/07        -9.1       -5.8       29.9      -14.3      -7.5       .2        7.5      -41.3      -19.3
      YT       2004       .693        .225       .036      .105      .622      .164        .01      1.084      .722
            %∆04/07       -10.8       -5.8       31.5      -10.6      -3.2      2.9        6.7      -37.7      -10.2
     Notes: This table reports provincial Constructed Foreign Bias (CFB) indexes, and the corresponding percentage
     changes 2004-2007, against US.
