                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CULTURAL DIVERSITY, GEOGRAPHICAL ISOLATION, AND THE ORIGIN OF
                        THE WEALTH OF NATIONS

                                           Quamrul Ashraf
                                            Oded Galor

                                        Working Paper 17640
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17640


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Dror Brenner, Raquel Fernández, Peter Howitt, Boyan Jovanovic,
Ross Levine, Elias Papaioannou, Yona Rubinstein, Andrei Shleifer, Enrico Spolaore, Joachim Voth,
David Weil, seminar participants at Ben-Gurion, Brown, Copenhagen, Doshisha, Hebrew U, Hitotsubashi,
IMF, Keio, Kyoto, Osaka, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, Tufts, the World Bank, as well as conference participants
at the CEPR UGT Summer Workshop, the NBER Macroeconomics Across Time and Space group
meeting, the KEA International Employment Forum, the NBER Culture and Institutions group meeting,
and the NBER Political Economy group meeting for their helpful comments and suggestions. Yoni
Bedine, Boris Gershman, and Dean Weesner provided superlative research assistance. Galor's research
is supported by NSF grant SES-0921573. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Cultural Diversity, Geographical Isolation, and the Origin of the Wealth of Nations
Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor
NBER Working Paper No. 17640
December 2011
JEL No. N0,O1,O4

                                               ABSTRACT

This research argues that variations in the interplay between cultural assimilation and cultural diffusion
have played a significant role in giving rise to differential patterns of economic development across
the globe. Societies that were geographically less vulnerable to cultural diffusion benefited from enhanced
assimilation, lower cultural diversity, and more intense accumulation of society-specific human capital.
Thus, they operated more efficiently with respect to their production-possibility frontiers and flourished
in the technological paradigm that characterized the agricultural stage of development. The lack of
cultural diffusion and its manifestation in cultural rigidity, however, diminished the ability of these
societies to adapt to a new technological paradigm, which delayed their industrialization and, hence,
their take-off to a state of sustained economic growth. The theory thus contributes to the understanding
of the advent of divergence and overtaking in the process of development. Consistently with the theory,
the empirical analysis establishes that (i) geographical isolation prevalent in pre-industrial times (i.e.,
prior to the advent of airborne transportation technology) has had a persistent negative impact on the
extent of contemporary cultural diversity; (ii) pre-industrial geographical isolation had a positive impact
on economic development in the agricultural stage but has had a negative impact on income per capita
in the course of industrialization; and (iii) cultural diversity, as determined exogenously by pre-industrial
geographical isolation, has had a positive impact on economic development in the process of industrialization.


Quamrul Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu

Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu
1     Introduction
The contemporary distribution of income per capita across countries attests to a Great Divergence in
their developmental paths since the Industrial Revolution, bearing witness to reversals in economic
performance for some of the technological leaders in the pre-industrial era. The gap in per capita
GDP between the richest regions of the world and the poorest increased from a modest 3 to 1 ratio
in 1820 to an astounding 18 to 1 ratio in 2000 (Maddison, 2001). Moreover, historical evidence
indicates that, as late as the end of the 1st millennium CE, the civilizations of Asia were well ahead
of Europe in both wealth and knowledge.1 Nonetheless, by the time of the Industrial Revolution in
the 18th century, Europe had already overtaken these societies (Landes, 1998).2
         This research argues that variations in the interplay between the forces of cultural assimilation
and cultural di¤usion have played a signi…cant role in giving rise to di¤erential patterns of economic
development across the globe, contributing to the Great Divergence and to reversals in economic
performance. In particular, societies that were geographically less vulnerable to cultural di¤usion
bene…ted from enhanced assimilation, lower cultural diversity, and greater accumulation of society-
speci…c human capital. Thus, they operated more e¢ ciently with respect to their production-
possibility frontier and ‡ourished in the technological paradigm that characterized the agricultural
stage of development. The lack of cultural di¤usion and its manifestation in greater cultural rigidity,
however, diminished the ability of these societies to adapt to a new technological paradigm, delaying
the onset of their industrialization and, thereby, their take-o¤ from Malthusian stagnation to a state
of sustained economic growth.
         The fundamental hypothesis of this research stems from the recognition that the evolution of
the wealth of nations has been governed in part by the con‡icting e¤ects of cultural assimilation and
cultural di¤usion in di¤erent stages of development. The universal force of cultural assimilation (i.e.,
the homogenization of cultural traits within a society) contributed to the accumulation of society-
speci…c human capital and, hence, to society’s ability to e¢ ciently exploit the existing technological
frontier. However, vulnerability to cultural di¤usion (i.e., the spread of cultural traits from one
society to another) disrupted the force of assimilation in society, hampering the accumulation of
society-speci…c human capital, while augmenting cultural diversity and, thus, the latent adaptability
of society towards a looming technological regime. Societies that were historically characterized
by geographical conditions conducive to cultural di¤usion therefore incurred the costs associated
with ine¢ ciencies in socioeconomic organization within a given technological paradigm, operating
ine¢ ciently with respect to their technological frontier during the agricultural stage of development.
Nonetheless, the more frequent disruption of the assimilation process in these societies conferred the
    1
      It has been argued by historians that Chinese technology long anticipated advancements during the Industrial
Revolution in Europe. For example, China had been employing water-driven machinery in textiles as early as the 12th
century, …ve hundred years prior to the appearance of similar technologies in Europe. In addition, the use of coal
and coke for iron smelting in China in the 11th century resulted in iron outputs that were only matched in Europe
seven hundred years later. In this Malthusian era, the technological superiority of China over Europe was primarily
manifested in its larger population (Ashraf and Galor, 2011a). However, re‡ecting incomplete population adjustments
in the short run, China’s technological superiority also resulted in a higher income per capita in comparison to Europe
(466 vs. 412 in 1990 international dollars) in the year 1000 CE (Maddison, 2003).
    2
      Detailed historical accounts of the early technological dominance of Asian societies and the European overtaking
have been given by Abu-Lughod (1989), Chaudhuri (1990), Goody (1996), Wong (1997), Frank (1998), Pomeranz
(2000), and Hobson (2004).


                                                          1
long-run bene…ts of greater cultural ‡uidity and ‡exibility, stimulating their accumulation of universal
human capital and fostering their ability to implement a paradigmatic shift of the technology frontier
towards industry.
         The proposed theory contributes to the understanding of the advent of divergence and
overtaking in the process of long-run development. It attributes the dominance of some societies
within a given technological regime to a superior operation of cultural assimilation, and it explains
the success of others in the switch between technological regimes to a higher frequency of cultural
di¤usion and to the bene…cial e¤ect of cultural diversity on the degree of adaptability of society to
a changing technological environment.
         The theory is based on three fundamental elements. The interaction between these elements
generates a dynamic pattern that is consistent with the observed asymmetric evolution of societies
from an epoch of Malthusian stagnation to a regime of sustained economic growth, characterized
by a Great Divergence in cross-country income per capita as well as by reversals in the economic
performance of some societies.
         The …rst element pertains to the role of cultural assimilation in enhancing the intergen-
erational transmission and, thus, the accumulation of society-speci…c human capital.3                           Cultural
assimilation reduces diversity by standardizing sociocultural traits (e.g., norms, beliefs, ethics, and
codes of conduct) in society. It improves the e¤ectiveness with which society-speci…c human capital
is transmitted across generations and, thereby, enhances the e¢ ciency with which society operates
with respect to the available production technologies.4
         The second element embodies the notion that cultural di¤usion, as re‡ected by the fre-
quency of emergence of alternative modes of behavior in society, generates greater cultural ‡uidity
and ‡exibility that enhances the accumulation of knowledge and, thus, of more widely-applicable
general human capital, expanding the economy’s production-possibility frontier and complementing
its ability to advance and adapt to a new technological paradigm.5 Cultural di¤usion, therefore,
   3
      This implicitly invokes an evolutionary theory, pioneered by Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981) and Boyd and
Richerson (1985), where the intergenerational transmission of cultural traits occurs both vertically (i.e., from parents
to children) and horizontally (i.e., from role models in society to the younger generation). In the context of the proposed
theory, greater cultural homogeneity in the adult generation would imply smaller discrepancies between parental traits
and those in society at large and, thereby, lead to a more consistent transmission of society-speci…c human capital to
the succeeding generation. For explicit applications of this evolutionary framework in the economics literature, see
Bowles (1998), Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001), and Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009).
    4
      This observation is broadly consistent with empirical evidence on the development-promoting e¤ects of greater
social cohesion or social capital within a society (e.g., Knack and Keefer, 1997; Temple and Johnson, 1998; Zak and
Knack, 2001; Gradstein and Justman, 2002; Algan and Cahuc, 2010) and across nations (e.g., Guiso et al., 2009;
Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009, 2011). The reader is also referred to Fukuyama (1995) for general arguments based on
a historical perspective.
    5
      This view is broadly consistent with theoretical and empirical evidence on the creativity-promoting e¤ects of
diversity in the workforce. Hong and Page (2001) provide a theoretical formalization of this idea, proving that a group
of “cognitively diverse”problem solvers can …nd optimal solutions to di¢ cult problems and that a more diverse group of
people with limited abilities can outperform a homogeneous group of high-ability problem solvers. Moreover, Berliant
and Fujita (2008) develop a microeconomic model of knowledge creation through cooperative interactions between
people, which demonstrates that heterogeneity is essential for successful cooperation in the joint creation of ideas. In
the context of team theory, Prat (2002) has established that heterogeneity raises team productivity when jobs within
teams are complementary to one another. Similarly, Lazear (1999a,b) has also discussed how diversity in a productive
unit can raise overall productivity once the costs associated with language barriers are taken into account. The bene…ts
of cultural heterogeneity are further highlighted by Ottaviano and Peri (2005) who have empirically demonstrated
the productivity-enhancing e¤ects of ethnic and linguistic diversity in American cities. More recently, Andersen and



                                                            2
has an ambiguous e¤ect on total factor productivity. Productivity is fostered on one hand by the
accumulation of general human capital, and it is diminished on the other by ine¢ ciencies in the
intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c human capital.
         The third element is designed to capture the importance of general human capital in pro-
moting socioeconomic transitions to a new technological regime that is potentially more advanced
in terms of per-capita income. Consistent with historical evidence on the transition from agriculture
to industry, the economy is characterized by a greater complementarity between the advancement of
the knowledge frontier and technological inventions that are applicable to industrial production as
opposed to agricultural production.6
         Cultural traits are transmitted intergenerationally. In the absence of forces operating on these
traits, individuals possess their parental cultural dispositions, and the degree of cultural diversity in
society thus remains constant over time. Individuals, however, are subjected to two cultural forces
that generate opposing e¤ects on the evolution of cultural diversity: assimilation and di¤usion. The
former represents forces, internal to society, that lower diversity via the homogenization of cultural
traits. The latter, in contrast, represents geographically determined forces, external to society (e.g.,
the in‡uence of a nearby foreign culture), that raise diversity via the periodic introduction of new
cultural traits.
         In particular, the economy’s population is subject to the inherent gravitational inertia of
cultural assimilation, which functions to homogenize the discordant attitudes in society and, thereby,
reduces the degree of cultural heterogeneity in the population over time. The process of assimilation,
however, is opposed by the geographically governed forces of cultural di¤usion, whereby the periodic
emergence of new traits, via cross-cultural contact, functions to increase the degree of cultural
diversity in the population over time.
         In early stages of development, the economy is in a Malthusian regime where output is
generated exclusively by an agricultural sector that is subject to decreasing returns to labor. Tech-
nological progress is rather gradual and occurs via relatively small increments to the economy’s stock
of knowledge, which is positively a¤ected by the size of the population and the degree of its cultural
heterogeneity. Resources generated by technological progress are channeled primarily towards an
increase in population size, and the economy evolves along a dynamic path, characterized by growing
population and total factor productivity, towards a Malthusian equilibrium where income per capita
remains stagnant.
         The transition from agriculture to industry in the process of development is brought about by
sustained growth in the latent productivity of manufacturing labor. The larger degree of complemen-
tarity between the expansion of the knowledge frontier and technological advancements applicable to
industrial production sustains the endogenous growth of latent manufacturing productivity, which
ultimately leads to the adoption of industry in later stages of development and paves the way for
a take-o¤ from the Malthusian epoch. Upon the adoption of industry, the economy emerges into
Dalgaard (2011) test the hypothesis that the interaction of people of di¤erent nationalities stimulates productivity by
facilitating the international exchange of ideas, and they …nd a signi…cant causal impact of cross-border people ‡ows
on aggregate productivity.
   6
     See, for example, Mokyr (2002) for a detailed historical account on the role of knowledge in bringing about and
sustaining the Industrial Revolution. The broad de…nition of knowledge provided therein is consistent with the concept
of general human capital in the current theory.


                                                          3
a Post-Malthusian regime of development where output is generated using both the agricultural
and a manufacturing production technology. The endogenous growth of total factor productivity in
manufacturing, coupled with intersectoral labor mobility, sustains a dynamic path characterized by
endogenously growing population and income per capita.7
         The interaction between cultural diversity and the process of development is examined based
on the signi…cance of their coevolution in the agricultural stage of development and, also, in the timing
of the take-o¤ from agriculture to industry. In the agricultural stage, an economy characterized by
a relatively higher degree of cultural diversity is associated with a relatively inferior Malthusian
steady state in terms of the economy’s level of productivity per worker and the size of its working
population. This inferiority stems from the fact that the adverse e¤ect of diversity on the transmission
of society-speci…c human capital outweighs its bene…cial role in the moderate advancement of rural
productivity. The long-run level of income per capita in this stage of development, however, is
una¤ected by higher cultural diversity since the resulting lower level of productivity per worker is
counter-balanced by a smaller size of the working population.
         The degree of cultural diversity, however, also has an e¤ect on the timing of industrialization
and, thus, on the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth. The earlier take-o¤ from the
Malthusian steady state by a society with a higher but still moderate degree of cultural diversity
stems from the fact that the bene…cial e¤ect of diversity on the advancement of knowledge, and,
therefore, on the advancement of industrial productivity relative to that in agriculture, outweighs
its eroding e¤ect on the intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c human capital. However,
if the degree of diversity is too large, an increase in diversity raises the ‡ow of ideas while increasing
the prevalence of anarchy in society, acutely disrupting the transmission of society-speci…c human
capital. The rate at which new ideas are implemented and productivity is advanced in the economy
is therefore diminished.
         Variation over a moderate range in the degree of cultural diversity across societies is thus
associated with the phenomenon of overtaking in global economic development. A higher degree of
diversity generates an inferior outcome in the agricultural stage of development, but it ultimately
stimulates an earlier industrialization and, thus, an earlier take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic
growth. As such, the cultural composition of societies can have a profound e¤ect on their historical
experience with regard to the process of economic development.
         An economy that is characterized by greater geographical vulnerability to foreign cultural
in‡uences, and, hence, by more cultural di¤usion, is also associated with a relatively higher degree of
cultural diversity and, thereby, with a relatively inferior Malthusian steady state. However, as long as
the degree of diversity is not su¢ ciently high so as to induce excessive dissonance in the organization
   7
    Since the goal of the theoretical analysis is to unravel the e¤ects of the degree of cultural diversity on the properties
of the Malthusian equilibrium as well as the timing of the take-o¤ from the Malthusian epoch, the model abstracts
from the forces that ultimately lead to a demographic transition and the emergence of sustained economic growth.
Incorporating human capital and a quality-quantity trade-o¤ in parental fertility choices, along the lines of Uni…ed
Growth Theory (Galor, 2011), would generate a demographic transition, eventually leading to the emergence of a
sustained growth regime, distinguished by rising income per capita and zero (or, perhaps, even negative) growth in
population. This modi…cation, however, would signi…cantly complicate the theoretical analysis without altering the
main insights.




                                                             4
of society, an increase in cultural di¤usion, due to more vulnerable geographical conditions, expedites
the onset of industrialization and, thus, the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.
         Variation across societies over a moderate range in the degree of geographical vulnerability
to cultural di¤usion is thus associated with the phenomenon of overtaking in global economic
development. Speci…cally, a higher degree of geographical vulnerability generates an inferior eco-
nomic outcome in the agricultural stage of development, but it ultimately stimulates an earlier
industrialization and, thus, an earlier take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.
         The theory is tested empirically using data from across countries.8 In line with the predictions
of the theory, the empirical analysis suggests that, accounting for a wide variety of potentially
confounding factors, (i) geographical isolation prevalent in pre-industrial times (i.e., prior to the
advent of airborne transportation technology) has had a persistent negative impact on the extent
of contemporary cultural diversity; (ii) pre-industrial geographical isolation had a positive impact
on economic development in the agricultural stage but has had a negative impact on income per
capita in the course of industrialization; and (iii) cultural diversity, as determined exogenously by
pre-industrial geographical isolation, has had a positive impact on economic development in the
process of industrialization.


2       Advances with Respect to the Related Literature
What caused the Great Divergence is a controversial topic. The relative in‡uence of geographical,
cultural, and institutional factors, human capital formation, ethnic, linguistic, and religious fraction-
alization, colonialism, and globalization has been at the center of the debate regarding the origins of
the remarkable transformation of the world income distribution over the past two centuries.
         The signi…cance of sociocultural factors in giving rise to the di¤erential development trajec-
tories of Europe and Asia has been the focus of an in‡uential hypothesis originally raised by Max
Weber, in his works on the sociology of religion (Weber, 1905, 1922), and promoted more recently
by Hall (1986), Lal (1998), Landes (1998, 2006), and others.9 Implicitly, the central premise of the
cultural hypothesis is that societal norms, customs, and ethics can be ranked in terms of their ability
to nurture technological innovation and the “entrepreneurial spirit” of capitalist development. The
Weberian viewpoint therefore places the proclivity of European culture towards rationalism and the
objective “disenchantment of the world” at the forefront in explaining the rise of industry in the
Western world.10 Moreover, the emphasis placed by Oriental culture on rigid aesthetic values of self-
perfection and …lial piety is held responsible for the delayed transition from Malthusian stagnation
to a sustained growth regime in the East.
    8
      Appendix D additionally provides some historical evidence.
    9
      The term “culture” in this regard refers to the set of society’s norms, beliefs, customs, traditions, taboos, codes of
conduct, etc., and it is therefore distinct from the notion of “institutions”, which has traditionally been regarded in the
literature as embodying the sociopolitical environment as determined by constitutions, rule of law, and property rights.
North (1981, 1991), however, has advanced a broader notion of “institutions” in terms of a set of constraints used to
impose structure on human socioeconomic interaction. These include both “informal constraints,”such as customs and
traditions, as well as “formal constraints” such as laws and property rights.
   10
      Some economists have interpreted the emergence of the Weberian “capitalist spirit” in terms of the endogenous
evolution of preferences (e.g., Doepke and Zilibotti, 2008; Galor and Michalopoulos, 2011).




                                                             5
         The theory advanced in this study di¤ers signi…cantly from the existing sociocultural hypoth-
esis that underlines the existence of a hierarchy of cultural attributes according to their conduciveness
to innovation and their applicability towards an industrial take-o¤. While society-speci…c cultural
traits (e.g., norms, beliefs, and ethics) may well have some di¤erential e¤ects on the process of
development, the proposed hypothesis suggests that it is the variation in the relative strengths of
the forces of cultural assimilation and di¤usion, which operate over these traits, that is instrumental
for comparative economic development.11 The universal force of cultural assimilation, working to
acculturate the divergent attitudes in society towards its customs and traditions, whatever these may
be, leads to greater cohesion and social order over time, which enables society to function closer to
the production-possibility frontier of the existing technological paradigm. However, vulnerability to
cultural di¤usion, which diminishes the homogenization of society-speci…c cultural traits over time,
simulates the adaptability of society to a new technological paradigm and, thereby, expedites the
onset of industrialization.
         The role of favorable geographical conditions in fostering the earlier European take-o¤ from
Malthusian stagnation has been given precedence by Jones (1981), Diamond (1997), Pomeranz
(2000), and others.12 They argue that the earlier rise of Europe could be attributed to its favor-
able natural resource base, abundant rainfall, temperate climate, lower disease burden, and its
geographical proximity to the New World, which facilitated the escape from the Malthusian trap
via the alleviation of land constraints. The geographical hypothesis has also stressed an indirect
role of geography in promoting the earlier European take-o¤. It has been argued, particularly by
Jones (1981), that the natural barriers created by Europe’s mountain chains and rivers prevented
a single state from politically dominating the entire territory, which eventually led to sociopolitical
fragmentation and competition, thereby encouraging innovative activities that contributed to an
earlier take-o¤.
         The element of geographical determinism in the proposed theory is distinct from that raised
in the literature regarding the direct e¤ects of natural resource endowments (i.e., the in‡uence of
climate, rainfall, disease burden, etc.). Speci…cally, the proposed theory attributes di¤erences in
the frequency with which the force of cultural assimilation is hampered to variation in natural
characteristics that determine geographical isolation and, hence, the likelihood of emergence of new
attitudes and ideas within societies via cultural di¤usion. Moreover, in contrast to the hypothesis
of Jones (1981), where natural barriers within Europe served to delineate societies that competed
with each other in a process that stimulated innovation and development for the region as a whole,
the hypothesis in this paper is that such internal barriers prevented the cultural homogenization of
  11
     While not the focus of the current study, the endogenous emergence of social norms has been motivated from the
perspective of contract enforceability by Kandori (1992), Greif (1993, 1994), and others. Furthermore, in an approach
complementary to the proposed theory, Heiner (1983) and Harrington (1998, 1999) have argued that the emergence
of rigidity versus ‡exibility in social norms is governed by a social selection mechanism that rewards these attitudes
di¤erentially depending upon the degree of uncertainty in the socioeconomic environment. It should also be noted that
cultural traits themselves have been shown to a¤ect economic outcomes. This is demonstrated empirically by Barro
and McCleary (2003), Fernández et al. (2004), Giuliano (2007), Tabellini (2008), Fernández and Fogli (2009), Guiso
et al. (2009), Alesina and Giuliano (2010), Alesina et al. (2010), Alesina et al. (2011), and Andersen et al. (2011). An
excellent review of this empirical literature is provided by Fernández (2011).
  12
     See, for example, Gallup et al. (1999) and Olsson and Hibbs (2005).




                                                           6
the entire European continent and permitted a constant ‡ow of cultural di¤usion within the region,
thereby expediting the European transition to industry.
         The in‡uence of institutions has been emphasized by North and Thomas (1973), North
(1981), and Landes (1998), amongst others, who argue that institutional factors that facilitated the
protection of individual property rights and enhanced technological innovations and the di¤usion of
knowledge were the prime forces behind the earlier European transition to sustained economic growth.
Moreover, the endogenous nature of sociopolitical institutions, coupled with the arguable exogeneity
of geography, has recently prompted some researchers to propose that initial geographical conditions
gave rise to persistent di¤erences in institutional quality across regions.13 Engerman and Sokolo¤
(2000), for example, argue that societies initially characterized by geographical factors conducive
to income inequality also implemented oppressive institutions designed to preserve the unequal
distribution of wealth within their populations. Others, notably Acemoglu et al. (2005a), have argued
that historical reversals in the economic performance of societies have a colonial legacy that re‡ects
the imposition of extractive institutions by European colonizers in regions that were relatively a- uent
in the pre-industrial era.14 The role of colonialism in giving rise to the phenomenon of overtaking
through institutional reversals is inapplicable, however, in explaining the delayed emergence of a
sustained growth regime in China, which, as economic historians have argued, represents one of the
most signi…cant historical reversals in global economic development.15
         In contrast to the institutional viewpoint, where the quality of sociopolitical institutions
has an unequivocal e¤ect on economic growth, the e¤ect of the degree of cultural homogeneity
in the proposed theory is ambiguous. Greater homogeneity improves the e¢ ciency with which
society-speci…c human capital is transmitted across generations on the one hand, but it hampers
the accumulation of general human capital on the other. The force of assimilation therefore permits
society’s advancement within a given technological regime through a well-de…ned socioeconomic
structure, but it also comes at the opportunity cost of hindering its progress towards a potentially
more advanced regime.16
  13
      Recent empirical investigations by Easterly and Levine (2003), Rodrik et al. (2004), and Acemoglu et al. (2005a)
appear to support the hypothesis that the geographical determinism of contemporary economic development operates
primarily through the e¤ects of initial geographical conditions on institutional quality.
   14
      Additional aspects of the long-run e¤ects of European colonialism on comparative economic development are
examined at a within-country level for India by Banerjee and Iyer (2005) and at a cross-country level for Africa by
Bertocchi and Canova (2002). In general, the …ndings in these studies are broadly consistent with the notion of a
deleterious institutional legacy of European in‡uence in the colonized regions. See also the recent papers in the context
of Africa’s slave trades by Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2010), as well as the studies by Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2011a,b) in the context of the “Scramble for Africa.”
   15
      An alternative hypothesis explaining how favorable geographical conditions could have given rise to historical
reversals in economic performance has been advanced by Galor et al. (2009) who emphasize the negative impact of
inequality in the distribution of land ownership on the emergence of human capital promoting policies such as public
schooling and child labor regulations.
   16
      The institutional viewpoint typically underscores more politically-governed aspects of social structure, such as
property rights, laws, and constitutions, while this paper emphasizes the role of social cohesion that emerges naturally
from the homogenization of cultural dispositions in society with respect to its customs, traditions, and codes of conduct.
Using the terminology adopted in North’s (1981) de…nition of institutions, the distinction here is that between society’s
formal and informal constraints. In particular, the proposed theory stresses the implementation of informal constraints
in society as governed by the extent to which the force of assimilation can operate without any external impediments.
As such, the inertia of assimilation can also be interpreted as a “meta-constraint” whose quality captures society’s
ability to successfully indoctrinate subsequent generations to abide by and promulgate the well-established societal
norms, beliefs, and ethics.


                                                            7
        The role of ethnic, linguistic, and religious fractionalization in the emergence of divergence
through “growth tragedies”has been linked to their e¤ects on the quality of institutions. Easterly and
Levine (1997) and Alesina et al. (2003) have demonstrated that geopolitical factors, which brought
about a high degree of ethnic fractionalization in some regions of the world, led to the implementation
of poor institutions and, consequently, to a divergence in developmental paths across societies.17 In
contrast, one could view the current analysis as suggesting that heterogeneity in cultural dispositions
within a given ethnic group is conducive for industrialization, although the similar bene…ts from
heterogeneity that is generated by the presence of multiple ethnic groups is outweighed by the costs
associated with interethnic con‡icts.
        Finally, the role of human capital formation and the onset of the demographic transition
in giving rise to and sustaining the Great Divergence is stressed by uni…ed growth theories (e.g.,
Galor and Weil, 2000; Galor and Moav, 2002; Galor, 2011), and is demonstrated empirically by
Glaeser et al. (2004) and Becker and Woessman (2009).18 While tangential to the current analysis,
these studies establish theoretically and quantitatively that the rise in the technologically driven
demand for human capital in the second phase of industrialization, and its e¤ect on human capital
formation and on the onset of the demographic transition, were the central forces in the transition
from stagnation to sustained economic growth and in the emergence of the associated phenomenon
of the Great Divergence. In particular, they suggest that once the technologically driven demand
for human capital emerged in the second phase of industrialization, the prevalence of human capital
promoting institutions determined the extensiveness of human capital formation and, hence, the
rapidity of technological progress, the timing of the demographic transition, the pace of the transition
from stagnation to growth, and, thus, contributed to the contemporary distribution of income in the
world economy.


3     The Basic Structure of the Model
Consider a perfectly competitive overlapping-generations economy in the process of development
where economic activity extends over in…nite discrete time.

3.1    Cultural Assimilation and Cultural Di¤usion
Individuals are characterized by a cultural trait that determines their attitude towards the prevailing
cultural norms in the economy. They can be either conformist or nonconformist with respect to the
prevailing culture. Cultural traits are transmitted intergenerationally. In the absence of forces
operating on these traits, individuals possess their parental cultural dispositions and the fraction
of nonconformists in society remains constant over time. However, individuals are subjected to
two cultural forces that generate opposing e¤ects on the fraction of nonconformists in the adult
  17
     See also the recent study by Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005). These …ndings, however, have commonly been
misinterpreted as implying that diversity is unconditionally harmful for growth, which is not necessarily the case as
established by Lian and Oneal (1997). Speci…cally, based on the notion that some sociopolitical institutions are more
conducive to cooperative behavior than others, it may be argued that ethnic fragmentation should be less disruptive in
more democratic and pluralistic societies. The studies of Collier (2000) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) have indeed
provided some empirical validation along these lines.
  18
     See also Becker et al. (2010, 2011).


                                                          8
population: cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion. Cultural assimilation represents cultural
changes due to internal forces that operate towards the homogenization of traits, and it thus reduces
the fraction of nonconformists in society. Cultural di¤usion, in contrast, represents cultural changes
due to external forces (e.g., the in‡uence of a nearby foreign culture) that increases the heterogeneity
of traits, and it thus raises the fraction of nonconformists in society.19 Given that conformists always
comprise the majority of the adult population, the degree of cultural diversity (fractionalization) in a
given period is increasing in the prevalence of nonconformism amongst the adult population in that
period.
          Due to the forces of cultural assimilation, individuals born to nonconformist parents deviate
with probability       2 (0; 1) from their parental trait and become conformists. Hence, a proportion
   of the fraction of nonconformists, !, adopt a conformist disposition in the next period, with
the remaining proportion, (1             ), maintaining nonconformism. On the other hand, due to the
forces of cultural di¤usion, which re‡ect the geographically determined vulnerability of the domestic
culture to foreign cultural in‡uences, individuals who are born to conformist parents, deviate with
probability      2 (0; 1) from their parental disposition to adopt the nonconformist trait present in
the environment.20 Consequently, a proportion                  of the fraction of conformists, (1           !), become
nonconformists in the next period.
          The steady-state fraction of nonconformists is therefore ! = (1                    )! +      (1    !), which
implies that
                                            ! = =( + )            !( ; ),                                            (1)

where @!=@ > 0 and @!=@ < 0. Namely, ! is increasing in the degree of geographical vulnerability
to cultural di¤usion, , and decreasing in the intensity of cultural assimilation, .
          Following the framework of Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001), Appendix A provides a micro-
based formulation of the intergenerational transmission of cultural traits through costly socialization
of children. Importantly, it demonstrates that, relative to the benchmark model presented below, the
evolution of the economy is qualitatively unaltered under the corresponding endogenous dynamics
of the size and cultural composition of the labor force.

3.2    Production
In every period, the economy produces a single homogenous good in a rural (agricultural) sector and,
possibly, in a manufacturing (industrial) sector, employing labor and land in the production process.
Labor is supplied inelastically by households and evolves over time at the endogenously determined
rate of population growth. The supply of land, however, is exogenously determined and remains
  19
     Alternatively, the di¤usion process can be equivalently considered in terms of members of a foreign population
replacing a fraction of the domestic population, where the foreigners are, by de…nition, nonconformists vis-a-vis the
domestic sociocultural norms. In the context of the Malthusian regime, this could occur as a result of foreign invasions
of the domestic population.
  20
     It is plausibly assumed that individuals in the Malthusian regime did not envision the eventual occurrence of the
Industrial Revolution and the importance of diversity for an earlier transition to industry. Hence, the evolution of
cultural traits, as described, do not re‡ect a strategic choice by individuals but rather the operation of the inevitable
forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion.




                                                           9
constant over time.21 In early stages of development, the manufacturing sector is not economically
viable and production is conducted exclusively in the rural sector. However, due to its relatively
faster rate of growth in productivity, the manufacturing sector ultimately becomes economically
viable and both sectors are jointly operated in later stages of development.

3.2.1    Production in the Rural and Manufacturing Sectors

The output produced in the rural sector in period t, YtR , is governed by a Cobb-Douglas, constant-
returns-to-scale production technology such that

                                                    1
                                    YtR = AR
                                           t X            LR
                                                           t     ;           2 (0; 1) ,                             (2)

where LR
       t is the amount of labor employed in the rural sector in period t, X is the amount of land,
and AR
     t is the level of rural productivity in period t. For simplicity the amount of land is normalized
such that X = 1.
         The output of the manufacturing sector in period t, YtM , is determined by a linear, constant-
returns-to-scale production technology such that

                                                   YtM = AM  M
                                                          t Lt ,                                                    (3)

where LM                                                                               M
       t is the amount of labor employed in the manufacturing sector in period t, and At is the
level of manufacturing productivity in period t.
         The total labor force in period t, Lt , is allocated between the two sectors. Therefore,

                                                  LR    M
                                                   t + Lt = Lt ,                                                    (4)

where Lt > 0 in every period t.
         As will become apparent, in early stages of development, when the productivity of manu-
facturing labor, AM
                  t , is low relative to that of rural labor, output is produced using only the rural
technology. However, in later stages of development, when AM
                                                           t rises su¢ ciently relative to the
productivity of rural labor, the manufacturing technology becomes economically viable.

3.2.2    Factor Prices and Aggregate Labor Allocation

Producers operate in perfectly competitive markets for labor and the …nal good. In the absence
of property rights to land, the return to land is zero, and workers in the rural sector receive their
average product. Therefore, given (2), the inverse demand for labor in the rural sector is

                                                                     1
                                               wtR = AR   R
                                                      t =Lt              ,                                          (5)

where wtR is the wage rate of rural labor in period t.22
  21
     The presence of a …xed factor implies that there are diminishing returns to labor in the rural sector, an essential
ingredient for the emergence of a stable Malthusian equilibrium in early stages of development.
  22
     The modeling of the production side is based on two simplifying assumptions. First, capital is not an input in
the production process and, second, the return to land is zero. Since the fundamental mechanism of the emergence


                                                          10
        The inverse demand for labor in the manufacturing sector, given (3), is

                                                      wtM = AM
                                                             t ,                                                  (6)

where wtM is the wage rate of manufacturing labor in period t.
        As follows from (5), the inverse demand for labor in the rural sector increases without bound
as employment decreases in that sector. This, coupled with the …nite productivity of labor in
the manufacturing sector, implies that the rural sector will be operative in every period. The
manufacturing sector, in contrast, will be operative if and only if labor productivity in this sector
exceeds the marginal productivity of labor in the rural sector when the entire labor force is employed
in the rural sector. Moreover, perfect labor mobility between the two sectors implies that the sectoral
wage rates will be equal as long as both sectors are used in production.
        The following lemma and its associated corollary respectively establish conditions on the level
of manufacturing productivity and, equivalently, on the size of the working population under which
the manufacturing technology becomes economically viable.

Lemma 1 (The Manufacturing Productivity Threshold for the Economic Viability of the Manu-
facturing Sector) There exists a threshold level of manufacturing productivity, A^M
                                                                                  t , such that the
manufacturing sector is economically viable in period t if and only if

                                                      1
                                  AM
                                   t       AR
                                            t =Lt              A^M AR
                                                                    t ; Lt     A^M
                                                                                 t .


Proof. Follows from (5)–(6) and the perfect mobility of labor between sectors, which assures that
workers will start gaining employment in the manufacturing sector if their productivity in that sector,
                                                                                                    1
AM                                                                            R
 t , is at least as high as their marginal productivity in the rural sector, At =Lt                      , when the
entire labor force, Lt , is employed in the rural sector.

Corollary 1 (The Population Threshold for the Economic Viability of the Manufacturing Sector)
                                                                              ^ t , such that the
Given AM > 0, there exists a unique threshold size of the working population, L
          t
manufacturing sector is economically viable in period t if and only if
                                                      1
                                  Lt      1=AM
                                             t
                                                  1
                                                          AR
                                                           t
                                                                   ^ AR
                                                                   L       M
                                                                      t ; At
                                                                                ^ t.
                                                                                L

        Let   t 2 (0; 1] denote the fraction of the economy’s labor force employed in the rural sector in
period t, i.e., t LR                                                                       M     ^M
                       t =Lt . As follows from Lemma 1 and depicted in Figure 1(a), if At < At , the
entire labor force will be employed in the rural sector and the wage rate in the economy, wt , will be
the associated wage rate in the rural sector, wR . However, as depicted in Figure 1(b), if AM A^M ,
                                                          t                                               t       t

of sustained growth explored in this paper focuses on the role of knowledge accumulation, rather than that of capital
accumulation, the absence of capital from the production process is a natural simplifying assumption. One could have
assumed, alternatively, that the economy uses capital as a factor input in both sectors, is small and open to a world
capital market where the interest rate is constant, and that land is collectively owned with the proceeds distributed
lump sum to the population. In this case, the quantity of capital would be …xed so as to equalize its marginal product
to the world interest rate, whereas the price of land would evolve to ensure that the total return on land (rent plus
price appreciation) would also equal the world interest rate. Allowing for capital accumulation and property rights
over land in a closed-economy context would complicate the model to the point of intractability.


                                                              11
              (A    Lt )                                                             (A       Lt )
                R      1−α                                                                R      1−α
   wtR         t                                        wtM              wtR             t                                          wtM




                                                                         wt                                                         AtM

      wt                                                  Aˆ M                                                                      Aˆ M


                                                          AtM

                             LRt = Lt                                                LRt = θt Lt               LMt = (1 − θt ) Lt

                    (a) The AM   ^M
                             t < At Case                                                      (b) The AM   ^M
                                                                                                       t > At Case



Figure 1: The Labor Market Equilibrium Conditional on the Level of Productivity of Labor in the
Manufacturing Sector


the manufacturing sector will be operational and the perfect mobility of workers between sectors
                                                                                                         1
will assure that wt = wtR = wtM and, therefore, that AM    R   R
                                                      t = At =Lt                                               . Hence, the equilibrium
allocation of labor between the rural and manufacturing sectors in period t, as described by                                               t,   is
given by                                            8
                                                    > 1                             if    AM   ^M
                                                                                           t < At
                                                    >
                                                    <
                                  t      LR
                                          t =Lt =                                                                                           (7)
                                                    >
                                                    >                1
                                                    :      1     1       AR
                                                                                    if    AM           A^M
                                                                                                         t ,
                                                                          t
                                                          AM             Lt                t
                                                           t

and, as follows from (5) and (6), the equilibrium wage rate in the economy in period t, wt , is
                                               8                 1
                                               >  R        AR                             ^M
                                               >
                                               < wt =
                                                            t
                                                           Lt                  if    AM
                                                                                      t < At
                                        wt =                                                                                                (8)
                                               >
                                               >
                                               :
                                                   wtM = AM
                                                          t                    if    AM
                                                                                      t          A^M
                                                                                                   t .


           Consistent with the historical path of economic development, where agriculture unequivocally
precedes industry, it is assumed that the manufacturing sector is not economically viable in period
0. Namely,

                                                                               1
                                                     AM    R
                                                      0 < A0 =L0                     .                                                     (A1)

3.3        Individuals
In every period t, a generation comprising a continuum of Lt economically identical individuals joins
the labor force. Individuals, as described earlier, may exhibit variation in a given cultural trait (i.e.,
in their stance as a cultural conformist versus a nonconformist), thereby giving rise to a certain
cultural composition of the generation in terms of this trait. As will become apparent, while the
cultural composition of the labor force does not in‡uence the economy’s production activities in any


                                                                 12
manner within a given period, it does a¤ect the dynamic path of the economy in the process of
development.23
         Reproduction occurs asexually and, therefore, each individual has a single parent. Members
of generation t live for two periods. In the …rst period of life (childhood), t                      1, individuals are
raised by their parents who face a …xed cost of child-rearing for every child in the household.24 In
the second period of life (parenthood), t, individuals are endowed with one unit of time, which they
allocate entirely to labor force participation.

3.3.1    Preferences and Constraints

The preferences of members of generation t (those born in period t                      1) are de…ned over consumption
as well as the number of their children. They are represented by the utility function

                                       ut = (ct ) (nt )1        ;          2 (0; 1) ,                               (9)

where ct is consumption, and nt is the number of children of individual t. The individual’s utility
function is therefore strictly monotonically increasing and strictly quasi-concave, satisfying the
conventional boundary conditions, which ensure that, for any positive level of income, there exists
an interior solution to the utility maximization problem.
         Let    > 0 be the cost (in terms of the consumption good) faced by a member of generation t
for raising a child. Income from labor force participation is divided between expenditure on children
(at a real cost of     per child) and consumption. Hence, the budget constraint faced by a member of
generation t is
                                                   ct + nt          wt ,                                          (10)

where wt is the labor income of individual t as given by (8).

3.3.2    Optimization

Members of generation t choose the number of their children and, therefore, their own consumption
so as to maximize their utility subject to the budget constraint. Substituting (10) into (9), the
optimization problem for a member of generation t reduces to
                                                 n                                  o
                                     nt = arg max (wt               nt ) (nt )1         ,                         (11)

which, consistent with one of the fundamental features of a Malthusian environment, yields the
optimal number of children for a member of generation t as an increasing function of individual t’s
  23
     To be speci…c, cultural traits themselves have no e¤ect of the individual sectoral productivity of the members of
a given generation. However, the distribution of traits within a given generation a¤ects the sectoral productivity of
subsequent generations.
  24
     This corresponds to the assumption that there exists some market, external to the economy, from where parents
can simply purchase child-rearing services (at a …xed real cost per child) without having to incur any opportunity cost
of time (in terms of labor force participation) for raising their children. An alternative modeling strategy based on a
time cost associated with child-rearing would not a¤ect the qualitative results of the model so long as technological
progress reduces the amount of time required to raise a child.




                                                           13
income. Speci…cally,
                                                                1
                                                         nt =            wt ,                                                (12)

which, following (8), yields
                                            8                   1
                                            >    1        AR                         ^M
                                            >
                                            <
                                                           t
                                                          Lt             if     AM
                                                                                 t < At
                                    nt =                                                                                     (13)
                                            >
                                            >
                                            :    1
                                                         AM
                                                          t              if     AM
                                                                                 t        A^M
                                                                                            t .


4        The Time Paths of the Macroeconomic Variables
The time paths of the macroeconomic variables are captured by the dynamics of factor productivity
in each of the rural and manufacturing sectors, AR      M
                                                 t and At , as well as the evolution of the size of the
working population, Lt . The evolution of factor productivity in each sector is, in turn, determined
by the accumulation of knowledge and is a¤ected by the size and the cultural composition of the
adult (working) population.

4.1      The Dynamics of Knowledge
In every period t, members of the adult generation in the economy develop new knowledge, which
advances the productivity of society in two dimensions. First, new knowledge upgrades the existing
production technologies, which expands society’s production-possibility frontier. Second, it permits
improvements in the organization of society so that production can occur closer to the technological
frontier. The process of knowledge creation is fueled by the size of the adult generation, Lt , via its
e¤ect on the supply of, the demand for, and the di¤usion of ideas, as well as through its enhancement
of trade and the division of labor.25 Furthermore, the knowledge creation process is complemented by
cultural diversity as re‡ected by the degree of fractionalization across conformist and nonconformist
traits in society,     . The higher is the fractionalization in cultural dispositions amongst the adult
generation, the greater is the amount of new knowledge produced in the economy.26
          Therefore, the advancement in the stock of knowledge,                            t,   between its level in period t,   t,
and its level in period t + 1,      t+1 ,   is

                                                     t    t+1        t   =    (Lt ; ) ,                                      (14)

where @ (Lt ; ) =@Lt > 0, @ (Lt ; ) =@                    > 0, @ 2 (Lt ; ) = (@Lt @ )                0, and the initial stock of
knowledge,     0   > 0, is given.
    25
     During the Malthusian and Post-Malthusian regimes, which are the stages of development examined in the current
analysis, the technological frontier was not very distant from the working environment of most individuals, and the
scale of the population a¤ected the rate of technological progress through its e¤ect on: (a) the supply of innovative
ideas, (b) the demand for new technologies, (c) the rate of technological di¤usion, (d) the division of labor, and (e)
the scope for trade. The positive e¤ect of the scale of the population on technological progress in the Malthusian
epoch is supported by Boserup (1965) and Kremer (1993). However, whether scale e¤ects exist in the modern era is
controversial. Distance to the technological frontier is signi…cantly larger, and population size may have an ambiguous
e¤ect on technological progress since it could come at the expense of population quality.
  26
     For related models that emphasize the productive role of heterogeneity in knowledge creation and di¤usion, see
Jovanovic and Rob (1989), Berliant et al. (2006), and Berliant and Fujita (2008).


                                                                    14
          The degree of cultural fractionalization,         , is represented by the conventional Hirschman-
Her…ndahl index that re‡ects the probability that two randomly selected individuals from the adult
generation would di¤er from one another in their cultural dispositions. Hence, given the fraction of
conformists, 1      !, and nonconformists, !, in the adult population,

                                                      = 2! (1    !) .                                         (15)

          The change in the stock of knowledge between periods t and t + 1,                 t,   is assumed to be
subject to diminishing marginal returns in the size of the economy’s labor force in period t. In
particular, it is taken to be of the following form:

                                         t   = ! (1    !) Lt ;          2 (0; 1).                             (16)

          Appendix B discusses a particular micro-founded mechanism, based on productive matches
between conformists and nonconformists, that generates this knowledge creation function.

4.2      The Dynamics of Sectoral Productivity
The level of productivity in each of the rural and manufacturing sectors, AR      M
                                                                           t and At , is governed
by the technological level in that sector as well as by the level of society-speci…c human capital
(i.e., attitudes of trust, obedience, discipline, and social cohesion), which determines the extent
of society’s ability to take advantage of the technological frontier. Productivity in each sector is
in‡uenced positively by technological progress, which occurs via the incorporation of new knowledge
into existing technologies and the application of new knowledge in improving the organization of
society. Sectoral productivity, however, is in‡uenced negatively by cultural nonconformism, which
obstructs the transmission of society-speci…c human capital across generations.
          The degree of nonconformism in society has an ambiguous e¤ect on the level of productivity in
each sector. On the one hand, nonconformism contributes to the degree of heterogeneity in society
and, thus, stimulates knowledge accumulation, thereby advancing society’s technological frontier
(through either innovation or the adoption of existing technologies) and improving society’s ability
to operate closer to this frontier.27 On the other hand, it introduces disharmony in society, eroding
society’s ability to transmit its society-speci…c human capital from one generation to another. Thus,
the evolution of factor productivity in each sector is subject to a fundamental trade-o¤, whereby
a larger fraction of nonconformists enhances productivity by contributing to knowledge creation
and, at the same time, diminishes productivity via its detrimental e¤ect on the intergenerational
transmission of society-speci…c human capital.
          The dynamics of productivity in the rural and manufacturing sectors are governed by the same
fundamental law of motion. In particular, productivity is enhanced by the creation of new knowledge,
   t,   and simultaneously diminished at a rate proportional to the fraction of nonconformists in society,
!, re‡ecting the deleterious e¤ect of nonconformism on the transmission of society-speci…c human
  27
   The bene…cial e¤ect of nonconformism on knowledge accumulation will hold so long as a higher prevalence of
nonconformism contributes to cultural diversity. Given that conformists always comprise the majority of the working
population, the above assertion holds by de…nition.


                                                          15
capital. However, the advancement of knowledge, in general, and the invention and adoption of new
technologies, in particular, are more complementary to productivity in the manufacturing sector as
compared to the rural sector.28
        The evolution of productivity in the manufacturing sector between periods t and t + 1, as
follows from (16), is determined by

                        AM
                         t+1 = (1       !) AM
                                            t + ! (1         !) Lt AM
                                                                    t    AM AM
                                                                             t ; Lt ; ! ,                        (17)

where the initial level of manufacturing productivity, AM
                                                        0 > 0, is given. In particular, (1                    !) AM
                                                                                                                  t
captures the erosion in productivity due to the disruptive e¤ect of nonconformism on the transmission
of society speci…c human capital, whereas ! (1           !) Lt AM
                                                                t captures the advancement in productivity
due to the application of new knowledge to the existing level of technology.29
        Similarly, the evolution of productivity in the rural sector between periods t and t + 1 is
determined by
                        AR
                         t+1 = (1       !) AR
                                            t + ! (1     !) Lt AR
                                                                t          AR AR
                                                                               t ; Lt ; ! ,                      (18)

where the initial level of rural productivity, AR
                                                0 > 0, is given, and


                                              >0       and      +   < 1,                                        (A2)

assuring a larger degree of complementarity between the advancement of the knowledge frontier and
the existing stock of sector-speci…c productivity in the manufacturing sector.

4.3    The Dynamics of Population Size
The size of the adult population (or labor force) in any period is determined by the size of the
preceding generation and its fertility rate. As follows from (13), the adult population size evolves
over time according to
                                    8    1         1
                                    >         AR        Lt       LR AR
                                                                     t ; Lt        if        ^t
                                                                                        Lt < L
                                    <          t
                  Lt+1 = nt Lt =                                                                                 (19)
                                    >
                                    :    1
                                             AM                  LM     AM                    ^ t,
                                              t Lt                       t ; Lt    if   Lt    L

where the initial size of the adult population, L0 > 0, is given.
       Hence, as long as the manufacturing sector is not economically viable (i.e., the labor force
     ^
Lt < Lt , or manufacturing productivity AM   ^M
                                         t < At ), population dynamics are governed by the level
of productivity in the rural sector as well as the size of the adult population. However, when both
sectors are active, the labor market equilibrium ensures that population dynamics are governed by
the level of productivity in the manufacturing sector and the size of the adult population.
  28
     Knowledge is assumed to be a pure public good, and it is therefore nonrival and nonexcludable in terms of its
applicability in the rural versus manufacturing sectors.
  29
     As will become apparent, given the initial conditions of economies, TFP increases monotonically in the process of
development.




                                                         16
5        The Process of Development
This section examines the role of cultural factors in determining the characteristics of the Malthusian
equilibrium and the timing of the take-o¤ from an epoch of Malthusian stagnation to a state of
sustained economic growth. The analysis demonstrates that, due to a greater e¢ ciency in the
intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c human capital, a society that is predominantly
characterized by cultural assimilation ‡ourishes in the Malthusian regime, bene…ting from a more
advanced agricultural technology and sustaining a higher population density. However, the associated
lack of cultural di¤usion delays the advancement of knowledge in this economy, hindering its ability
to shift to an industrial technology and, thereby, escape Malthusian stagnation to enter a state of
sustained economic growth.
           The process of economic development, given the fraction ! of nonconformists in society as
                                                                           1
de…ned in (1), is fully determined by a sequence AR     M
                                                  t ; A t ; Lt ; !         t=0
                                                                                 that governs the evolution of the
productivity in the rural sector,    AR
                                      t ,   the productivity in the manufacturing sector, AM
                                                                                           t , and the size
of adult population, Lt . Speci…cally, noting (17), (18), and (19), the dynamic path of the economy
is given by               8        8
                          >        >  R R                               ^ AR ; A M
                          >
                          >        < L At ; L t               if   Lt < L  t     t
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          > Lt+1 =
                          >
                          >        >
                                   : M M
                          >
                          >          L At ; Lt                if   Lt   ^ AR ; A M ;
                                                                        L
                          <                                                t     t
                                                                                                                (20)
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          > AR       R AR ; L ; ! ;
                          >
                          >  t+1 = A    t    t
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          : M
                            At+1 = AM AM t ; Lt ; ! ,

where, consistent with the process of development, the initial conditions, AR    M
                                                                            0 ; A0 ; L0 , are set to
satisfy assumption (A1).

5.1      The Dynamical System
The global analysis of the evolution of the economy from the agricultural to the industrial regime
is based on phase diagrams that describe the evolution of the system within the Malthusian epoch
as well as its endogenous transition to an industrialized economy. The analysis underlines the role
of the prevalence of cultural nonconformism (i.e., the degree of cultural diversity) in determining
the characteristics of the Malthusian equilibrium and the timing of the economy’s take-o¤ to an
industrial mode of production.30
           The phase diagrams, depicted in Figures 2–3, describe the evolution of the system in the
 AR
  t ; Lt    plane, conditional on the level of AM                     M
                                                t . The evolution of At generates a phase transition of
    30
    Since reversals in economic performance are historically observed in the relatively earlier industrialization of
economies that under-performed in the pre-industrial stage of development, the analysis here focuses on the forces
that brought about industrialization rather than the subsequent forces that led to the demographic transition and the
emergence of the modern growth regime. Clearly, one could employ the methodology advanced by Galor (2011) and,
thereby, generate the entire developmental path from Malthusian stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond.
This additional complication, however, will not generate any new insights on the role of cultural factors in bringing
about historical reversals in economic performance.



                                                         17
the dynamical system and brings about a qualitative change that is associated with industrialization
and the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.
        Each of the phase diagrams is based on three geometric elements that are instrumental for the
determination of motion within the system: the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, which separates
the regions in which the economy is agricultural from those where it is industrial; the AA locus,
which denotes the set of all pairs AR
                                    t ; Lt for which the productivity in the rural sector is constant;
and the LL locus, which denotes the set of all pairs for which, conditional on the latency of the
manufacturing sector, the size of the adult population is constant.

5.1.1    The Conditional Malthusian Frontier

The Conditional Malthusian Frontier is a geometric locus, in AR
                                                              t ; Lt space, that separates the
regions where the economy is exclusively agricultural from those where it is industrial as well. Once
the economy’s trajectory crosses this frontier, industrialization takes place.
        Let the Conditional Malthusian Frontier be the set of all pairs AR
                                                                         t ; Lt such that, for a
given level of manufacturing productivity, AM
                                            t , the entrepreneurs in the economy are indi¤erent
as to whether to operate the manufacturing sector or not. Following Corollary 1, the Conditional
Malthusian Frontier, M MjAM
                          t
                            , as depicted in Figures 2–3, is
                                         n                                  o
                             M MjAM           AR             ^ R M
                                               t ; Lt : Lt = L At ; At          .                 (21)
                                  t



Lemma 2 (The Properties of the Conditional Malthusian Frontier) If AR
                                                                    t ; Lt 2 M MjAM
                                                                                  t
                                                                                    , then
along the M MjAM
               t
                 frontier,

                                                    1
                                Lt = 1=AM
                                        t
                                                1
                                                        AR
                                                         t
                                                             ^ AR
                                                             L       M
                                                                t ; At ,

        ^ AR
where @ L  t ; At    t
                                  ^ AR
                M =@AR > 0, and @ L       M =@AM < 0.
                                     t ; At    t

Proof. Follows immediately from (21), Corollary 1, and di¤erentiation.
        The Conditional Malthusian Frontier is therefore an upward sloping ray from the origin
in   AR
      t ; Lt   space where, as follows from Corollary 1, the region strictly below the frontier is
associated with production using only the rural technology, and the region (weakly) above the
frontier is associated with both industrial and agricultural production. Furthermore, the frontier
rotates clockwise in AR                M
                      t ; Lt space as At increases in the process of development.

Lemma 3 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the Conditional Malthusian Frontier)
Given AR          M
       t > 0 and At > 0, for all Lt
                                    ^ AR
                                    L       M
                                       t ; At ,


                             Lt+1    Lt T 0     if and only if    t T
                                                                 AM     1       .

Proof. Follows immediately from (19).
        Hence, if the manufacturing sector is operational, (i.e., if the economy is in the region above
the M MjAM
         t
           frontier in AR
                        t ; Lt space), the evolution of the size of the adult population depends on


                                                        18
the level of AM
              t relative to a critical level, = (1             ). In particular, when manufacturing productivity
is below the threshold, = (1         ), the wage rate in the economy is too low to sustain fertility beyond
replacement so the adult population declines in size over time. However, if AM
                                                                             t is above the critical
threshold, then the wage rate is high enough to maintain fertility above the replacement level so the
size of the adult population increases over time.

5.1.2   The AA Locus

Let the AA locus be the set of all pairs AR                                                  R
                                          t ; Lt such that the level of rural productivity, At , is in
a steady state:
                                     AA           AR         R
                                                   t ; Lt : At+1        AR
                                                                         t =0 .                            (22)

Lemma 4 (The Properties of the AA Locus) Under assumption (A2), if AR
                                                                    t ; Lt 2 AA, then along
the AA locus,
                                                      1
                                              1                1
                                 Lt =                     AR
                                                           t            LAA AR
                                                                             t ;! ,
                                          1       !
                                                                    2
where @LAA AR        R       2 AA AR ; ! = @AR
            t ; ! =@At > 0, @ L    t         t                          > 0, and @LAA AR
                                                                                       t ; ! =@! > 0.


Proof. Noting (22), the functional form of LAA AR
                                                t ; ! is obtained from the algebraic manipulation
of (18) under AR      R
               t+1 = At . The remainder follows directly from di¤erentiation while observing
assumption (A2).

Corollary 2 (The Dynamics of Rural Productivity with respect to the AA Locus) Given AR
                                                                                     t > 0 and
! 2 (0; 1),
                          AR
                           t+1        t T0
                                     AR           if and only if        Lt T LAA AR
                                                                                  t ;! .


        Hence, the AA locus, as depicted in Figures 2–3, is a strictly convex, upward sloping curve
from the origin in AR
                    t ; Lt space. Further, an increase in ! pushes the locus closer towards the
Lt -axis. Moreover, AR
                     t grows over time above the AA locus (i.e., for values of Lt that, for a given
AR
 t , are above the steady-state level), since the adult population here is su¢ ciently large to ensure
that the associated advancement of the knowledge frontier fosters technology accumulation beyond
the eroding forces of cultural nonconformism on productivity. Below the AA locus (i.e., for values of
Lt that, for a given AR
                      t , are below the steady-state level), the advancement of the knowledge frontier
is not su¢ cient to overcome the eroding e¤ects of nonconformism on productivity, so AR
                                                                                      t falls over
time.

5.1.3   The LL Locus

Let the LL locus be the set of all pairs AR
                                          t ; Lt                   such that, conditional on the latency of the
manufacturing sector, the size of the adult population, Lt , is in a steady state:
                                 n                                                     o
                        LL           AR
                                      t ; Lt : Lt+1
                                                                         ^ AR ; A M
                                                           Lt = 0 j Lt < L                 .               (23)
                                                                            t     t




                                                           19
Lemma 5 (The Properties of the LL Locus) If AR
                                             t ; Lt 2 LL, then along the LL locus,

                                                              1
                                          1               1
                                   Lt =                            AR
                                                                    t    LLL AR
                                                                              t ,


                                                 2
where dLLL   R           2 LL    R
        t =dAt > 0, and d Lt = dAt                   = 0.

Proof. Noting (23), the functional form of LLL AR
                                                t is obtained from the algebraic manipulation
of (19) under Lt+1 = Lt . The remainder follows immediately from di¤erentiation.

Corollary 3 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the LL Locus) Given AR
                                                                                  t > 0 and
 M                   ^ A ;A ,
At > 0, for all Lt < L  R  M
                        t  t


                            Lt+1    Lt S 0       if and only if           Lt T LLL AR
                                                                                    t .


         Hence, the LL locus, as depicted in Figures 2–3, is an upward sloping ray from the origin
in   AR
      t ; Lt   space. Lt grows over time below the LL locus since a su¢ ciently high wage rate, that
results from a population that is smaller than the steady-state level, permits fertility to be above
replacement. Lt declines over time above the LL locus since a su¢ ciently low wage rate, resulting
from a population that is larger than the steady-state level, dictates the fertility rate to be below
the replacement level. The position of the LL locus, in AR
                                                         t ; Lt space, relative to the Conditional
Malthusian Frontier, M MjAM
                          t
                            , is established in the following lemma.

Lemma 6 (The Position of the LL Locus relative to the Conditional Malthusian Frontier) Given
                                  ^ AR ; AM 2 M M M and AR ; LLL AR 2 LL,
AM > 0, for all AR such that AR ; L
 t                  t               t        t        t                  jAt         t            t


                         ^ AR ; AM T LLL AR
                         L  t    t        t                       if and only if    t S
                                                                                   AM     1   .

                                                      ^ AR ; AM and LLL AR as speci…ed in
Proof. Follows from comparing the functional forms of L  t    t          t
Corollary 1 and Lemma 5 respectively.
         Thus, for AM
                    t < = (1        ), the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, M MjAM
                                                                                 t
                                                                                   , is located above
the LL locus. However, the clockwise rotation of M MjAM
                                                      t
                                                        , propelled by the growth of AM
                                                                                      t in the
process of development, eventually causes the two loci to coincide when AM
                                                                         t = = (1                         ), and the
Conditional Malthusian Frontier, M MjAM
                                      t
                                        , subsequently drops below the LL locus.
         Therefore, the critical level of AM
                                           t , established in Lemma 3, that determines whether the
size of the adult population in the region above the Conditional Malthusian Frontier is growing or
declining over time, also governs the position of M MjAM
                                                       t
                                                         relative to the LL locus. As such, the
growth of AM
           t through the critical level, =(1                      ), instigates a permanent change in the qualitative
nature of the system with respect to the global dynamics of the size of the adult population. This
change re‡ects the transition of the system from the Malthusian to the Post-Malthusian regime and
is summarized in the following lemma.

Lemma 7 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the LL Locus and the Conditional
Malthusian Frontier) Given AM               R
                            t > 0, for all At > 0,


                                                              20
  1. If AM
         t <     1   , then

        the Conditional Malthusian Frontier is above the LL locus, i.e.,

                                               ^ AR ; AM > LLL AR ,
                                               L  t    t        t


        and                                         8
                                                    >
                                                    > <0       if   Lt > LLL AR
                                                                              t
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    <
                                        Lt+1   Lt       =0     if   Lt = LLL AR
                                                                              t
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    :
                                                        >0     if   Lt < LLL AR
                                                                              t ;


  2. If AM
         t >     1   , then

        the Conditional Malthusian Frontier is below the LL locus, i.e.,

                                               ^ AR
                                               L       M
                                                  t ; At < LLL AR
                                                                t ,


        and, for all Lt ,
                                                        Lt+1    Lt > 0.

Proof. Part (1) follows immediately from Lemmas 3 and 6, and Corollary 3. Part (2) follows from
the same results while observing that, above the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, Lt+1       Lt > 0 if
AM
 t   > = (1      ), and if Lt is below the LL locus.

5.1.4    The Phase Diagrams

The evolution of economic activity in the agricultural stage of development and in the transition to
the industrial stage is depicted in the phase diagrams in Figures 2–3. Figure 2 depicts early stages of
development where the economy is agricultural and characterized by Malthusian dynamics, whereas
Figure 3 depicts the endogenous take-o¤ to an industrial economy, characterized by an acceleration
in the growth rates of output per worker and population.

The Agricultural Stage of Development The dynamical system in the agricultural stage of
development, when productivity in the (latent) manufacturing sector, AM
                                                                      t , is below the critical level,
 = (1     ), is depicted in Figure 2.
        As established in Lemma 7, the M MjAM
                                            t
                                              frontier in this stage resides above the LL locus,
and the dynamical system is characterized by a globally stable conditional Malthusian steady state
equilibrium, (AR
               ss ; Lss ), located at the point of intersection of the AA and LL loci. It follows from
the functional forms of LAA AR
                             t ; ! and L
                                        LL AR , speci…ed in Lemmas 4 and 5 respectively, that
                                            t
the Malthusian steady-state values of productivity in the rural sector, AR
                                                                         ss ; and the size of the adult




                                                        21
              Lt                        MM | AM                                 AA
                                             t




                                                                                                  LL




              Lss




               0                                                    AssR                          AtR

                            Figure 2: The Agricultural Stage of Development


population, Lss , are
                                         "                        #1       1

                                             1       1
                             AR
                              ss    =                    (1    !)              AR
                                                                                ss (!) ;                        (24)

                                         "           1            #1       1

                                             1       1
                             Lss =                       (1    !)              Lss (!) .                        (25)


        The dynamical system gravitates towards the steady-state equilibrium in a conventional
Malthusian fashion.31 Speci…cally, in the region above the LL locus but below M MjAM
                                                                                   t
                                                                                     , the adult
population (employed exclusively in the rural sector) is su¢ ciently large, and, hence, the wage rate
su¢ ciently small, such that fertility is at sub-replacement levels. Thus, as depicted in the phase
diagram, the adult population in this region declines in size over time. However, below the LL
locus, the adult population is su¢ ciently small, and the rural wage rate is therefore large enough to
ensure that the fertility rate is above replacement, implying that the adult population in this region
grows in size over time. Finally, in the region above M MjAM
                                                           t
                                                             , it follows from Lemma 3 that the size
of the adult population falls over time, which eventually drops the economy below the Conditional
Malthusian Frontier. The industrial mode of production is therefore not sustainable in this stage
of development, and the economy ultimately converges to an agricultural regime characterized by a
Malthusian equilibrium.
  31
    In addition, the system has an unstable trivial steady state located at the origin of AR                    R
                                                                                           t ; Lt space. Given A0 > 0
and L0 > 0, however, the non-trivial steady-state equilibrium is globally stable.


                                                         22
          Given the discrete nature of the dynamical system, the trajectories implied by the phase
diagram in Figure 2 approximate the actual dynamic paths only if both state variables evolve
monotonically over time. The actual system, however, may be characterized by oscillatory con-
vergence to the conditional Malthusian steady-state equilibrium if at least one of the eigenvalues of
the system’s Jacobian matrix is negative (Galor, 2007). The trajectories in Figure 2 are thus drawn
under the assumption that the parametric condition in Lemma 8 holds so as to ensure that the
conditional dynamical system is locally nonoscillatory in the vicinity of the conditional Malthusian
steady state. However, the qualitative aspects of analysis would not be altered even if oscillations
were to characterize the evolution of the Malthusian economy towards its steady state since this a
feature that appears to be present during the Malthusian epoch.32
          The stability properties of the conditional steady-state equilibrium, AR
                                                                                 ss ; Lss , are formally
established in the following lemma by examining the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix of the
conditional dynamical system evaluated at the steady-state equilibrium.

Lemma 8 (The Local Stability Properties of the Conditional Malthusian Steady State) If assumption
(A2) is satis…ed and AM
                      t < = (1               ), then the conditional steady-state equilibrium, AR
                                                                                                ss ; Lss , of
the dynamical system in (20) is:

  1. locally asymptotically stable; and

  2. characterized by the local monotonic evolution of both state variables, AR
                                                                              t and Lt , if and only
        if the Jacobian matrix,
                                       2                                                         3
                                           @AR AR               R
                                                ss ; Lss ; ! =@At     @AR AR
                                                                           ss ; Lss ; ! =@Lt
                                    6                                                            7
                      J AR
                         ss ; Lss = 4                                                            5,
                                            @LR AR           R
                                                 ss ; Lss =@At             @LR AR
                                                                                ss ; Lss =@Lt


        has eigenvalues that are real and positive, i.e., if and only if

                                                  !<                       .
                                                            +    (1    )

Proof. See Appendix C.

The Industrial Stage of Development                   The dynamical system in the industrial stage of devel-
opment, when manufacturing productivity, AM
                                          t , is above the critical level, = (1                 ), is depicted in
Figure 3.
          As established in Lemma 7, the M MjAM
                                              t
                                                frontier in this stage resides below the LL locus,
and the dynamical system changes qualitatively in relation to its characteristics in the agricultural
stage. The wage rate increases over time, permitting a continuous increase in the size of the adult
population along with an increase in the growth rate of productivity and output per worker.
 32
      See, for example, Lagerlöf (2006) and Galor (2011).




                                                            23
            Lt                                                           AA




                                                                                           LL




            Lss                                                                        MM | AM
                                                                                            t




             0                                              AssR                          AtR

                            Figure 3: Industrialization and the Take-o¤


The Transition from Agriculture to Industry             The transition from agriculture to industry in
the process of development is brought about by the growth of manufacturing productivity from its
initial level below the critical threshold, = (1    ), as depicted in Figure 2, to a level beyond this
threshold as depicted in Figure 3.
       The transition from agriculture to industry therefore requires that the economy starts with
a mode of production that is exclusively agricultural. Hence, the initial level of manufacturing
productivity is assumed to satisfy
                                          AM
                                           0 < = (1        ).                                    (A3)

Furthermore, to assure that industrial production ultimately becomes economically viable, it is
su¢ cient to assume that (latent) manufacturing productivity grows monotonically and eventually
exceeds the critical magnitude, = (1      ).
       Let gt+1 denote the rate of productivity growth in the manufacturing sector between periods
t and t + 1 . It follows directly from (17) that

                                 AM
                                  t+1   AM
                                         t
                         gt+1              = ![(1       !) Lt      1]   g (Lt ; !) .             (26)
                                    AMt

In particular, noting (25), the improvement in productivity that takes place in the (latent) man-
ufacturing sector between any two adjacent periods at the conditional Malthusian steady-state




                                                   24
equilibrium is
                                      8                                              9
                                      >"                                  #11        >
                                      < 1                1
                                                                                     =
                  g (Lss (!) ; !) = !                             (1   !)           1      gss (!) ,               (27)
                                      >
                                      :                                              >
                                                                                     ;

where gss (0) = 0 and gss (1) =       1.

Lemma 9 (The Condition for Positivity of the Growth Rate of Manufacturing Productivity at the
Conditional Malthusian Steady State) There exists some ! 2 (0; 1) such that

                                 gss (!) > 0       if and only if           +    < 1.

Proof. Necessity follows immediately from observing that, given ! 2 (0; 1), the positivity of gss
implies that (1     ) = > 1. For su¢ ciency, given (1                  ) = > 1, the proof follows trivially from the
continuity of gss as ! approaches 0 from above.

        Following Lemma 9, in order to permit society’s transition to an industrial economy for at
least some cultural compositions of society, !, the sum of the parameters                 and     is restricted so as to
ensure a positive rate of productivity growth in the (latent) manufacturing sector at the conditional
Malthusian steady-state equilibrium, i.e.,

                                                         +    < 1.                                                (A4)

Lemma 10 (The Properties of the Growth Rate of Manufacturing Productivity at the Conditional
Malthusian Steady State)

  1. Under assumption (A4), there exists a unique !
                                                  ^ 2 (0; 1) such that

                                           gss (!) T 0   if and only if         !S!
                                                                                  ^;


  2. Under assumptions (A2) and (A4), dgss (0) =d! > 0, and there exists a unique !
                                                                                  ~ 2 (0; 1) such
      that
                  dgss (~
                        ! ) =d! < 0        and    d2 gss (!) = (d!)2 S 0         if and only if   !S!
                                                                                                    ~,

Proof. See Appendix C.

Corollary 4 (The Degree of Cultural Diversity that Maximizes the Growth Rate of Manufacturing
Productivity at the Conditional Malthusian Steady State) Under assumptions (A2) and (A4), there
exists a unique ! 2 (0; 1) such that

                               dgss (!) =d! T 0          if and only if         !S! .

        The growth rate of manufacturing productivity at the conditional Malthusian steady-state
equilibrium, gss , has a unique interior root, !
                                               ^ , in the (0; 1) domain, and it is positive (negative) for all


                                                             25
                      g ss




                                                                               1
                        0                                                              ωt
                                           ω*           ω%       ω̂

                       -1



Figure 4: The E¤ect of Cultural Diversity on the Growth Rate of Manufacturing Productivity at
the Conditional Malthusian Steady State


values of ! below (respectively, above) the root. Furthermore, as depicted in Figure 4, it has a hump-
shaped relationship with the fraction of cultural nonconformists in the adult population (i.e., the
degree of cultural diversity).33 In particular, for a certain range of cultural compositions, i.e., for ! 2
(0; !
    ^ ), the productivity in the (latent) manufacturing sector at the conditional Malthusian steady-
state equilibrium increases monotonically over time, thereby making industrialization ultimately
inevitable for the economy.

5.2     The Evolution of the Economy
The evolution of the economy is characterized by an early epoch of Malthusian stagnation, where
production is exclusively agricultural, and by an endogenous industrialization with a subsequent
take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.

5.2.1    The Agricultural Economy

In early stages of development, the productivity in the (latent) manufacturing sector, AM
                                                                                        t , is low
(satisfying assumptions (A1) and (A3)), and only the rural sector is operative. The dynamical
system, depicted in Figure 2, gravitates (monotonically or in Malthusian oscillations) towards a
globally stable conditional steady-state equilibrium, (AR
                                                        ss ; Lss ).
        Since the adult population in this stage of development is employed exclusively in the rural
                                                                                                   1
sector, it follows from (2) that the steady-state level of income per worker is AR
                                                                                 ss =Lss               . Using
(24) and (25), the steady-state level of income per worker is given by


                                                yss =                 ,                                    (28)
                                                             1
  33
    Without loss of generality, Figure 4 has been drawn under the implicit assumption that !
                                                                                           ~ < !^ . The general
hump-shaped relationship between gss and !, however, holds regardless of whether the value of ! at the in‡ection
point, !
       ~ , is below, above, or equal to the root value, !
                                                        ^.


                                                         26
which re‡ects the well-established Malthusian property that the long-run level of income per capita
is constant and independent of the level of technology. A higher level of productivity per worker is
simply counter-balanced by a larger size of the working population.

5.2.2    From Agriculture to Industry

The transition from agriculture to industry in the process of development is brought about by the
growth of productivity in the (latent) manufacturing sector. As manufacturing productivity increases,
the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, M MjAM
                                          t
                                            , rotates clockwise in the AR
                                                                        t ; Lt space of Figure 2.
The level of productivity in the manufacturing sector ultimately surpasses the critical threshold,
 = (1     ), which drops the Conditional Malthusian Frontier below the LL locus as depicted in
Figure 3.
        The dynamical system, in AR
                                  t ; Lt space, is no longer characterized by a globally stable
conditional Malthusian steady state. Speci…cally, the steady-state equilibrium ceases to act as an
attractor as soon as trajectories cross the Conditional Malthusian Frontier and the manufacturing
sector becomes active. The emergence of the manufacturing sector then places the economy on a
dynamic path where the state variables, AR
                                         t and Lt , grow endogenously over time, and the growth
of manufacturing productivity drives the growth of income per worker.

5.3     Culture and Comparative Development
The e¤ect of culture on comparative development can be examined based on the e¤ect of the cultural
composition of society on Malthusian equilibrium outcomes in the agricultural stage of development,
and on the timing of industrialization and the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.

Proposition 1 (The E¤ ect of Cultural Diversity on the Equilibrium in the Agricultural Stage of
Development) Under assumption (A2), as long as the economy remains exclusively agricultural, an
increase in cultural diversity has an adverse e¤ ect on the steady-state levels of productivity in the
rural sector and the size of the adult population, but it has no e¤ ect on the steady-state level of income
per capita, i.e., for all ! 2 (0; 1),

                                        dAR
                                          ss =d! < 0;        dLss =d! < 0;
                                        dyss =d! = 0.

Proof. Follows immediately from di¤erentiating (24), (25), and (28) with respect to ! while noting
assumption (A2) and recognizing that the prevalence of nonconformism contributes to cultural
diversity since, by de…nition, conformists comprise the majority of the adult population.

        Geometrically, as depicted in Figure 5, a higher value of ! causes the AA locus to reside
closer to the Lt -axis in AR
                           t ; Lt space, thereby yielding lower steady-state levels of adult population
size and rural productivity.
        Therefore, an economy that is characterized by a relatively higher proportion of cultural
nonconformists in its working population (i.e., a relatively higher degree of cultural diversity) is also
associated with a relatively inferior conditional Malthusian steady state in terms of the economy’s


                                                        27
              Lt                 MM | AM                             AA
                                      t




                                                                                      LL




              Lss




               0                                          AssR                       AtR

Figure 5: The E¤ect of an Increase in Cultural Diversity on the Malthusian Equilibrium in the
Agricultural Stage of Development


level of rural productivity per worker and the size of its working population. However, the long-run
level of income per capita is una¤ected by the higher prevalence of cultural nonconformism since the
resulting lower level of productivity per worker is counter-balanced by a smaller size of the working
population.
       The inferiority of the conditional Malthusian steady state, in a society with a larger fraction
of cultural nonconformists, stems from the fact that the adverse e¤ect of nonconformism on the
transmission of society-speci…c human capital outweighs its bene…cial role in the moderate advance-
ment of rural productivity via its contribution to cultural heterogeneity and, thus, to the expansion
of the knowledge frontier.
       The prevalence of cultural nonconformism, however, also has an e¤ect on the timing of
industrialization and, thus, on the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth. This e¤ect is
summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 (The E¤ ect of Cultural Diversity on the Timing of Industrialization and the Take-
o¤ from Malthusian Stagnation) Consider an economy in a conditional Malthusian steady-state
equilibrium. Under assumptions (A2) and (A4), an increase in cultural diversity, as long as the
degree of diversity is not too large, has a bene…cial e¤ ect on the timing of the adoption of industry
and, thus, on the timing of the take-o¤ from Malthusian stagnation, i.e.,

                               dgss =d! R 0   if and only if     !Q! .



                                                 28
Proof. Follows immediately from Corollary 4 while recognizing that the prevalence of nonconformism
contributes to cultural diversity since, by de…nition, conformists comprise the majority of the adult
population.

       Hence, productivity growth in the (latent) manufacturing sector at the conditional Malthusian
steady-state equilibrium is monotonically increasing in the nonconformist fraction of the adult
population up to the critical level, ! , and monotonically decreasing thereafter.
       The earlier take-o¤ from the conditional Malthusian steady state by a society with a larger
but still moderate fraction of cultural nonconformists stems from the fact that the bene…cial e¤ect of
nonconformism on the advancement of knowledge, and, therefore, on the advancement of industrial
productivity relative to that in agriculture, outweighs its eroding e¤ect on the intergenerational
transmission of society-speci…c human capital. In contrast, if the fraction of nonconformists is too
large, an increase in the prevalence of nonconformism raises the ‡ow of ideas but also increases the
degree of anarchy in society, thereby acutely disrupting the transmission of society-speci…c human
capital. The rate at which new ideas are implemented and productivity is advanced in the economy
is therefore diminished.
       Following Propositions 1 and 2, variation in the moderate prevalence of cultural noncon-
formism across societies is associated with the phenomenon of overtaking. Speci…cally, a higher
prevalence of nonconformism (i.e., a higher degree of cultural diversity) generates an inferior eco-
nomic outcome in the agricultural stage of development, but it ultimately stimulates an earlier
industrialization and, thus, an earlier take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth. As such, the
cultural composition of societies can have a profound e¤ect on their historical experience with regard
to the process of development.

Corollary 5 (Cultural Diversity and Overtaking) Consider two societies indexed by i 2 fC; Eg.
Suppose that society E is characterized by a higher degree of cultural diversity and that ! C < ! E < ! ,
where ! i is the cultural diversity of society i. Society E will then be characterized by an inferior
productivity in the Malthusian regime, but it will overtake society C via an earlier take-o¤ into the
industrial regime.

5.4   Geography, Culture, and Comparative Development
The e¤ect of initial geographical conditions on comparative development can be examined based
on the e¤ects of society’s geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion on Malthusian equilibrium
outcomes in the agricultural stage of development, and on the timing of industrialization and the
take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth.

Proposition 3 (The E¤ ect of Geographical Vulnerability to Cultural Di¤ usion on the Equilibrium
in the Agricultural Stage of Development) Under assumption (A2), as long as the economy remains
exclusively agricultural, an increase in geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤ usion has an adverse
e¤ ect on the steady-state levels of productivity in the rural sector and the size of the working popu-




                                                   29
lation, but it has no e¤ ect on the steady-state level of income per capita, i.e., for all   2 (0; 1),

                                       dAR
                                         ss =d < 0;        dLss =d < 0;
                                       dyss =d = 0.

Proof. Follows immediately from Proposition 1 while noting that @!=@ > 0 in (1).

        Hence, an economy that is characterized by greater geographical vulnerability to foreign
cultural in‡uences, and, thus, by more cultural di¤usion, is also associated with a relatively inferior
conditional Malthusian steady state in terms of the economy’s level of rural productivity per worker
and the size of its working population. This inferiority arises from the fact that greater geographical
vulnerability to cultural di¤usion results in a relatively higher prevalence of cultural nonconformism in
society (i.e., a relatively higher degree of cultural diversity), with the adverse e¤ect of nonconformism
on the transmission of society-speci…c human capital outweighing its productive role in the moderate
advancement of rural productivity through the expansion of the knowledge frontier. Nonetheless,
the long-run level of income per capita is una¤ected by greater geographical vulnerability since the
resulting lower level of productivity per worker is accommodated by a smaller size of the working
population.
        However, the extent of geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion, as a result of its in‡u-
ence on the fraction of cultural nonconformists, also has an e¤ect on the timing of industrialization
and, thus, on the take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth. This e¤ect is summarized in the
following proposition.

Proposition 4 (The E¤ ect of Geographical Vulnerability to Cultural Di¤ usion on the Timing of
Industrialization and the Take-o¤ from Malthusian Stagnation) Consider an economy in a condi-
tional Malthusian steady-state equilibrium. Under assumptions (A2) and (A4), an increase in the
geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤ usion, as long as the vulnerability is not too high, has a
bene…cial e¤ ect on the timing of the adoption of industry and, thus, on the timing of the take-o¤
from Malthusian stagnation, i.e.,

                                 dgss =d R 0     if and only if     Q     ,

where     is implicitly given by ! (    ; )=! .

Proof. Follows immediately from Proposition 2 while noting that @!=@ > 0 in (1).

        Thus, productivity growth in the (latent) manufacturing sector at the conditional Malthusian
steady-state equilibrium is monotonically increasing in geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion
up to the critical level,   , and monotonically decreasing thereafter.
        The earlier take-o¤ from the conditional Malthusian steady state by a society that has a
higher but moderate geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion, and, hence, possesses a higher
prevalence of moderated nonconformism, stems from the fact that the adverse e¤ect of nonconformism
on the intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c human capital is outweighed by its bene…cial
e¤ect on the advancement of knowledge, and, thus, on the advancement of industrial productivity


                                                      30
relative to that in agriculture. However, if the degree of vulnerability to di¤usion is too large, and,
thus, the prevalence of nonconformism too high, an increase in vulnerability raises the degree of
anarchy in society and, thereby, severely disrupts the transmission of society-speci…c human capital.
Thus, while a higher degree of geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion increases the ‡ow
of new ideas, the rate at which these ideas are implemented and productivity is advanced in the
economy is diminished.
          Following Propositions 3 and 4, variation across societies over a moderate range in the degree
of geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion is associated with the phenomenon of overtaking in
global economic development. In particular, a higher degree of geographical vulnerability generates
an inferior economic outcome in the agricultural stage of development, but it ultimately stimulates
an earlier industrialization and, thus, an earlier take-o¤ to a state of sustained economic growth. By
in‡uencing the cultural composition of societies throughout history, geography confers a profound
e¤ect on their experience with regard to the process of economic development.

Corollary 6 (Geographical Vulnerability to Cultural Di¤ usion and Overtaking). Consider two so-
cieties indexed by i 2 fC; Eg. Suppose that society E is characterized by a higher geographical
vulnerability to cultural di¤ usion, and, thus, by a higher degree of cultural diversity, and that   C   <
 E    <    , where   i   is the degree of geographical vulnerability in society i. Society E will then be
characterized by a inferior productivity in the Malthusian regime, but it will overtake society C via
an earlier take-o¤ into the industrial regime.


6     Cross-Country Evidence
This section empirically examines the hypotheses that (i) geographical isolation in pre-industrial
times (i.e., prior to the advent of airborne transportation technology) has had a persistent negative
impact on the extent of cultural diversity in the modern world; (ii) pre-industrial geographical
isolation had a positive impact on economic development in the agricultural stage but has had a
negative impact on income per capita in the course of industrialization; and (iii) cultural diversity,
as determined exogenously by pre-industrial geographical isolation, has had a positive impact on
economic development in the process of industrialization.

6.1       Data and Empirical Strategy
6.1.1      The Cross-Country Sample

The analysis is conducted on a cross-country sample comprising the Old World (i.e., Europe, Asia,
and Africa). This sample is natural in the context of the current analysis for several reasons. First,
the Old World is characterized by the early rise of interdependent, advanced civilizations, and it
thus appears most likely to capture the intensity of the trade-o¤ associated with the di¤erential
impact of pre-industrial geographical isolation (amongst countries in the Old World) on comparative
development in the agricultural vs. industrial stages of development. Second, the broad cross-
continental population ‡ows in the era of European colonization and the signi…cant transformations
that they have brought to the sociocultural and institutional makeup of the native populations

                                                     31
of the New World present a major hurdle in the identi…cation of the e¤ect that pre-industrial
geographical isolation may have had on the economic development of this region in the course of
industrialization. Third, the complete absence of spatial interactions between pre-industrial societies
of the Old and New Worlds, since the disappearance of the Bering land bridge (prior to the Neolithic
Revolution) and until the voyage of Columbus in the late 15th century, suggests that the inclusion of
geographical isolation between societies in the Old and New Worlds into the analysis would obscure
the identi…cation of the trade-o¤ associated with the extent of geographical isolation, as opposed to
complete isolation.

6.1.2    The Index of pre-Industrial Geographical Isolation

In establishing the persistent causal e¤ect of geographical isolation on cultural diversity, as well as
its di¤erential causal e¤ects on comparative development in the agricultural vs. industrial stages of
development, the current analysis applies a novel index of geographical isolation prevalent amongst
Old World societies in the pre-industrial era. The index re‡ects the average time required to travel
from each square kilometer located in the Old World to the capital of a country, along speci…c land-
and sea-based routes that minimize travel time in the absence of steam-powered transportation
technologies.34
        The descriptive statistics of the isolation index in a full sample of 139 Old World countries
(for which data on the index are available) indicate that (i) the average time required to travel from
any other location in the Old World to the capital city of a representative Old World country is 14.7
weeks, which is the value associated with the isolation index for Myanmar; and (ii) a one standard
deviation movement above the mean of 14.7 weeks corresponds to an increase in the average travel
time by 4.1 weeks, representing the movement from the isolation level of Myanmar to that of East
Timor. In general, according to the isolation index, West African countries are associated with the
highest degrees of isolation whereas the Central Asian and Caucasus regions are representative of
the smallest degrees of isolation.
        As mentioned above, the isolation index for a given country is the unweighted average of
the time required to reach the country’s capital along time cost minimizing paths. One may have
considered using an alternative index of geographical isolation that is restricted only to the average
time required to travel from the capital of a country to all other capitals. The index used by the
current analysis, however, is superior as it does not su¤er from potential endogeneity arising from
the fact that the locational choice involved during the emergence of major urban centers was not
orthogonal to the spatial distribution of existing cities. The employed isolation index therefore
permits the exploitation of exogenous variation in the degree of geographical isolation in the pre-
industrial era in order to identify the impact of geographical isolation on cultural diversity, as well
   34
      The optimal land-restricted routes are computed using a time cost of human mobility surface, constructed by
Özak (2010), that re‡ects the time required to traverse any square kilometer on land in the Old World, accounting
for natural impediments to human mobility under various topographical and meteorological conditions as reported by
Hayes (1996). This cost surface over land is complemented with estimates of the time required to cross any square
kilometer on seas in the Old World, by constructing average times for each sea from primary and secondary historical
sources. Özak (2010) validates the methodology employed to construct the isolation index by comparing the optimal
travel paths with data on ancient trade routes, showing that the optimal paths among Old World capitals have strong
explanatory power for the locations of trade routes in the Old World between 500 BCE and 1900 CE.


                                                        32
as its di¤erential in‡uence on comparative development in the agricultural vs. industrial stages of
development.

6.1.3   The Index of Cultural Diversity

To empirically assess the hypothesized negative persistent impact that pre-industrial geographical
isolation has had on contemporary cultural diversity and to demonstrate the positive impact of
cultural diversity on income per capita in the process of industrialization, the analysis constructs
a novel index of cultural diversity based on the heterogeneity of responses to questions (on values,
beliefs, norms, etc.) in the World Values Survey (WVS) across the respondents in a given country. In
the absence of strong priors regarding the particular set of values and beliefs for which heterogeneity
would be important, and because responses to many questions in the WVS tend to be highly
correlated, this study employs two broad dimensions of cross-cultural variation identi…ed by the
factor analysis of Inglehart and Baker (2000) as the cultural characteristics over which to measure
the extent of cultural diversity across individuals.
        The two dimensions of cultural variation, referred to by Inglehart and Baker (2000) as the
“traditional vs. secular rational”and the “survival vs. self-expression”dimensions, represent the …rst
two factors extracted from individual-level responses to ten di¤erent items in the WVS. In particular,
for the “traditional vs. secular rational” dimension, the traditional end of the spectrum tends to
emphasize that (i) God is very important in the respondent’s life; (ii) it is more important for a child
to learn obedience and faith, rather than independence and determination; (iii) abortion is never
justi…able; (iv) the respondent has a strong sense of national pride; and (v) the respondent favors
more respect for authority. In contrast, the secular-rational end of the spectrum emphasizes the
opposite of these …ve characteristics. Moreover, for the “survival vs. self-expression”dimension, the
survival end of the spectrum tends to emphasize that (i) the respondent gives priority to economic
and physical security over self-expression and quality-of-life; (ii) the respondent describes self as not
very happy; (iii) the respondent would not sign a petition; (iv) homosexuality is never justi…able; and
(v) one has to be very careful about trusting others. Self-expression, on the other hand, emphasizes
the opposite of these …ve characteristics. In the global sample comprising over 217,000 individual
respondents from 92 countries and 5 di¤erent waves of the WVS over the 1981–2007 time period, the
two cultural dimensions together explain about 40% of the total cross-individual variation among
these ten WVS variables.
        Having determined the two dimensions over which to measure the extent of cultural diversity
across individuals, the construction of the diversity index proceeds by …rst performing a data
clustering analysis across individual respondents within a given country based on individual-level
scores for these dimensions. This enables the identi…cation of clusters (or groups of individuals)
from the extent of cultural dissimilarity between any two individuals (as re‡ected by their Euclidean
distance on the plane de…ned by the two cultural dimensions). An important outcome of a cluster
analysis that permits the construction of a diversity index is a tree-diagram or a dendrogram re‡ecting
the hierarchical relationship amongst the identi…ed clusters, with the height of the tree representing
the maximum distance or dissimilarity between any two identi…ed clusters. As an example, Figure 6



                                                   33
Figure 6: The Hierarchical Relationship Amongst Cultural Groups Identi…ed by the Clustering
Analysis of World Values Survey Data for India


depicts the dendrogram obtained for the population of India using the aforementioned data clustering
analysis.
        Given the information summarized in the dendrogram, along with the proportion of the total
number of individuals associated with each branch at a given height of the tree, it is then possible to
construct an index of cultural fractionalization, which corresponds to that particular height of the
tree. However, since the height of the tree itself contains useful information about the overall extent of
diversity in the two cultural dimensions, the employed diversity index is constructed as the integral of
fractionalization across the entire height of the dendrogram. The index therefore captures two distinct
elements of cultural diversity: one due to the number of culturally di¤erentiated groups and their
respective representations in the national population (i.e., a cultural fractionalization component),
and another due to the extent of observed cultural di¤erences amongst them (i.e., a cultural distance
component).
        The descriptive statistics of the diversity index in a full sample of 72 Old World countries (for
which underlying data for constructing the index are available) indicate that (i) the cross-country
mean level of diversity is 1.39, which is the value associated with the diversity index for India; and
(ii) the cross-country standard deviation of cultural diversity is 0.20, representing the movement from
the diversity level of India to that of France. In general, according to the constructed diversity index,
the Middle Eastern countries are associated with the lowest degrees of cultural diversity whereas the
populations of the Western European nations are representative of the highest degrees of cultural
diversity.
        While limitations in the availability of individual-level data on values, beliefs, and norms
restrict the construction of the index of cultural diversity only for the contemporary period, it is


                                                   34
nevertheless possible to employ this index to examine whether pre-industrial geographical isolation
has had a persistent negative impact on cultural diversity. In particular, the observed impact of
pre-industrial isolation on contemporary cultural diversity should be expected to capture (i) the
contemporaneous e¤ect of isolation on diversity in the modern world (due to a natural correlation
between contemporary and pre-industrial geographical isolation) and (ii) the historical e¤ect of
isolation on diversity in the pre-industrial world (due to the correlation between pre-industrial
and contemporary diversity that arises from the persistence in the intergenerational transmission
of cultural traits). Thus, the fact that cultural diversity is observed only in the contemporary
period does not necessarily limit the empirical assessment of the impact of pre-industrial geographical
isolation on cultural diversity in the distant past.
         Nonetheless, the extent to which the impact of pre-industrial isolation on contemporary
diversity re‡ects the aforementioned historical e¤ect should be expected to diminish over time as
the process of cultural transmission across generations becomes hampered by modernization and the
increasing in‡uence of globalization. In order to examine this hypothesis regarding the diminishing
impact of pre-industrial isolation, the analysis exploits data on the year of birth of respondents in
the WVS to construct birth-cohort-speci…c indices of cultural diversity (beginning as early as the
1920s) by applying the index-construction methodology discussed above to birth-cohort-speci…c sub-
samples of the WVS data. To the extent that the process of socialization is largely complete in the
formative years of an individual’s life, these birth-cohort-speci…c diversity indices can then be used
to proxy for time variation in cultural diversity within national populations over the course of the
20th century.

6.1.4    Empirical Strategy

To empirically examine the hypothesis that geographical isolation in pre-industrial times has had
a persistent negative impact on the extent of cultural diversity, the analysis exploits cross-country
variation in the index of pre-industrial geographical isolation to explain the cross-country variation in
the index of cultural diversity, based on pooled (i.e., age-independent) WVS respondent data within
a given country. However, in order to assess quantitatively how the persistent impact of isolation on
diversity has changed over time, the analysis also employs the cross-country variation in the isolation
index to explain cross-country variations in birth-cohort-speci…c indices of diversity corresponding
to cohorts born in the 1920s, 1940s, 1960s, and 1980s.
         In examining the impact of pre-industrial geographical isolation on cultural diversity in the
20th century, the analysis controls for a number of channels that, a priori, may not only be correlated
with geographical isolation but may also have had an independent persistent impact on contemporary
cultural diversity. These channels include: (i) the contemporary levels of ethnic and linguistic
fractionalization, which may contribute to cultural diversity, independently of isolation, given the
di¤erentiation of values and beliefs across ethnicities and language groups;35 (ii) the timing of the
Neolithic Revolution that may not only be correlated with geographical isolation (due to its impact
  35
    Although, a priori, geographical isolation may have had an in‡uence on ethnic fractionalization through its impact
on the accessibility of a given region to potential migrants, the empirical evidence to follow indicates that this e¤ect is
negligible, and that the origins of ethnic fractionalization are more likely to be associated with heterogeneity in land
endowments (Michalopoulos, 2011) rather than the degree of isolation.


                                                            35
on the spatial di¤usion of agricultural technologies) but may also have had a persistent positive
e¤ect on cultural diversity by augmenting the technological superiority of regions that underwent
the agricultural transition earlier (Ashraf and Galor, 2011a), thereby increasing the attractiveness of
these regions to migrants; (iii) geographical factors, such as the percentage of arable land, absolute
latitude, access to waterways, total land area, and a landlocked …xed e¤ect, all of which may have
had a persistent e¤ect on cultural diversity, either by directly a¤ecting the geographical accessibility
of a region or by in‡uencing the economic attractiveness of a region to migrants via the e¤ect of these
variables on the technological superiority of the region in the agricultural stage as demonstrated by
Ashraf and Galor (2011a); and (iv) additional geographical characteristics, such as the range of soil
quality, mean elevation, and the extent of spatial variation in terrain, all of which are known to be
correlated with the contemporary level of ethnic fractionalization (Michalopoulos, 2011) and may
therefore contribute to the extent of cultural diversity today.
         The examination of comparative development during the pre-industrial era, when societies
were in the agricultural stage of development, requires the interpretation of development outcomes
from a Malthusian equilibrium point of view. Improvements in the technological environment during
this epoch generated only temporary gains in income per capita, eventually leading to a larger
but not necessarily richer population (Ashraf and Galor, 2011a). The relevant variable gauging
comparative development during this period is thus population density as opposed to income per
capita. Therefore, to test the hypothesis that pre-industrial geographical isolation should have a
positive impact on economic development during the agricultural stage, the analysis exploits cross-
country variation in the index of pre-industrial geographical isolation to explain the cross-country
variations in log population density in the years 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE.
         To demonstrate the reversal in the impact of isolation on development outcomes in the course
of industrialization, the analysis employs the cross-country variation in the isolation index to explain
the cross-country variation in log income per capita in 1960. The focus on the year 1960 (rather
than, say, the year 2000) is dictated by the fact that the theoretical predictions pertain to the
impact of isolation (and diversity) on development during the transition from agriculture to industry
rather than when this transition is largely complete. Speci…cally, 1960 is not only one of the earliest
years for which reliable data on the standard of living are available for a relatively large sample
of countries from the Old World, but it is also fairly representative of a time period in the post-
WWII era when many Old World nations, particularly in Asia and Africa, were undergoing the
process of industrialization.36 Nonetheless, to demonstrate the detrimental impact of isolation on
economic development in the industrial stage amongst the sub-group of (primarily European) nations
that underwent the take-o¤ from the agricultural stage well before 1960, the analysis additionally
explains cross-country variations in log income per capita in the years 1820, 1870, and 1913 using
the cross-country variation in the isolation index.
  36
    Consistently with the theory, nearly identical results are obtained using log income per capita in 1950 as the
outcome variable gauging development in the process of industrialization. Results for the impact of isolation on income
per capita in later periods of the 20th century (e.g., in 1980 or 2000) are qualitatively similar but show progressively
weaker e¤ects of isolation in terms of magnitude and statistical signi…cance. As will become evident, this pattern in
part re‡ects the fact that the persistent adverse e¤ect of isolation on diversity has diminished over the course of the
20th century due to the increasing e¤ects of global integration on cultural di¤usion.




                                                          36
         In establishing the di¤erential impact of geographical isolation on development outcomes in
the agricultural vs. industrial stages of economic development, the analysis accounts for a variety of
potentially confounding factors. Speci…cally, in order to permit the interpretation that the observed
reversal in the impact of isolation primarily re‡ects the hypothesized reversal in the impact on
cultural diversity on development, it is necessary for the analysis to control for all the natural
correlates of geographical isolation, discussed above, that may have had an independent persistent
impact on cultural diversity. Further, since the in‡uence of geographical isolation would not only
capture the hypothesized latent e¤ect of cultural diversity but also the direct detrimental impact
of isolation on development arising from the diminished capacity of isolated societies to engage in
trade and bene…t from technological di¤usion, the analysis must account for this latter channel. This
is accomplished by controlling for distance to the nearest technological frontier (along a land-based
route that minimizes travel time) in regressions explaining the cross-country variation in historical
population density, and by controlling for the extent of “aerial” isolation (i.e., isolation under the
existence of modern airborne transportation technologies) in regressions explaining the cross-country
variation in income per capita in 1960. Moreover, to ensure that the observed di¤erential impact of
geographical isolation on development in the agricultural vs. industrial stages is not simply re‡ecting
a “reversal of fortune”arising from the in‡uence of European colonization, the analysis additionally
controls for a wide variety of …xed e¤ects that are known to be correlated with institutional quality,
including an Atlantic trader dummy, legal origin dummies, and a European colony dummy.
         The fact that cultural diversity is observable in the contemporary period, however, permits a
direct examination of whether cultural diversity confers a bene…cial e¤ect on economic development
in the industrial stage. Speci…cally, the analysis exploits cross-country variations in the diversity
index associated with the 1910–1940 birth cohort (i.e., in diversity across WVS respondents who
were of working age in 1960) to explain the cross-country variation in log income per capita in 1960
while accounting for the in‡uence of all aforementioned potentially confounding factors. Moreover,
to address the possibility that the positive relationship between cultural diversity and economic
development may still be spurious, potentially re‡ecting the latent impact of human capital and
other cultural, institutional, and geographical factors that have received attention in the empirical
literature on contemporary comparative development, the analysis additionally controls for the mean
levels of generalized trust and secular-rationalism in the population, executive constraints, malaria
ecology, and years of schooling. In its ultimate stage, the analysis employs pre-industrial geographical
isolation as an exogenous source of cross-country variation for contemporary cultural diversity to
establish the causal e¤ect of the diversity index associated with the 1910–1940 birth cohort on log
income per capita in 1960, conditional on the full array of cultural, institutional, and geographical
determinants of contemporary comparative development including the relevant measure of isolation
for global integration in the modern world, namely “aerial” isolation that admits the existence of
modern airborne transportation technologies.37
  37
     As with the analysis of the e¤ect of isolation on development in the course of industrialization, using log income per
capita in 1950 (rather than 1960) as the outcome variable generates nearly identical results for the e¤ect of diversity
on development. Moreover, unlike isolation, whose “reduced form” e¤ect on development diminishes over the course of
the 20th century, the results for the relationship between diversity and income per capita in later periods of the 20th
century (e.g., in 1980 or 2000) remain qualitatively and quantitatively intact. However, because of the progressively



                                                            37
         Finally, to account for the possibility that the observed relationships between isolation and
diversity, isolation and development in the agricultural vs. industrial stages, and diversity and
development in the industrial stage may in part re‡ect the latent impact of unobserved regional
characteristics, the analysis throughout controls for regional …xed e¤ects.38 In particular, the baseline
regression speci…cations all include …xed e¤ects for Sub-Saharan Africa, that generally exhibits
both relatively high levels of geographical isolation and relatively low levels of cultural diversity
and economic development, as well as Middle East and Central Asia, that on average exhibits
relatively low levels of isolation (due to its greater accessibility given its centralized location on
the Eurasian landmass) and moderate levels of diversity and economic development. Nonetheless,
alternative speci…cations that account for continental rather than regional …xed e¤ects are examined
to demonstrate the qualitative robustness of the results.

6.2     Empirical Findings
6.2.1    The Impact of Isolation on Diversity

Table 1 establishes, consistently with the theory, that (i) pre-industrial geographical isolation has
had a persistent negative impact on the extent of cultural diversity in the contemporary era; and
that (ii) the persistent adverse e¤ect of isolation on cultural diversity has diminished over the course
of the 20th century.
         Using a sample of 60 countries for which data on the complete set of variables employed
by the analysis are available, Column (1) demonstrates that, conditional on regional …xed e¤ects,
pre-industrial geographical isolation possesses a statistically signi…cant negative relationship with
contemporary levels of cultural diversity, measured by the diversity index constructed using pooled
(i.e., age-independent) respondent data from the WVS. The standardized beta coe¢ cient indicates
that a one standard deviation increase in geographical isolation is associated with a 0.48 standard
deviation decrease in cultural diversity.39
         As established in Column (2), however, the contemporary levels of ethnic and linguistic
fractionalization do not appear to be systematically correlated with cultural diversity, conditional
on regional …xed e¤ects.         This re‡ects the fact that heterogeneity in values and beliefs across
individuals, as measured by the diversity index, incorporates not only cultural fractionalization
but cultural distance as well. Thus, while the fractionalization component of the diversity index
may well be positively correlated with ethnic fractionalization, the distance component of the index
need not necessarily exhibit such a relationship. Indeed, the negative association between ethnic
fractionalization and the diversity index, although statistically insigni…cant, is indicative of the
pattern that national populations comprised of a larger number of ethnic groups are also those where
weaker e¤ect of isolation on cultural diversity over time, it is no longer feasible to employ isolation as an exogenous
source of variation in diversity to establish its causal e¤ect on economic development in these more recent periods of
the contemporary era.
  38
     The qualitative results, however, are completely una¤ected by the omission of regional …xed e¤ects from the baseline
speci…cations.
  39
     Since there is no natural interpretation of a unit change in the index of cultural diversity, the table presents the
standardized beta coe¢ cient associated with isolation, along with the regular (unstandardized) coe¢ cients associated
with all the explanatory variables employed by the analysis.



                                                           38
                                           Table 1: The Determinants of Cultural Diversity in the 20th Century
                                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)            (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                  Full         Full       Full         Full         Full       >95%           Full           Full            Full            Full
                                 Sample       Sample     Sample       Sample       Sample      Native        Sample         Sample          Sample          Sample
                                  OLS          OLS        OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS           OLS            OLS             OLS             OLS
                                                              Dependent Variable is Index of Cultural Diversity Based on Data from

                                                                                                             1920–29        1940–49         1960–69        1980–89
                                                                                                              Birth          Birth           Birth          Birth
                                                 All Respondents (regardless of age)                         Cohort         Cohort          Cohort         Cohort

     Isolation Index            -0.026***               -0.026***    -0.024***   -0.022***    -0.026**       -0.038**      -0.021***       -0.015***       -0.011**
                                 (0.007)                 (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.009)        (0.014)       (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.005)
     Ethnic Fractionalization                  -0.293     -0.295       -0.191       -0.136      -0.099        -0.234         -0.054          -0.009          0.088
                                              (0.248)    (0.206)      (0.164)      (0.159)     (0.204)       (0.157)        (0.089)         (0.083)         (0.089)
     Linguistic                                0.022      0.029        0.167        0.122       0.053
       Fractionalization                      (0.225)    (0.195)      (0.168)      (0.145)     (0.135)
     Years since Neolithic                                           0.042***     0.032**       0.055         0.038          0.018         0.036***         0.024*
       Revolution                                                     (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.042)       (0.025)        (0.014)         (0.012)         (0.012)
     % of Arable Land                                                 -0.322*      -0.305*      -0.360        -0.175         -0.147         -0.271*          -0.227
                                                                      (0.162)      (0.178)     (0.357)       (0.312)        (0.141)         (0.148)         (0.152)




39
     Log Absolute Latitude                                            0.100**     0.106**       0.064        0.148**        0.165***       0.146***        0.153***
                                                                      (0.043)     (0.047)      (0.090)       (0.055)         (0.022)        (0.023)         (0.024)
     % of Land w/in 100km                                            0.273***     0.316***      0.066         0.228         0.352***       0.308***        0.304***
       of Waterway                                                    (0.075)      (0.103)     (0.185)       (0.151)         (0.112)        (0.098)         (0.109)
     Total Land Area                                                                -0.003      -0.012        0.001          0.006           0.005           0.006
                                                                                   (0.007)     (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.006)         (0.005)
     Range of Land Quality                                                          0.186       0.108         0.005          0.162          0.208*          0.199*
                                                                                   (0.119)     (0.209)       (0.157)        (0.114)         (0.103)         (0.114)
     Mean Elevation                                                                 0.051       -0.032        -0.075         0.061           0.108           0.096
                                                                                   (0.075)     (0.132)       (0.166)        (0.088)         (0.065)         (0.062)
     Standard Deviation of                                                          -0.152      -0.815        0.930          0.454           -0.281          -0.345
       Elevation                                                                   (0.331)     (0.993)       (0.726)        (0.590)         (0.335)         (0.364)

     Std. Beta of Isolation       -0.479                  -0.477       -0.436      -0.408      -0.490         -0.522         -0.388          -0.299         -0.228
     Landlocked Dummy               No          No          No           No         Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Regional Dummies              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Observations                   60          60          60           60          60          31             55             55              55             55
     R-squared                     0.31        0.22        0.38         0.63        0.66        0.72           0.58           0.68            0.72           0.67
     Notes: (i) The set of regional dummies include a …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa and one for Middle East and North Africa; (ii) Heteroskedasticity robust
     standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (iii) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all
     for two-sided hypothesis tests.
ethnic groups are on average culturally less di¤erentiated from one another. However, to the extent
that linguistic di¤erences represent correlated shifts in cultural traits across groups, the cultural
diversity index should be expected to be positively associated with linguistic fractionalization, which
is corroborated by the positive but statistically insigni…cant relationship between these two variables
in Column (2). Nonetheless, the regression in Column (3), which repeats the analysis from Column
(1) while controlling for ethnic and linguistic fractionalization, indicates that both the point estimate
and the statistical signi…cance of the coe¢ cient on isolation are virtually una¤ected in comparison
to the coe¢ cient in the …rst column.
        In Column (4), the analysis is augmented with controls for other determinants, including the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution, the percentage of arable land, absolute latitude, and access to
waterways, that may have had a persistent e¤ect on cultural diversity, either by directly a¤ecting the
geographical accessibility of a region or by in‡uencing its economic attractiveness to migrants via
the e¤ect of these variables on the technological superiority of the region in the agricultural stage.
Speci…cally, an earlier timing of the transition to agriculture and the greater geographical accessibility
of a region via waterways could have contributed to cultural diversity by fostering trade, immigration,
and occupational specialization across individuals in the population. The results indicate that,
while these other factors do indeed possess statistically signi…cant correlations with contemporary
cultural diversity, in directions consistent with the aforementioned priors, the detrimental impact of
geographical isolation remains relatively stable in comparison to earlier columns, diminishing only
marginally in magnitude but retaining statistical signi…cance.
        Column (5) further augments the analysis with additional geographical controls, such as land
area, range of soil quality, mean elevation, terrain variability, and a landlocked dummy, that may
not only have in‡uenced the geographical accessibility of a region to migrants but may also have
directly given rise to ethnic and cultural heterogeneity over time by fostering geographically-driven
occupational diversity as argued by Michalopoulos (2011). Further, land area should be expected
to contribute to cultural diversity due to the diminished force of cultural assimilation prevalent in
the peripheral regions of larger political territories. While the prior associated with the impact of
land area is not con…rmed by the results in Column (5), the regression does reveal a positive, albeit
statistically insigni…cant, association between geographical heterogeneity (as captured by the range of
soil quality) and cultural diversity, consistently with priors. Reassuringly, however, despite these ad-
ditional controls, the coe¢ cient associated with geographical isolation remains statistically signi…cant
and rather stable in magnitude in comparison to that observed in Column (4). The corresponding
standardized beta coe¢ cient suggests that a one standard deviation increase in geographical isolation
is associated with a 0.41 standard deviation decrease in cultural diversity.
        Column (6) repeats the analysis from Column (5) on a sub-sample of 31 countries, all of which
satisfy the criteria that at least 95 percent of the national population in a given country in the year
2000 can trace its ancestry to populations that were native to the same country in the year 1500 CE.40
The results from this regression, that almost completely eliminates the diversity-augmenting role of
cross-country migrations in the past 500 years, indicate that pre-industrial geographical isolation
 40
    The data employed to implement this sample selection criterion are obtained from the data set of Putterman and
Weil (2010).



                                                       40
continues to impart a statistically signi…cant negative e¤ect on contemporary cultural diversity.
Remarkably, the point estimate of the coe¢ cient associated with isolation is hardly a¤ected relative
to the estimate obtained under the full sample of countries in Column (5). This suggests, consistently
with the theory, that the relationship between pre-industrial geographical isolation and contemporary
cultural diversity largely re‡ects the impact of isolation on diversity in the past (that has persisted
to the present via the intergenerational transmission of cultural traits).
         Finally, Columns (7)–(10) examine the time variation in the adverse impact of pre-industrial
geographical isolation on cultural diversity over the course of the 20th century. Speci…cally, the
regressions examine the impact of isolation on the birth-cohort-speci…c indices of cultural diversity,
corresponding to cohorts born in the 1920s, 1940s, 1960s, and 1980s, while accounting for the full
set of controls from Column (5) with the exception of linguistic fractionalization, which is omitted
from the speci…cations in the interest of maximizing sample size.41 The analysis is conducted on
a sub-sample of 55 countries for which data on all the explanatory variables as well as all the
birth-cohort-speci…c diversity indices are available. Reassuringly, the results not only indicate a
statistically signi…cant negative in‡uence of isolation on diversity amongst individuals belonging to
di¤erent birth cohorts but, in line with the prior that the historical persistence in the impact of
isolation on diversity should be expected to diminish over time, the point estimates of the coe¢ cient
associated with isolation become progressively smaller in absolute value in regressions explaining
cultural diversity amongst younger cohorts.
         The evidence presented in Table 1 therefore demonstrates that indeed pre-industrial geo-
graphical isolation has had a persistent detrimental impact on contemporary cultural diversity, and
that, consistently with modernization and the increasing in‡uence of globalization, this e¤ect has
been diminishing over the course of the 20th century.42

6.2.2    The Impact of Isolation on Development in the Agricultural Stage

Table 2 establishes, in line with the theory, that pre-industrial geographical isolation had a bene…cial
impact on economic development in the agricultural stage. Speci…cally, accounting for a variety of
potentially confounding factors, the table demonstrates a positive e¤ect of the isolation index on log
population density in the years 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE.
         Employing a 110-country sample for which data on the complete set of variables exploited
by the analysis are available, Column (1) reveals that pre-industrial geographical isolation possesses
a statistically signi…cant positive relationship with population density in 1500 CE, conditional on
regional …xed e¤ects. The regression coe¢ cient indicates that a one week increase in the average
travel time required to reach a country’s capital city is associated with a 6.9% increase in population
density in 1500 CE.
         Column (2) augments the analysis from Column (1) with controls for the timing of the
Neolithic Revolution, the percentage of arable land, absolute latitude, and access to waterways, all
  41
     The inclusion of linguistic fractionalization in the speci…cations, however, does not qualitatively a¤ect the results
for isolation.
  42
     The results for isolation throughout Table 1 are qualitatively similar when conditioned on continental rather than
regional …xed e¤ects. Due to space constraints, however, the corresponding results obtained under continental …xed
e¤ects are omitted from the table.


                                                           41
                                    Table 2: Isolation and Comparative Development in the Malthusian Stage
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)            (9)            (10)
                                 Full        Full        Full         Full          Full      Common        Full      Common           Full            Full
                                Sample      Sample      Sample       Sample        Sample      Sample      Sample      Sample         Sample          Sample
                                 OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS           OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS            OLS             OLS
                                                                      Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in

                                                                              1500 CE                                                 1000 CE          1 CE

     Isolation Index            0.069**    0.068***     0.073***    0.069***      0.074***    0.074***    0.093***    0.088***       0.083***        0.081***
                                (0.027)     (0.022)      (0.021)     (0.019)       (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.018)     (0.017)        (0.021)         (0.022)
     Years since Neolithic                 0.184***     0.116**       0.085         0.083       0.046       0.065       0.002         0.148**        0.293***
       Revolution                           (0.057)     (0.056)      (0.051)       (0.051)     (0.053)     (0.066)     (0.073)        (0.067)         (0.072)
     % of Arable Land                      4.215***     3.830***    3.668***      3.785***    4.721***    3.869***    4.908***       3.506***        2.052**
                                            (0.845)      (0.790)     (0.773)       (0.750)     (0.623)     (0.723)     (0.554)        (0.851)        (0.885)
     Log Absolute Latitude                 -0.375***   -0.446***    -0.387***     -0.399***   -0.357***   -0.447***   -0.399***       -0.319**         0.046
                                            (0.137)     (0.103)      (0.114)       (0.113)     (0.099)     (0.106)     (0.090)         (0.122)        (0.094)
     % of Land w/in 100km                  0.917***     0.744***    1.026***      0.953***    0.856***    0.751**      0.707**        0.745**        0.862**
       of Waterway                          (0.279)      (0.265)     (0.285)       (0.290)     (0.305)    (0.301)      (0.308)        (0.336)        (0.356)
     Distance to Regional                              -0.190***    -0.185***     -0.172***   -0.179***   -0.158***   -0.184***       -0.153**       -0.195***
       Frontier                                         (0.048)      (0.050)       (0.050)     (0.054)     (0.053)     (0.058)         (0.061)        (0.062)




42
     Total Land Area                                                 -0.051*        -0.040      -0.044      -0.038     -0.045*       -0.074***       -0.078**
                                                                     (0.027)       (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.026)     (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.032)
     Range of Land Quality                                          1.188***      1.088***    0.919***    1.158***    0.960***       1.028***        0.986**
                                                                     (0.305)       (0.308)     (0.313)     (0.303)     (0.310)        (0.347)        (0.388)
     Mean Elevation                                                   0.319         0.283       0.244       0.261       0.288          0.352           0.001
                                                                     (0.310)       (0.304)     (0.340)     (0.295)     (0.330)        (0.329)         (0.342)
     Standard Deviation of                                            0.239         0.487      2.268*       0.841      2.324*          0.011           1.075
       Elevation                                                     (1.617)       (1.567)     (1.273)     (1.540)     (1.303)        (2.001)         (2.389)

     Std. Beta of Isolation      0.232       0.228       0.244        0.231         0.250       0.224       0.312       0.267          0.278           0.246
     Landlocked Dummy              No         No           No          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes
     Atlantic Trader Dummy         No         No           No           No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             No              No
     Regional Dummies             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          No         No             Yes             Yes
     Continent Dummies             No         No           No           No            No          No         Yes         Yes             No              No
     Observations                 110         110         110          110           110          92         110         92             108              99
     R-squared                    0.20       0.61         0.66         0.72          0.73        0.82        0.74       0.83            0.64            0.71
     Notes: (i) The set of regional dummies in Columns (1)–(6) and (9)–(10) include a …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa and one for Middle East and North
     Africa; (ii) The set of continent dummies in Columns (7)–(8) include a …xed e¤ect for Africa and one for Asia; (iii) The sample used in Columns (6) and
     (8) comprises the intersection of the full sample used by the current analysis and the full sample used by the analysis for income per capita in 1960 in
     Table 3; (iv) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (v) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, **
     at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
of which are important determinants of population density in the Malthusian epoch as established
in the empirical analysis of Ashraf and Galor (2011a). While these other factors do indeed confer
statistically signi…cant e¤ects on population density in 1500 CE, geographical isolation continues to
have a statistically signi…cant bene…cial impact on economic development in this period, with the
point estimate of the relevant coe¢ cient remaining virtually intact in comparison to its estimate in
Column (1).
         The regression presented in Column (3) attempts to separate the gross bene…cial e¤ect of
geographical isolation revealed thus far from its detrimental e¤ect, arising from the diminished
capacity of more isolated societies to bene…t from technological di¤usion. Speci…cally, the analysis
introduces a control for distance to the closest regional technological frontier (along a land-based route
that minimizes travel time). These regional centers of technology di¤usion are derived by Ashraf
and Galor (2011b) who employ historical urbanization estimates from Chandler (1987) to identify
frontiers based on the size of urban populations.43 In line with the predictions of the di¤usion channel,
distance to the closest regional frontier has a signi…cant negative impact on economic development.
Remarkably, however, the point estimate and statistical signi…cance of the coe¢ cient associated
with the isolation index are largely una¤ected, suggesting that the measure of geographical isolation
being employed is orthogonal to the dimension of isolation that is associated with the diminished
ability of more isolated societies to bene…t from technological advancement at the frontier during the
agricultural stage of development.
         Column (4) further augments the analysis with additional controls for land area, range of
soil quality, mean elevation, terrain variability, and a landlocked …xed e¤ect that were used in the
earlier analysis of the impact of geographical isolation on cultural diversity in Table 1. Reassuringly,
the bene…cial e¤ect of isolation on population density in 1500 CE remains essentially intact despite
the statistically signi…cant explanatory power of some of these factors, particularly the range of land
quality, for economic development in this period. In Column (5), the analysis additionally accounts
for a …xed e¤ect associated with access to the Atlantic Ocean, which, as demonstrated empirically
by Acemoglu et al. (2005b), conferred bene…ts to some Western European nations both directly, by
opening up trading opportunities with the New World, and indirectly, via institutional channels,
as early as the year 1500 CE. Since Western Europe in general exhibits relatively high levels of
geographical isolation (with respect to other locations in the Old World), it is important to control
for access to the Atlantic to ensure that the positive relationship between isolation and development
in the agricultural stage is not driven by the access of these perhaps only seemingly isolated countries
to the Atlantic Ocean. The regression results, however, indicate that not only does the coe¢ cient
on isolation retain statistical signi…cance, it increases slightly in magnitude once the Atlantic trader
…xed e¤ect is accounted for by the analysis. According to the regression, a one week increase in the
average travel time required to reach a country’s capital city is associated with a 7.4% increase in
population density in 1500 CE.
         To permit a fair assessment of the di¤erential e¤ect of isolation on economic development
in the agricultural vs. industrial stages, Column (6) conducts the same exercise as Column (5) but
   43
      Speci…cally, for a given time period, the set of regional frontiers in that period comprises the two largest cities
from each continent that belong to di¤erent socio-political entities. Thus, for 1500 CE, the frontiers identi…ed include
London (UK), Paris (France), Cairo (Egypt), Fez (Morocco), Constantinople (Turkey), and Peking (China).


                                                           43
on a 92-country sample that is common to both the current analysis of the e¤ect of isolation in the
agricultural stage and the analysis of the e¤ect of isolation in the industrial stage to be presented
in the next section. Reassuringly, despite the change in sample size between Columns (5) and (6),
the point estimate and statistical signi…cance of the coe¢ cient associated with the isolation index
remain virtually una¤ected.
        Columns (7) and (8) repeat the analyses from Columns (5) and (6), respectively, but using
continental …xed e¤ects as opposed to regional …xed e¤ects. The regressions reveal …ndings that are
qualitatively similar to those in earlier columns, suggesting that the bene…cial impact of isolation
on development in the agricultural stage was, on average, as prevalent within continents as it was
within sub-continental regions.
        Finally, Columns (9) and (10) conduct the same analysis as Column (4) but for log population
density in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE respectively –i.e., they examine the impact of geographical
isolation on economic development in these earlier periods under the full set of controls, with the
exception of the Atlantic trader dummy that is clearly inapplicable during these earlier periods in
history. The relatively smaller regression samples of 108 countries (for the 1000 CE analysis) and
99 countries (for the 1 CE analysis) re‡ect the greater unavailability of population density data for
these earlier time periods. The results, however, indicate that geographical isolation had a bene…cial
impact on economic development in these earlier historical periods as well.44
        The evidence presented in Table 2 therefore establishes, in accordance with the theory, that
indeed pre-industrial geographical isolation had a bene…cial impact on economic development during
the agricultural stage of development.

6.2.3   The Impact of Isolation on Development in the Industrial Stage

Consistently with the predictions of the theory, Table 3 establishes that, while the extent of geograph-
ical isolation prevalent in pre-industrial times had a positive e¤ect on economic development in the
agricultural stage, it has had a persistent detrimental impact on economic development in the course
of industrialization. In particular, the analysis reveals a statistically signi…cant and robust negative
e¤ect of the isolation index on log income per capita in 1960, a time period when the majority of
the nations in the Old World, particularly in Asia and Africa, were still undergoing the process of
industrialization.
        Exploiting variations across a sample of 100 countries for which data on the full set of variables
used by the analysis are available, Column (1) reveals that, conditional on regional …xed e¤ects,
pre-industrial geographical isolation possesses a statistically signi…cant negative relationship with
income per capita in 1960. Speci…cally, the regression coe¢ cient implies that a one week increase in
the average travel time required to reach a country’s capital city from any location in the Old World
is associated with a 6.1% decrease in income per capita in 1960.
        Maintaining symmetry with the analysis of the impact of isolation on development in the
agricultural stage from Table 2, Column (2) augments the current analysis with controls for the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution, the percentage of arable land, absolute latitude, and access to
  44
    Repeating the analyses in Columns (9) and (10) using continental as opposed to regional …xed e¤ects yields
qualitatively similar …ndings. These results, however, are omitted from the table due to space constraints.


                                                     44
                              Table 3: Isolation and Comparative Development in the Industrial Stage
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)
                                     Full        Full         Full         Full         Full         Full      Common        Full        Common
                                    Sample      Sample       Sample       Sample       Sample       Sample      Sample      Sample        Sample
                                     OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS         OLS           OLS
                                                               Dependent Variable is Log Income per Capita in 1960
     Isolation Index               -0.061***   -0.099***    -0.067***    -0.066***    -0.051**     -0.050**     -0.048**    -0.050**     -0.049**
                                    (0.022)     (0.023)      (0.022)      (0.023)      (0.022)      (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.024)
     Years since Neolithic                       0.077*       0.007        0.023        -0.053       -0.052      -0.052       -0.057       -0.082
       Revolution                                (0.042)     (0.043)      (0.047)      (0.041)      (0.044)     (0.046)      (0.069)      (0.073)
     % of Arable Land                           -1.706**    -2.078***    -2.070***    -1.590***    -1.551**     -1.851**    -1.745**     -2.017***
                                                 (0.657)     (0.577)      (0.586)      (0.481)      (0.689)      (0.708)     (0.703)      (0.742)
     Log Absolute Latitude                      0.211**       0.130        0.126        0.015        0.013       0.018        0.050        0.064
                                                (0.090)      (0.085)      (0.090)      (0.091)      (0.088)     (0.092)      (0.080)      (0.084)
     % of Land w/in 100km                       1.487***    1.400***     1.341***     0.896***     0.903***     0.910**     0.864**       0.935**
       of Waterway                               (0.262)     (0.262)      (0.303)      (0.301)      (0.331)     (0.384)     (0.351)       (0.401)
     Aerial Isolation                                       -0.217***    -0.208***    -0.179***   -0.179***    -0.243***    -0.201**     -0.284***
                                                             (0.057)      (0.062)      (0.058)     (0.058)      (0.053)      (0.098)      (0.098)
     Total Land Area                                                       -0.002       -0.007       -0.008      -0.005       -0.008       -0.000
                                                                          (0.023)      (0.017)      (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.021)




45
     Range of Land Quality                                                 0.027        -0.008       0.003       0.082        -0.065       0.095
                                                                          (0.348)      (0.327)      (0.344)     (0.354)      (0.316)      (0.314)
     Mean Elevation                                                        0.048        -0.164       -0.165      -0.054       -0.130       0.019
                                                                          (0.261)      (0.256)      (0.255)     (0.245)      (0.262)      (0.249)
     Standard Deviation of                                                 -1.576       -0.372       -0.347      -0.751       -0.584       -1.182
       Elevation                                                          (0.974)      (0.949)      (0.888)     (0.806)      (0.909)      (0.884)
     Log Population Density                                                                          -0.008      0.005        0.001        0.023
       in 1500 CE                                                                                   (0.102)     (0.108)      (0.108)      (0.117)

     Std. Beta of Isolation         -0.247       -0.400       -0.272       -0.268      -0.205       -0.203       -0.202      -0.204       -0.208
     Landlocked Dummy                 No           No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin Dummies             No           No           No           No         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     European Colony Dummy            No           No           No           No         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Regional Dummies                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          No           No
     Continent Dummies                No           No           No           No          No           No           No         Yes          Yes
     Observations                    100          100          100          100         100          100           92         100           92
     R-squared                       0.31         0.54         0.62         0.63        0.69         0.69         0.70        0.69         0.70
     Notes: (i) The set of legal origin dummies in Columns (5)–(9) include a …xed e¤ect for British legal origin and one for French origin; (ii)
     The set of regional dummies in Columns (1)–(7) include a …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa and one for Middle East and North Africa;
     (iii) The set of continent dummies in Columns (8)–(9) include a …xed e¤ect for Africa and one for Asia; (iv) The sample used in Columns
     (7) and (9) comprises the intersection of the full sample used by the current analysis and the full sample used by the analysis for population
     density in 1500 CE in Table 2; (v) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vi) *** denotes statistical
     signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
waterways. As is evident from the results, while some of these other factors do possess statistically
signi…cant correlations with income per capita in 1960, the persistent adverse e¤ect of isolation on
development in the industrial stage remains qualitatively robust, maintaining statistical signi…cance
and increasing somewhat in magnitude under these additional controls.
        In order to disentangle the persistent detrimental e¤ect of historical geographical isolation
on development from its contemporaneous e¤ect (i.e., as determined by the presence of airborne
transportation technologies), Column (3) introduces a control for the extent of “aerial” isolation as
measured by the average aerial distance from all other capital cities in the world. Not surprisingly,
given that geographical isolation prevalent in pre-industrial times is expected to be correlated
with geographical isolation as determined by modern transportation technologies, the persistent
detrimental impact of isolation diminishes somewhat in magnitude once its contemporaneous e¤ect
is accounted for by the analysis. Nevertheless, the persistent e¤ect of pre-industrial geographical
isolation remains sizeable and statistically signi…cant. Moreover, consistently with gravity models
of trade and technology di¤usion, “aerial” isolation has a statistically signi…cant adverse impact on
economic development in the industrial stage.
        Column (4) reveals that, further augmenting the analysis with additional controls for land
area, range of soil quality, mean elevation, terrain variability, and a landlocked …xed e¤ect, all of
which were used in the earlier analysis of the impact of geographical isolation on cultural diversity in
Table 1, hardly a¤ects the point estimate and statistical signi…cance associated with the coe¢ cient on
isolation. In addition, to ensure that the observed reversal in the impact of geographical isolation on
economic development in the industrial stage relative to the agricultural stage is not being driven by
institutional channels associated with the legacy of European colonialism (Acemoglu et al., 2005a),
the regression in Column (5) introduces controls for legal origins as well as a European colony …xed
e¤ect. Reassuringly, the regression coe¢ cient associated with the isolation index remains largely
robust, diminishing only moderately in magnitude and statistical signi…cance, under these additional
…xed e¤ects capturing the quality of institutions. Speci…cally, the coe¢ cient of interest implies that
a one week increase in the average travel time required to reach a country’s capital city is associated
with a 5.1% decrease in income per capita in 1960.
        In light of the previously uncovered bene…cial e¤ect of isolation on development in the
agricultural stage, the analysis in Column (6) assures that the observed adverse e¤ect of isolation on
development in the industrial stage is not simply re‡ecting a “reversal of fortune”that is associated
with the level of economic development in 1500 CE, as captured by log population density in this
time period. The results reassuringly indicate that (i) there is no statistically signi…cant negative
correlation between development outcomes in the industrial vs. agricultural stages of development,
and, more importantly, (ii) the magnitude of the persistent detrimental e¤ect of pre-industrial
isolation on per-capita income in 1960 is virtually una¤ected under this explicit control for unobserved
historical persistence.
        Column (7) conducts the same exercise as the preceding column but on the 92-country sample
that is common to both (i) the current analysis of the e¤ect of isolation on development in the
industrial stage and (ii) the analysis of the e¤ect of isolation on development in the agricultural
stage from the preceding section. The …ndings reveal that the coe¢ cient associated with the isolation


                                                  46
                        Table 4: Isolation and Comparative Development in Earlier Stages of Industrialization
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)         (9)
                                    Full         Full         Full             Full        Full        Full           Full         Full        Full
                                   Sample       Sample       Sample           Sample      Sample      Sample         Sample       Sample      Sample
                                    OLS          OLS          OLS              OLS         OLS         OLS            OLS          OLS         OLS
                                                                      Dependent Variable is Log Income per Capita in:

                                                 1820                                      1870                                    1913

     Isolation Index              -0.049***    -0.060***   -0.046***         -0.063***   -0.052***   -0.050***      -0.080***    -0.062***   -0.062***
                                   (0.017)      (0.011)     (0.011)           (0.019)     (0.017)     (0.017)        (0.022)      (0.018)     (0.019)
     Years since Neolithic                     0.089***     0.056***                     0.084***      0.065                     0.099***       0.079
       Revolution                               (0.018)      (0.019)                      (0.028)     (0.042)                     (0.035)      (0.051)
     % of Arable Land                            -0.333       -0.102                     -1.566***   -1.489**                    -1.815***    -1.716**
                                                (0.271)      (0.343)                      (0.533)     (0.663)                     (0.582)      (0.749)
     Log Absolute Latitude                       0.058        -0.036                     0.246***    0.337***                    0.332***     0.382***
                                                (0.057)      (0.064)                      (0.080)     (0.087)                     (0.085)      (0.112)
     % of Land w/in 100km                      0.560***     0.404***                     0.569***    0.614***                    0.642***     0.677***
       of Waterway                              (0.116)      (0.091)                      (0.158)     (0.132)                     (0.159)      (0.165)




47
     Total Land Area                             -0.007       -0.003                       -0.017      -0.008                    -0.027**     -0.020*
                                                (0.007)      (0.006)                      (0.011)     (0.010)                     (0.011)     (0.012)
     Range of Land Quality                      0.362**       0.154                      0.724**     0.631**                     0.820***     0.744**
                                                (0.140)      (0.145)                     (0.270)     (0.279)                      (0.280)     (0.322)
     Mean Elevation                              -0.122       -0.113                      -0.344*      -0.162                    -0.570**     -0.425*
                                                (0.138)      (0.104)                      (0.190)     (0.165)                     (0.220)     (0.228)
     Standard Deviation of                     -1.144**      -0.767*                       -0.937    -1.850**                      -0.674       -1.328
       Elevation                                (0.456)      (0.436)                      (0.566)     (0.685)                     (0.652)      (0.823)

     Std. Beta of Isolation         -0.436       -0.540      -0.410           -0.445      -0.364      -0.350            -0.472    -0.369       -0.367
     Landlocked Dummy                 No          Yes         Yes               No         Yes         Yes                No       Yes          Yes
     Atlantic Trader Dummy            No           No         Yes               No          No         Yes                No        No          Yes
     Legal Origin Dummies             No           No         Yes               No          No         Yes                No        No          Yes
     European Colony Dummy            No           No         Yes               No          No         Yes                No        No          Yes
     Observations                     41           41          41               48          48          48                48        48           48
     R-squared                       0.23         0.81        0.89             0.22        0.67        0.78              0.22      0.74         0.78
     Notes: (i) The set of legal origin dummies in Columns (3), (6) and (9) include a …xed e¤ect for British legal origin and one for French origin;
     (ii) All regressions include a regional …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa; (iii) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported
     in parentheses; (iv) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis
     tests.
index remains robust in both magnitude and statistical signi…cance despite the drop in sample size
between Columns (6) and (7). Moreover, in conjunction with Column (6) of Table 2, the results here
demonstrate that, exploiting variations across the same sample of countries, isolation does indeed
impart a characteristically di¤erent e¤ect on comparative economic performance in the agricultural
vs. industrial stages of development. Finally, Columns (8)–(9) repeat the analyses conducted in the
preceding two columns using continental …xed e¤ects as opposed to regional …xed e¤ects, revealing
qualitatively similar results with respect to the adverse long-run impact of pre-industrial geographical
isolation on income per capita in 1960.
         Complementing the …ndings in Table 3, and in line with the theory, Table 4 demonstrates
that pre-industrial geographical isolation had a persistent adverse e¤ect on economic development
amongst (primarily European) nations that underwent the process of industrialization over the course
of the 19th century. Speci…cally, the table shows a statistically signi…cant and robust negative e¤ect
of the isolation index on log income per capita in the years 1820, 1870, and 1913, using a 41-country
sample (for 1820) and a 48-country sample (for 1870 and 1913) determined by the availability of
data on all the relevant variables employed by the respective analyses.
         For each time period examined, Table 4 reports the results from estimating three di¤erent
speci…cations: (i) one examining the impact of the isolation index on income per capita, conditional
on a regional …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa;45 (ii) one that augments the preceding speci…cation
with a partial set of primarily geographical controls (corresponding to Column (4) of Table 3); and
(iii) one that further augments the analysis with additional controls for the institutional channel via
…xed e¤ects associated with legal origins, European colonial history, and access to the Atlantic Ocean.
Notably, the results for each time period indicate that geographical isolation confers a statistically
signi…cant negative e¤ect on income per capita, and that the estimated magnitude of this e¤ect
remains relatively stable when subjected to additional controls.
         The evidence presented in Tables 3 and 4 therefore demonstrate, consistently with the theory,
that indeed pre-industrial geographical isolation has had a persistent detrimental impact on economic
development in the course of industrialization.

6.2.4     The Impact of Diversity on Development in the Industrial Stage

In line with the theory, Table 5 establishes that cultural diversity has a statistically signi…cant and
robust bene…cial impact on economic development in the course of industrialization. Speci…cally, the
table demonstrates a positive e¤ect of the diversity index associated with the 1910–1940 birth cohort
(i.e., of diversity across WVS respondents who were of working age in 1960) on log income per capita
in 1960 while accounting for a variety of potentially confounding factors. Further, by exploiting
pre-industrial geographical isolation as an exogenous source of variation in cultural diversity in the
20th century, the analysis establishes a causal e¤ect of diversity on economic development in the
course of industrialization.
         Using a sample of 42 countries for which data on the complete set of variables exploited by
the analysis (with the exception of years of schooling) are available, Column (1) reveals that diversity
  45
    Unlike the analyses in preceding tables, the sample size limitations in this case prevent the use of additional regional
…xed e¤ects.


                                                            48
                               Table 5: Cultural Diversity and Comparative Development in the Industrial Stage
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
                                         Full        Full         Full       Schooling    >95%         Full        Full        Full        Full         Full
                                        Sample      Sample       Sample       Sample      Native      Sample      Sample      Sample      Sample       Sample
                                         OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS         OLS          IV         OLS         OLS           IV
                                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Income per Capita in 1960

     Cultural Diversity Index          2.020***     1.613***    1.266***      1.308**     1.051**                2.729***    1.236***                 2.547***
       (for 1910–40 Birth Cohort)       (0.285)      (0.221)     (0.283)      (0.431)     (0.389)                 (1.033)     (0.265)                  (0.985)
     Isolation Index                                                                                 -0.115**                            -0.102**
                                                                                                      (0.043)                             (0.041)
     Years since Neolithic                          -0.134*       -0.092        -0.028     -0.176      0.029      -0.119*      -0.133      -0.036       -0.131
       Revolution                                   (0.066)      (0.080)       (0.092)    (0.148)     (0.085)     (0.062)     (0.091)     (0.102)      (0.084)
     % of Arable Land                              -1.592***     -1.230*        -0.850     -1.607      -1.029    -1.664**    -1.662**     -1.646*     -1.954***
                                                    (0.560)      (0.598)       (0.487)    (0.994)     (0.798)     (0.692)     (0.705)     (0.795)      (0.678)
     Log Absolute Latitude                          0.316*        0.249         0.458      -0.104     0.395*       0.175       0.261       0.394        0.172
                                                    (0.156)      (0.218)       (0.375)    (0.516)     (0.227)     (0.187)     (0.259)     (0.257)      (0.217)
     % of Land w/in 100km                            0.519        0.501         0.767      0.229     1.335**       0.502       0.388      1.080**       0.419
       of Waterway                                  (0.331)      (0.467)       (0.561)    (0.540)    (0.566)      (0.467)     (0.445)     (0.516)      (0.413)
     Aerial Isolation                               -0.123*      -0.127*        -0.016     -0.228      -0.023      -0.089     -0.224*      -0.170       -0.148
                                                    (0.067)      (0.065)       (0.077)    (0.166)     (0.074)     (0.062)     (0.119)     (0.115)      (0.106)
     Mean Generalized Trust                                       0.473         0.068      -0.566      0.737       0.806       0.297       0.428        0.629
      (for 1910–40 Birth Cohort)                                 (0.861)       (0.677)    (1.583)     (0.836)     (0.749)     (0.782)     (0.780)      (0.698)




49
     Mean Secular-Rationalism                                     0.113         -0.099     -0.108     0.541*       -0.451      0.129      0.551**       -0.387
      (for 1910–40 Birth Cohort)                                 (0.212)       (0.367)    (0.374)     (0.267)     (0.448)     (0.209)     (0.257)      (0.431)
     Executive Constraints                                        0.056         0.032      0.185       0.083       0.023       0.046       0.070        0.024
                                                                 (0.072)       (0.045)    (0.130)     (0.067)     (0.070)     (0.084)     (0.073)      (0.073)
     Malaria Ecology                                              -0.009        0.004      -0.011      0.021       0.003       -0.024      -0.004       -0.007
                                                                 (0.027)       (0.035)    (0.064)     (0.035)     (0.029)     (0.040)     (0.042)      (0.032)
     Years of Schooling                                                         0.070
                                                                               (0.053)

     Std. Beta of Diversity              0.681       0.544        0.427        0.389       0.389                   0.920        0.417                   0.859
     Std. Beta of Isolation                                                                           -0.466                               -0.413
     Other Controls for Geography         No          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Other Controls for Institutions      No          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Historical Population Density        No          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Regional Dummies                    Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          No          No          No
     Continent Dummies                    No           No          No            No         No          No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Observations                         42           42          42            28         26          42          42           42          42          42
     R-squared                           0.62         0.88        0.90          0.99       0.98        0.89                     0.90        0.88
     Notes: (i) The set of other geographical controls in Columns (2)–(10) include total land area, range of land quality, mean elevation, and the standard
     deviation of elevation; (ii) The set of other institutional controls in Columns (2)–(10) include a European colony …xed e¤ect as well as …xed e¤ects for
     British and French legal origins; (iii) The set of regional dummies in Columns (1)–(7) include a …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa and one for Middle
     East and North Africa; (iv) The set of continent dummies in Columns (8)–(10) include a …xed e¤ect for Africa and one for Asia; (v) Heteroskedasticity
     robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vi) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
     level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
(amongst individuals born in the 1910–1940 time period) possesses a statistically signi…cant positive
relationship with income per capita in 1960, conditional on regional …xed e¤ects. The standardized
beta coe¢ cient indicates that a one standard deviation increase in the diversity index is associated
with a 0.68 standard deviation increase in the standard of living in 1960.
        Columns (2)–(4) examine the relationship between cultural diversity and income per capita
in 1960 while accounting for the in‡uence of incrementally larger sets of potentially confounding
factors. Speci…cally, Column (2) augments the current analysis with the full set of control variables
that were employed in the earlier analysis of the impact of geographical isolation on log income per
capita in 1960 (i.e., in Column (6) of Table 3). Not surprisingly, given the persistent independent
e¤ect of some of these other factors on cultural diversity (as seen in Table 1), and their independent
relationship with economic development in 1960 (as seen in Table 3), the coe¢ cient associated with
diversity in Column (2), while retaining statistical signi…cance, diminishes somewhat in magnitude
in comparison to that in Column (1).
        Nonetheless, to account for the possibility that the observed relationship between diversity
and development may still be spurious, potentially re‡ecting the latent impact of other cultural,
institutional, and geographical factors that have received attention in the empirical literature on
contemporary comparative development, Column (3) additionally controls for (i) mean cultural traits
like the prevalence of generalized trust and the degree of secular-rationalism amongst individuals
belonging to the 1910–1940 birth cohort, (ii) institutional quality by way of executive constraints,
and (iii) disease environments as re‡ected by malaria ecology. Despite these additional controls, all of
which appear to bear conditional correlations with development that are statistically insigni…cant but
in directions consistent with priors, the coe¢ cient associated with diversity remains largely robust,
maintaining statistical signi…cance and diminishing only marginally in magnitude. The corresponding
standardized beta coe¢ cient suggests that a one standard deviation increase in diversity is associated
with a 0.43 standard deviation increase in log income per capita in 1960.
        The issue that the positive association between cultural diversity and economic development
in 1960 revealed thus far could be re‡ecting the latent in‡uence of human capital is surmounted
in Column (4), which augments the speci…cation from Column (3) with an explicit control for the
average years of schooling in the population aged 15–64 during the 1910–1960 time period. However,
due to the greater paucity of cross-country historical data on educational attainment, the regression
sample employed by the analysis diminishes to 28 countries.46 Despite the reduction in sample size
and the inclusion of an explicit control for human capital in the regression, diversity continues to
possess a statistically signi…cant positive relationship with the standard of living in 1960. Given the
qualitative robustness of the coe¢ cient on diversity to controlling for human capital, this control is
dropped from subsequent regressions in an e¤ort to retain the largest possible sample size.
  46
    The reduction in sample size between Columns (3) and (4) does not permit a fair assessment of the quantitative
impact on the coe¢ cient associated with diversity due to the inclusion of years of schooling as an additional control
in the regression. Results (not shown in Table 5 due to space constraints) from repeating the exercise in Column (3)
on the regression sample in Column (4) indicate that the coe¢ cient on diversity possesses a point estimate of 1.435
with a (robust) standard error estimate of 0.428 (thereby implying statistical signi…cance at the 5% level). Thus, the
inclusion of years of schooling as an additional control in Column (4) only marginally diminishes the magnitude of the
coe¢ cient on diversity (from 1.435 to 1.308).




                                                         50
         Column (5) makes a …rst attempt at addressing the challenge that the observed positive
relationship between cultural diversity and contemporary development may be driven by reverse
causality, capturing the fact that economically more developed nations are also more attractive to
potential foreign migrants. Speci…cally, Column (5) repeats the analysis from Column (3) but on a
sub-sample of 26 countries satisfying the criterion that at least 95 percent of the national population
in a given country in the year 2000 can trace its ancestry to populations that were native to the same
country in the year 1500 CE. Reassuringly, the results from this regression, which virtually eliminates
the diversity-augmenting role of cross-country migrations during the past 500 years, indicate that
cultural diversity continues to bear a statistically signi…cant positive relationship with income per
capita in 1960.
         The analysis now turns to formally address the issue of endogeneity between cultural diversity
and economic development in the modern world by exploiting pre-industrial geographical isolation as
an exogenous source of variation in diversity. Before proceeding, however, it is informative to establish
the “reduced form” impact of isolation on development within the 42-country sample employed by
the current analysis and subject to the full set of controls from Column (3), which includes additional
cultural, institutional, and geographical factors beyond those employed by the earlier analysis (in
Table 3) of the e¤ect of isolation on income per capita in 1960. This is accomplished by the exercise
in Column (6) where the results indicate that, consistently with the …ndings in Table 3, pre-industrial
geographical isolation continues to impart a statistically signi…cant detrimental e¤ect on the standard
of living in 1960. Moreover, in light of the fact that the speci…cation accounts for a wide variety
of potentially confounding factors, including the naturally correlated measure of “aerial” isolation
that is relevant for global integration in the modern world, it appears plausible that the observed
negative e¤ect of pre-industrial geographical isolation on economic development in 1960 is ultimately
re‡ecting its historically persistent detrimental impact on cultural diversity in the 20th century and
the latent bene…cial impact of diversity on development.47
         Based on the aforementioned argument, the instrumental variables (IV) regression conducted
in Column (7) employs pre-industrial geographical isolation as an instrument to establish the causal
e¤ect of cultural diversity on income per capita in 1960, conditional on the full set of control variables
from Column (3). The standardized beta corresponding to the IV coe¢ cient associated with the
diversity index suggests that a one standard deviation increase in diversity causes a 0.92 standard
deviation increase in the standard of living in 1960. Finally, Columns (8)–(10) repeat the analyses
conducted in Columns (3), (6), and (7), respectively, but using continental …xed e¤ects as opposed to
regional …xed e¤ects. The regressions reveal …ndings that are both qualitatively and quantitatively
similar to those in the earlier corresponding columns, indicating that the causal bene…cial impact of
diversity on development in the process of industrialization has been, on average, as prevalent within
  47
    The results (not shown) from regressions conducting a “horse race” between cultural diversity and pre-industrial
geographical isolation indicate that the negative “reduced form” e¤ect of pre-industrial geographical isolation on the
standard of living in 1960, as revealed in Columns (6) and (9) of Table 5, disappears (i.e., diminishes substantially
in magnitude and becomes statistically insigni…cant) once cultural diversity is controlled for. In contrast, diversity
appears in these regressions with a highly statistically signi…cant positive coe¢ cient. Bearing in mind, however, that
cultural diversity is potentially subject to reverse causality from development, these results, while reassuring, are not
necessarily indicative of what would otherwise be considered an informal identi…cation test (which, to be valid, requires
that neither of the “horse race” variables is plagued by reverse causality).



                                                           51
                                        Table 6: The Determinants of Economic Integration in the Industrial Stage
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)              (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)        (10)
                                         Full         Full      Restricted      Full      Restricted         Full        Full       Restricted      Full      Restricted
                                        Sample       Sample      Sample        Sample      Sample           Sample      Sample       Sample        Sample      Sample
                                         OLS          OLS         OLS           OLS         OLS              OLS         OLS          OLS           OLS         OLS
                                                                                            Dependent Variable is:

                                                     Log Trade Share of GDP in 1960                           Log Foreign Migrant Share of the Population in 1960

     Isolation Index                     -0.005       0.005        0.026        0.011        0.025           -0.001       -0.004       0.028        -0.022       0.025
                                        (0.022)      (0.024)      (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.037)         (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.081)      (0.041)      (0.066)
     Years since Neolithic             -0.242***    -0.199***    -0.258**     -0.188**     -0.272**          -0.053       0.043        0.290        0.038        0.046
       Revolution                       (0.061)      (0.068)      (0.118)      (0.070)      (0.123)         (0.100)      (0.107)      (0.175)      (0.128)      (0.212)
     % of Arable Land                   -0.872*       -0.651       -1.117       -0.885       -1.388          0.203        -0.588       -1.268       -0.969      -2.919*
                                        (0.469)      (0.626)      (1.160)      (0.655)      (0.985)         (0.814)      (1.212)      (1.158)      (1.153)      (1.465)
     Log Absolute Latitude              -0.131**    -0.187***      -0.097     -0.177***      -0.085          -0.121       -0.109       0.330        -0.060       0.339
                                         (0.064)     (0.060)      (0.110)      (0.057)      (0.114)         (0.150)      (0.191)      (0.224)      (0.176)      (0.271)
     % of Land w/in 100km               0.517**       0.279        -0.231       0.126        -0.216         1.100**       0.815        1.004        0.883        0.690
       of Waterway                      (0.217)      (0.346)      (1.332)      (0.427)      (1.332)         (0.434)      (0.578)      (0.941)      (0.573)      (0.847)
     Aerial Isolation                  -0.180***    -0.178***    -0.264**     -0.192***    -0.318***       -0.429***   -0.428***    -0.506***    -0.435***     -0.678**
                                        (0.045)      (0.054)      (0.088)      (0.065)      (0.076)         (0.099)     (0.092)      (0.149)      (0.126)       (0.263)
     Mean Generalized Trust                                        -0.653                    -0.686                                    1.870                     1.396




52
      (for 1910–40 Birth Cohort)                                  (0.737)                   (0.753)                                   (1.505)                   (1.736)
     Mean Secular-Rationalism                                     0.394**                   0.426**                                    -0.617                    -0.211
      (for 1910–40 Birth Cohort)                                  (0.162)                   (0.165)                                   (0.574)                   (0.632)
     Executive Constraints                                         -0.028                    -0.038                                    0.067                     -0.021
                                                                  (0.078)                   (0.075)                                   (0.107)                   (0.103)
     Malaria Ecology                                               -0.063                    -0.072                                    -0.076                   -0.067*
                                                                  (0.064)                   (0.068)                                   (0.050)                   (0.037)

     Std. Beta of Isolation Index        -0.032       0.031        0.146       0.069         0.139          -0.002       -0.014        0.074       -0.068        0.067
     Std. Beta of Aerial Isolation       -0.493      -0.488       -0.806       -0.527       -0.971          -0.607       -0.606       -0.714       -0.615       -0.957
     Other Controls for Geography          No          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             No          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
     Other Controls for Institutions       No          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             No          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
     Historical Population Density         No          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             No          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
     Regional Dummies                     Yes          Yes          Yes          No            No            Yes          Yes           Yes          No            No
     Continent Dummies                     No           No           No         Yes           Yes             No           No            No         Yes           Yes
     Observations                          61           61           35          61            35             94           94            44          94            44
     R-squared                            0.48         0.59         0.83        0.57          0.83           0.26         0.37          0.72        0.38          0.68
     Notes: (i) The set of other geographical controls in Columns (2)–(5) and (7)–(10) include total land area, range of land quality, mean elevation, and the standard
     deviation of elevation; (ii) The set of other institutional controls in Columns (2)–(5) and (7)–(10) include a European colony …xed e¤ect as well as …xed e¤ects for
     British and French legal origins; (iii) The set of regional dummies in Columns (1)–(3) and (6)–(8) include a …xed e¤ect for Sub-Saharan Africa and one for Middle
     East and North Africa; (iv) The set of continent dummies in Columns (4)–(5) and (9)–(10) include a …xed e¤ect for Africa and one for Asia; (v) Heteroskedasticity
     robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vi) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level,
     all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
continents as it has been within sub-continental regions.
        As already discussed, the key identifying assumption behind the IV regressions in Table 5 is
that, conditional on the full set of cultural, institutional, and geographical controls, which includes
“aerial”isolation (i.e., the isolation concept that is technologically relevant for determining the extent
of economic integration in the contemporary era), the “reduced form”negative e¤ect of pre-industrial
geographical isolation on income per capita in 1960 is ultimately re‡ecting its historically persistent
detrimental impact on cultural diversity in the modern world and the latent bene…cial impact of
diversity on development. However, if this identifying assumption is correct, then one should not
expect pre-industrial geographical isolation to possess any statistically discernible relationship with
the extent of economic integration in the modern world, by way of either the cross-border ‡ows of
goods and services or the cross-border ‡ows of people, once the impact of “aerial”isolation has been
accounted for. In this regard, the assumption underlying the identi…cation of the causal e¤ect of
diversity on development is corroborated by the results presented in Table 6.
        As demonstrated by Table 6, in regressions explaining the extent of economic integration
in the modern world, pre-industrial geographical isolation has no systematic e¤ect on either (i) the
trade share of GDP in 1960 (Columns (1)–(5)) or (ii) the share of foreign migrants in the population
in 1960 (Columns (6)–(10)), given that “aerial” isolation is controlled for. Speci…cally, conditional
on either a partial or the full set of cultural, institutional, and geographical controls employed by the
analysis in Table 5, the regressions indicate that, while “aerial” isolation has a highly statistically
signi…cant negative e¤ect on both the trade share of GDP and the share of foreign migrants in the
population, the coe¢ cient on pre-industrial geographical isolation is typically more than an order
of magnitude smaller (in comparison to the coe¢ cient on “aerial” isolation) and invariably not
statistically signi…cantly di¤erent than zero.
        The evidence presented in Table 5 therefore demonstrates, in line with the predictions of the
theory, that cultural diversity has indeed had a causal bene…cial impact on economic development in
the mid-20th century, a time period when the majority of nations in the Old World were undergoing
the process of industrialization. Further, the evidence presented in Table 6 supports the assumption
underlying the identi…cation of the causal e¤ect of cultural diversity on economic development during
this time period – i.e., that pre-industrial geographical isolation can be plausibly employed as an
exogenous source of variation in cultural diversity in the 20th century, conditional on the relevant
cultural, institutional, and geographical factors, particularly “aerial” isolation.


7    Concluding Remarks
This research argues that variations in the interplay between cultural assimilation and cultural
di¤usion played a signi…cant role in giving rise to the di¤erential patterns of economic development
across the globe. Societies that were geographically less vulnerable to cultural di¤usion bene…ted
from enhanced assimilation, lower cultural diversity, and more intense accumulation of society-speci…c
human capital, which permitted them to ‡ourish in the technological paradigm that characterized
the agricultural stage of development. However, the lack of cultural di¤usion and its manifestation
in cultural homogeneity and rigidity diminished the ability of these societies to adapt to a new


                                                   53
technological paradigm, thereby delaying the onset of their industrialization and, thus, their take-o¤
to a state of sustained economic growth.
       The superiority of societies that were geographically less vulnerable to cultural di¤usion in
early stages of development stems from the dominance of the bene…cial e¤ect of an uninterrupted
process of cultural assimilation on the transmission of society-speci…c human capital over the adverse
e¤ect of cultural rigidity on the advancement of knowledge and its spillover to the agricultural
technology. In comparison, the earlier take-o¤ of societies that were more vulnerable to cultural
di¤usion, re‡ects the dominance of the bene…cial e¤ects of cultural diversity and ‡exibility on the
advancement of the knowledge-intensive industrial technology, relative to its eroding e¤ect on the
accumulation of society-speci…c human capital.
       Thus, in contrast to the cultural and institutional hypotheses, which posit a hierarchy
of cultural and institutional attributes in terms of their conduciveness to innovation and their
applicability towards an industrial take-o¤, the proposed theory suggests that the desirable degree of
the relative prevalence of cultural assimilation versus cultural di¤usion varies according to the stage
of development. Enhanced cultural assimilation is optimal in the agricultural stage but is detrimental
for the take-o¤ to the industrial stage. Therefore, while cultural traits themselves do not necessarily
have a di¤erential e¤ect on the process of development, it is the variation in the relative strengths of
the forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion, which together determine the overall degree
of diversity in these cultural traits, that is instrumental for comparative economic development.
       The proposed theory elucidates how variation in cultural diversity across societies can explain
historical reversals in their economic performance during the course of the worldwide transition
from agriculture to industry and can, in fact, be applied more generally to understand current
and future reversals as the global frontier advances from one technological paradigm to another.
Indeed, the trade-o¤ between the bene…ts of enhanced cultural assimilation in the short-run and the
costs of cultural rigidify in the long-run is analogous to the trade-o¤ between sexual and asexual
reproduction with respect to biological …tness. Asexual reproduction is bene…cial in the short-run
when the environment is relatively stable while being costly in the long-run due to its elimination of
genetic diversity amongst o¤spring, which may become critical for their adaptability and, thus, their
survivability in a gradually changing environment.
       In accordance with the predictions of the theory, empirical evidence from across countries
suggests that, accounting for a wide variety of potentially confounding factors, (i) geographical
isolation in pre-industrial times (i.e., prior to the advent of airborne transportation technology) has
had a persistent negative impact on the extent of cultural diversity in the modern world; (ii) pre-
industrial geographical isolation had a positive impact on economic development in the agricultural
stage but has had a negative impact on income per capita in the course of industrialization; and
(iii) cultural diversity, as determined exogenously by pre-industrial geographical isolation, has had
a positive impact on economic development in the process of industrialization and the associated
take-o¤ from Malthusian stagnation.




                                                  54
Appendices
A           Endogenous Cultural Dynamics
This appendix presents a particular micro-based formulation of the intergenerational transmission
of cultural traits through costly socialization of children, whereby households optimally trade-o¤
consumption for the number and “cultural type” of children. The current setup therefore builds
on the framework of Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981), Boyd and Richerson (1985), and Bisin and
Verdier (2000, 2001). Speci…cally, parents derive utility from their own consumption and from the
number of children expected to be of their own cultural type, given an optimally chosen investment in
socialization per child. The parental investment in socialization per child is made with full awareness
that, in the event that socialization within the household fails (with likelihood decreasing in parental
resources devoted to socialization), the child’s cultural type will be probabilistically determined by
the society-wide forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion. The endogenous laws of motion
of the size and cultural composition of the adult population (or labor force) that emerge from this
augmented framework generate a dynamic path for the economy that is qualitatively similar to that
in the benchmark model of the paper.

Preferences and Constraints. The preferences of individuals of generation t (those born in period
t        1) possessing cultural type i are de…ned over their own consumption, cit , as well as the number
of children, Pti nit , expected to be of their own type. They are represented by the utility function

                                                              1
                                        uit = cit   Pti nit        ;        2 (0; 1) ,                           (A.1)

where, as discussed in detail below, Pti is the probability that each child will possess its parent’s
cultural type, which can be either conformist (type C) or nonconformist (type N ).
              Figure A.1 illustrates, without loss of generality, the di¤erent stages of the socialization
process of a child borne by a nonconformist parent. The process is symmetric for the case of a
conformist parent. As depicted in Figure A.1, in the …rst stage of this process, a parent of cultural
type i in period t chooses the amount of resources,                    i,   devoted to socializing each child. The
                                                                       t
amount of parental investment in this “direct vertical socialization” governs the probability, d                   i   ,
                                                                                                                   t
of successfully socializing the child to be of the parent’s cultural type. The function d               i   is assumed
                                                                                                        t
to possess the following properties:

         1. 0 6 d( it ) 6 1 (it represents a probability).

         2. d(0) = 0 (direct vertical socialization fails when there is no investment).

         3. d0 ( it ) > 0 (the likelihood of success is increasing in the amount of investment).

         4. d00 ( it ) < 0 (there are diminishing returns to investment in direct vertical socialization).

              Thus, as shown in Figure A.1, given the amount of investment in direct vertical socialization,
    i,   the child is successfully socialized with probability d            i   to possess the parent’s cultural type,
    t                                                                       t



                                                              55
             Figure A.1: The Socialization Tree for a Child of a Nonconformist Parent


which the child then retains for the rest of its life. With probability 1           d     i   , however, direct
                                                                                          t
vertical socialization fails and the child is exposed to a second stage of socialization by society at
large. The …nal outcome of socialization in the second stage is determined both by the current
cultural composition of the adult population and by the relative intensities of the society-wide forces
of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion.
       Speci…cally, the second stage of socialization comprises two sub-stages. The child …rst adopts
a “preliminary” cultural type through a process of “oblique socialization,” whereby the child is
in‡uenced randomly by members of the adult population. Thus, given the current (period t) fraction
of nonconformists in the adult population, ! t , the child adopts nonconformism with probability
! t , and it adopts conformism with probability (1          ! t ). Thereafter, the child is exposed to the
society-wide forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion, whose intensities are re‡ected
by the parameters       and   . In particular, if the child initially adopts a nonconformist stance, it
“converts”to conformism with exogenous probability            and retains nonconformism with probability
(1    ). However, if the child initially adopts a conformist stance, it converts to nonconformism
with exogenous probability      and retains conformism with probability (1              ). At this point, the
socialization process ends, and the child enters its second period of life (adulthood) during which it
retains its cultural type determined in childhood.
       In light of the two-stage socialization process outline above, the probability faced by a
nonconformist parent that its child will eventually enter adulthood as a nonconformist is

 PtN = P N     N
               t   =d    N
                         t    + 1   d   N
                                        t   (! t (1        ) + (1   !t) ) = d   N
                                                                                t   1         N
                                                                                              t   +   N
                                                                                                      t ,   (A.2)




                                                      56
        N
where   t        ! t (1           ) + (1      ! t ) . On the other hand, the relevant probability for a conformist
parent is

  PtC = P C       C
                  t     =d          C
                                    t   + 1        d      C
                                                          t       (! t + (1                 ! t ) (1                     )) = d       C
                                                                                                                                      t            1       C
                                                                                                                                                           t   +     C
                                                                                                                                                                     t ,   (A.3)

        C
where   t     ! t + (1             ! t ) (1        ). Thus, noting (A.1)–(A.3), it is clear that parents will take into
account the society-wide forces that can potentially a¤ect the cultural type of their children when
making decisions about the amount of resources to devote to direct vertical socialization.
        The cost of child-rearing incurred by a parent of type i is assumed to be increasing in both the
number of children, nit , and the amount of resources devoted to socializing each child,                                                                       i.
                                                                                                                                                               t    Speci…cally,
following Bisin and Verdier (2001), it is taken to be of the form,
                                                                             h                         i
                                                                                                 i 2
                                                       C(nit ;        i
                                                                      t)    = '+                 t         nit ,

where ' > 0 is a …xed cost incurred (in terms of the consumption good) for rearing a child. Income
earned by a parent from labor force participation is divided between expenditure on children and
consumption. Hence, the budget constraint faced by a parent of cultural type i in period t is
                                                              h                        i
                                                                                 i 2
                                                         cit + ' +               t         nit         wt ,                                                                (A.4)

where wt is labor income as given by (8).

Optimization. Parents of cultural type i in period t choose the number of their children, the
amount of resources devoted to socializing each child, and, therefore, their own consumption so as to
maximize their utility subject to the budget constraint. Substituting (A.4) into (A.1) and observing
that Pti = P i      i
                    t     according to (A.2) and (A.3), the optimization problem for a parent of cultural
type i in period t reduces to
                                                              nh             h                         i         i                                     o
                                                                                             i 2                                               1
                          nit ;    i
                                   t     = arg max              wt               '+          t             nit            Pi      i
                                                                                                                                  t   nit
                                                                                                                                                                           (A.5)
                                                                             h                     i
                                                                                             i 2
                                               subject to wt                     '+          t             nit           0; nit ;         i
                                                                                                                                          t         0.

The respective …rst-order necessary conditions for optimality of nit and                                                              i
                                                                                                                                      t       are
                                              h                   i
                                               '+         i 2
                                                          t                        1
                                              h                   i          =                     ;
                                        wt      '+        i 2         nit                  nit
                                                          t

                                              (1       ) P i0         i
                                                                      t                                    2         i
                                                                                                                     t
                                                              i
                                                                             =                              h                        i,
                                                    Pi        t                    wt =nit                      '+             i 2
                                                                                                                               t




                                                                             57
which together yield the following implicit solutions:

                           P i0   i
                                  t                           2    i
                                                                   t                                        i          i
                                  i
                                            =         h                      i      =)                      t    =         (! t ; ; ) ;          (A.6)
                           Pi     t                       '+           i 2
                                                                       t

                                                       (1   ) wt
                                  nit =               h
                                                               2
                                                                 i                  =)                     nit = ni (wt ; ! t ; ; ) .            (A.7)
                                                        ' + it

Lemma A.1 (Existence and Uniqueness of the Optimal Level of Parental Investment in Direct
Vertical Socialization) The solution to the utility maximization problem (A.5) with respect to                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                     t
exists, and it is unique.

Proof. As noted in (A.6), the optimal level of parental investment in direct vertical socialization,
 i,   satis…es
 t
                                                          P i0         i
                                                                       t                       2       i
                                                                                                       t
                                                                       i
                                                                               =h                                i,
                                                          Pi           t            '+                     i 2
                                                                                                           t

                                                                                           i
which, following (A.2) and (A.3), and noting that                                          t   6= 1, may be rewritten as,

                                                  h                        i                                                   i
                                                                   i 2                                                         t
                                  d0        i
                                            t         '+           t              2 it d               i
                                                                                                       t    =2         i
                                                                                                                       t           i
                                                                                                                                       .         (A.8)
                                                                                                                           1       t

The right-hand side of (A.8) is increasing linearly in                                             i       through the origin. Now, the derivative of
                                                                                                   t
the left-hand side with respect to                i    is
                                                  t
                                                              h                        i
                                                                                 i 2
                                                d00       i
                                                          t       '+             t                 2d            i
                                                                                                                 t    < 0,

where the negativity follows from the concavity of d                                               i       . Therefore, the left-hand side of (A.8) is
                                                                                                   t
monotonically decreasing in            i.   Moreover, it has a y-axis intercept at 'd0 (0) > 0. Thus, it must be
                                       t
true that the left-hand side of (A.8) will intersect with the right-hand side, and it will do so only
once and at a strictly positive value of                      i,   which completes the proof.
                                                              t

          As is evident from (A.2), (A.3), and (A.5), the optimal level of parental investment in
direct vertical socialization (regardless of the parent’s cultural type) will be governed by the current
(period t) cultural composition the adult population, ! t , and by the intensities of the society-wide
forces of cultural assimilation,                , and cultural di¤usion,                                         . The following lemma establishes the
relevant comparative statics for the optimal level of investment in direct vertical socialization by
nonconformist parents. The results with respect to conformist parents are perfectly symmetric and
are, therefore, omitted from the lemma in the interest of brevity.

Lemma A.2 (Comparative Statics of the Optimal Level of Parental Investment in Direct Vertical
Socialization) The optimal level of investment in direct vertical socialization by a nonconformist
parent,    N   (! t ; ; ), is:




                                                                                 58
   1. increasing (decreasing) in the intensity of cultural assimilation (di¤ usion), i.e.,

                                                    N    (! t ; ; ) > 0             and           N   (! t ; ; ) < 0;


   2. either increasing or decreasing in the cultural composition of the adult population, depending
        on combined intensity of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤ usion, i.e.,

                                                   N
                                                   !t   (! t ; ; ) R 0             if and only if               +    R 1.


Proof. The …rst part follows from implicitly di¤erentiating (A.6) for nonconformist parents with
respect to . This yields

                                              !t                                                  2    N
              N                                                            h                  i        t
                  (! t ; ; ) =                                                                                                                > 0,
                                               N 2                     N                N 2                 N            N              N
                                      1        t           d00         t       '+       t             2d    t        2   t =    1       t


                                                                                          N                                             N
where the positivity follows from the concavity of d                                      t       and recognizing that                  t   < 1. Similarly,
implicit di¤erentiation of (A.6) for nonconformist parents with respect to                                                     yields

                                      1        !t                                                 2    N
              N                                                            h                  i        t
                  (! t ; ; ) =                                                                                                                < 0,
                                               N 2                     N                N 2                 N            N              N
                                      1        t           d00         t       '+       t             2d    t        2   t =    1       t


                                                                                                        N                                        N
where, again, the negativity follows from the concavity of d                                            t       and recognizing that             t   < 1. For
the second part of the lemma, implicit di¤erentiation of (A.6) for nonconformist parents with respect
to ! t yields

                                      1       ( + )                                                     2   N
                  N                                                            h                  i         t
                  !t   (! t ; ; ) =                                                                                                              ,
                                                    N 2                    N              N 2                    N            N              N
                                          1         t            d00       t       '+     t                2d    t       2    t =   1        t


                                                                           N                                             N
from which, following the concavity of d                                   t    and recognizing that                     t   < 1, it is clear that the
expression will be strictly positive, zero, or strictly negative if and only if                                                 +       is strictly greater
than, equal to, or strictly less than 1, thereby completing the proof.
         Thus, as established in Lemma A.2, the optimal level of parental investment in the direct
vertical socialization of each child is increasing (decreasing) in the intensity of the society-wide
cultural force (i.e., either assimilation or di¤usion) that increases (decreases) the likelihood that
the child will deviate from the parental cultural type in the event that direct vertical socialization
fails. Moreover, depending on the combined intensity of the forces of assimilation and di¤usion, the
following two cases are possible:

   1.     +       < 1: “cultural substitutability.” In this case, the direct vertical transmission of cultural
        traits acts as a cultural substitute to oblique transmission since parents have less incentives
        to socialize their children the greater is the proportional representation of their cultural type
        in the adult population and, hence, the greater is the likelihood that their children will be
        socialized by oblique socialization to possess their cultural type in the event that direct vertical

                                                                                   59
          socialization fails. This is the benchmark case examined by Bisin and Verdier (2001) as it
          generally appears more plausible, and it is the one adopted here for the subsequent analysis of
          the dynamical system.

     2.     +    > 1: “cultural complementarity.”In this case, the direct vertical transmission of cultural
          traits acts as a cultural complement to oblique transmission since parents have more incentives
          to socialize their children the greater is the proportional representation of their cultural type
          in the adult population.


The Dynamics of the Size of the Labor Force. The size of the adult population (labor force)
in period t + 1 is determined by the sizes of the preceding generation of nonconformists, ! t Lt , and
conformists, (1          ! t ) Lt , as well as by their respective fertility rates, nN      C
                                                                                     t and nt . Given that the
forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion do not necessarily possess the same intensity (i.e.,
  6= ) and because the proportional representations of two cultural types in the adult population
are not necessarily equal, the optimal level of parental investment in direct vertical socialization and,
therefore, the optimal fertility rate will di¤er between the two types of adults in period t. Thus,
noting (A.7), the size of the labor force will evolve over time according to
                                                                "                                               #
                                                                             !t                 1     !t
                  Lt+1 = nN           C
                          t ! t Lt + nt (1         ! t ) Lt =                           +                           (1     ) wt Lt ,    (A.9)
                                                                    '+            N 2       '+         C 2
                                                                                  t                    t

which, as follows from (8), may be expressed as,
                         8                          1
                         >    (! t ) (1     ) AR         Lt              ~ R AR
                                                                         L    t ; Lt ; ! t                 if        ^t
                                                                                                                Lt < L
                         <                     t
                Lt+1 =                                                                                                                 (A.10)
                         >
                         :
                              (! t ) (1     ) AM
                                               t Lt
                                                                         ~M
                                                                         L        AM
                                                                                   t ; Lt ; ! t            if   Lt       ^ t,
                                                                                                                         L

where the initial size of the labor force, L0 > 0, is given and, as implied by (A.6) and (A.9),

                                                          !t                            1       !t
                                          (! t )                         2   +                             .
                                                   '+[    N     (! t )]           '+[       C   (! t )]2


The Dynamics of the Cultural Composition of the Labor Force. The nonconformists fraction
of the adult population (labor force) in period t + 1 is simply the number of nonconformist adults
in period t + 1 divided by the size of the total adult population in period t + 1. The number of
nonconformist adults in period t + 1, however, comprises (i) the children of the preceding generation
of nonconformist adults that enter into adulthood as nonconformists, PtN nN
                                                                          t ! t Lt , as well as (ii) the
children of the preceding generation of conformist adults that enter into adulthood as nonconformists,
 1        PtC nC
               t (1      ! t ) Lt . Thus, as follows from (A.9), the fraction of nonconformists in the labor force
evolves over time according to

                                              PtN nN
                                                   t ! t Lt + 1    PtC nC
                                                                        t (1    ! t ) Lt
                                   ! t+1 =            N           C
                                                                                         ,
                                                     nt ! t Lt + nt (1 ! t ) Lt


                                                                    60
which, upon substituting (A.7) for both cultural types and simplifying, reduces to
                           h                      i                        h                                  i
                                              2                                                         C 2
                  ! t PtN = ' + N t                   + (1 ! t ) 1 PtC = ' +                            t
        ! t+1   =             h                         i             h          i                                    (! t ; ; ) ,               (A.11)
                                                  N   2                        2
                           !t= ' +                t       + (1 ! t ) = ' + C t


where, as follows from (A.2), (A.3), and (A.6),                          i
                                                                         t   =    i (!
                                                                                          t;    ; ) and Pti = P~ i (! t ; ; ).
        Thus, the evolution of the cultural composition of the labor force, as re‡ected by the fraction
of nonconformists in the adult population, is governed by a one-dimensional, autonomous, …rst-order
nonlinear di¤erence equation. Importantly, the law of motion in (A.11) is independent of all the
other state variables in the economy, and it can thus be analyzed in isolation from the dynamics of
the size of the labor force, as speci…ed in (A.10), and of the levels of productivity in each sector of
the economy, as speci…ed in (17) and (18). The following two lemmas establish some characteristics
of the system governed by (A.11). To simplify the proofs, the probability of success of direct vertical
socialization, d        i   , is taken to be of the following form:
                        t

                                                                                  i
                                                                    i             t
                                                              d     t    =            i
                                                                                          .
                                                                             1+       t

Lemma A.3 (Existence and Stability of the Steady-State Fraction of Nonconformists in the Labor
Force) The system governed by the di¤ erence equation in (A.11) is characterized by a positive and
locally asymptotically stable steady-state equilibrium, ! = ! ( ; ), to which the system converges
monotonically over time.

Proof. Observe …rst that, for ! t > 0, the di¤erence equation in (A.11) may be written as
                                                                              h                                        i
                                                  P~ N (! t ; ; ) + (! t ; ; ) 1                        P~ C (! t ; ; )
                               (! t ; ; ) =                                                                                  ,                   (A.12)
                                                                         1 + (! t ; ; )

where
                                                                                          N                   2
                                                              1      !t ' +                    (! t ; ; )
                                           (! t ; ; )                                                             .
                                                                   !t         '+[         C    (! t ; ; )]2
Note that, for the remainder of the proof, time subscripts associated with variables and parenthetical
lists of arguments associated with functions are both dropped when no ambiguity results from such
omission. Now, di¤erentiating (A.12) with respect to ! t yields
                                     h                                                    i             h                                i
                        (1 + )           P~!N +       !   1       P~ C            P~!C              !       P~ N +      1        P~ C
                !   =                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                         (1 + )2

which, upon simpli…cation, implies that
                                          h                                                                                      i
                        sign    !   = sign (1 + )             P~!N               P~!C +         !       1     P~ N    P~ C           .           (A.13)




                                                                         61
                Figure A.2: The Steady-State Cultural Composition of the Labor Force


       Focusing on the second additive component of the right-hand side of (A.13), it follows from
(A.2) and (A.3) that P~ N + P~ C > 1 since N + C = 1. Moreover,
                                                                      h               i                         h              i
                            N 2                      N           N              C 2             C       C                N 2
                 1 '+                  1       ! 2               !        '+                2           !           '+
        !   =                      +                                           h                 i2                                < 0,
                 !2 ' + (   C )2           !                                                C )2
                                                                                   '+(

where the negativity follows from the result in Lemma A.2 that, under “cultural substitutability,”
 N   < 0 and     C   > 0. Thus, the sign of the second additive component of the right-hand side of
 !               !
(A.13) is positive.
        Next, focusing on the …rst additive component, it follows from (A.2) and (A.6) that, under
the aforementioned functional form of d              N       ,
                                                     "                                                  #
                                                                           '+       N 2
                             sign P~!N = sign            1           N
                                                                                            +       N
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                           [1 + (   N )]2


                             N
which is positive since      2 (0; 1). Following the symmetry of results for nonconformists vs.
conformists, the positivity of P~!N implies that P~!C < 0 and, therefore, that the sign of the …rst
additive component of the right-hand side of (A.13) is positive.
       Hence, it follows from the results above that ! > 0. Further, it is evident directly from
(A.11) that (0; ; ) = 1 P~ C (0; ; ) > 0 and (1; ; ) = P~ N (1; ; ) < 1. Thus, as depicted in



                                                                     62
Figure A.3: The E¤ect of an Increase (Decrease) in the Intensity of Assimilation (Di¤usion) on
the Steady-State Cultural Composition of the Labor Force


Figure A.2, the function        (! t ; ; ) possesses a strictly positive y-axis intercept in (! t+1 ; ! t ) space,
and it increases monotonically with ! t , approaching a value that is strictly less than one as ! t
approaches one. Therefore, it must be the case that the function            (! t ; ; ) intersects the 45-degree
line in (! t+1 ; ! t ) space at least once at a strictly positive value of ! t , !. It must also be the case
that   !   (!; ; ) < 1 (i.e.,     (! t ; ; ) intersects the 45-degree line from above at !). This implies
that ! is a locally stable steady-state equilibrium of the system, and, further, that local asymptotic
convergence to ! is monotonic, thereby completing the proof.


Lemma A.4 (Comparative Statics of the Steady-State Fraction of Nonconformists in the Labor
Force) The steady-state fraction of nonconformists in the labor force, ! = ! ( ; ), is decreasing in
the intensity of cultural assimilation, , and increasing in the intensity of cultural di¤ usion, , i.e.,

                                      ! ( ; )<0        and    ! ( ; ) > 0.

Proof. Repeating all the steps from the proof of Lemma A.3 to examine the partial derivatives of
(A.12) with respect to      and       yields    (! t ; ; ) < 0 and       (! t ; ; ) > 0. This implies that, as
depicted in Figure A.3, an increase in          or a decrease in      shifts the function    (! t ; ; ) down in
(! t+1 ; ! t ) space, yielding a lower value of ! at which the intersection with the 45-degree line occurs,
thus completing the proof.



                                                        63
The Evolution of the Economy. Since the evolution of the cultural composition of the labor force
is independent of all the other state variables in the economy, including the size of the labor force, Lt ,
and the levels of productivity in the rural and manufacturing sectors, AR      M
                                                                        t and At , the dynamic path
of the economy with respect to these other state variables can be conveniently analyzed conditional
on the fraction of nonconformists in the labor force having reached a steady state, !. In particular,
given the steady-state fraction of nonconformists in the labor force, the process of development is
                                             1
determined by a sequence AR     M
                          t ; A t ; Lt ; !   t=0
                                                   that governs the evolution of the levels of productivity
in each sector of the economy and the size of the labor force. Speci…cally, noting (17), (18), and
(A.10), the dynamic path of the economy is given by
                       8        8
                       >        > ~R R                                 ^ AR ; A M
                       >
                       >        < L At ; Lt ; !             if    Lt < L  t     t
                       >
                       >
                       >
                       > Lt+1 =
                       >
                       >        >
                                : ~M M
                       >
                       >          L At ; Lt ; !             if    Lt    ^ AR ; A M ;
                                                                        L
                       <                                                   t     t
                                                                                                    (A.14)
                       >
                       >
                       >
                       > AR       R AR ; L ; ! ;
                       >
                       >  t+1 = A    t    t
                       >
                       >
                       >
                       >
                       >
                       : M
                         At+1 = AM AM t ; Lt ; ! ,


where, as in the benchmark model of the paper, the initial conditions, AR    M
                                                                        0 ; A0 ; L0 , are set to
satisfy assumption (A1).
        A comparison of the dynamical system in (A.14) with that of the benchmark model, as
speci…ed in (20), immediately shows that, with the exception of the dynamics of the size of the labor
force, the two systems are qualitatively identical. In fact, as will become apparent, the two systems
can be qualitatively analyzed using the same set of phase diagrams, depicted in Figures 2–3, that are
based on the three geometric elements discussed earlier: the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, which
separates the regions in which the economy is agricultural from those where it is industrial; the AA
locus, which denotes the set of all pairs AR
                                           t ; Lt for which the productivity in the rural sector is
constant; and the LL locus, which denotes the set of all pairs for which, conditional on the latency of
the manufacturing sector, the size of the adult population is constant. The following set of lemmas
establishes the analytically distinct but qualitatively similar characteristics of the dynamics of the
size of the labor force in the current dynamical system, relative to those obtained in the benchmark
model, thereby demonstrating that the dynamic path of the economy remains qualitatively unaltered
under augmented microfoundations that generate endogenous dynamics of the cultural composition
of the labor force.

Lemma A.5 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the Conditional Malthusian Frontier)
                                    ^ AR ; A M ,
Given AR > 0 and AM > 0, for all Lt L
         t            t                            t    t


                          Lt+1   Lt T 0    if and only if         t T
                                                                 AM      (!) (1     ).

Proof. Follows immediately from (A.10).




                                                       64
Lemma A.6 (The Properties of the LL Locus) If AR
                                               t ; Lt 2 LL, then along the LL locus,

                                                           1
                            Lt = [ (!) (1           )] 1       AR
                                                                t
                                                                     ~ LL AR
                                                                     L     t ;! ,

                                           2
where dLLL   R           2 LL    R
        t =dAt > 0, and d Lt = dAt              = 0.

                                           ~ LL AR ; ! is obtained from the algebraic manipulation
Proof. Noting (23), the functional form of L     t
of (A.10) under Lt+1 = Lt . The remainder follows immediately from di¤erentiation.


Corollary A.1 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the LL Locus) Given AR
                                                                                    t > 0 and
 M                   ^ At ; A t ,
At > 0, for all Lt < L  R     M



                         Lt+1   Lt S 0     if and only if           Lt T L
                                                                         ~ LL AR
                                                                               t ;! .


Lemma A.7 (The Position of the LL Locus relative to the Conditional Malthusian Frontier) Given
AM               R            R ^    R    M              and AR    ~ LL AR ; ! 2 LL,
 t > 0, for all At such that At ; L At ; At  2 M MjAM t         t ;L     t


                ^ AR ; A M T L
                                                                          t S
                L            ~ LL AR ; !             if and only if      AM      (!) (1   ).
                   t     t         t

                                                      ^ AR
Proof. Follows from comparing the functional forms of L  t ; At
                                                                    ~ LL AR
                                                              M and L
                                                                          t ; ! as speci…ed in
Corollary 1 and Lemma A.6 respectively.


Lemma A.8 (The Dynamics of Population Size with respect to the LL Locus and the Conditional
Malthusian Frontier) Given AM               R
                            t > 0, for all At > 0,


  1. If AM
         t <    (!) (1    ), then

      the Conditional Malthusian Frontier is above the LL locus, i.e.,

                                           ^ AR ; A M > L
                                           L            ~ LL AR ; ! ,
                                              t     t         t


      and                                       8
                                                > <0           if        ~ LL AR ; !
                                                                    Lt > L
                                                >
                                                >                              t
                                                >
                                                >
                                                >
                                                <
                                    Lt+1   Lt        =0        if        ~ LL AR ; !
                                                                    Lt = L
                                                >                              t
                                                >
                                                >
                                                >
                                                >
                                                >
                                                :
                                                     >0        if        ~ LL AR
                                                                    Lt < L     t ;! ;


  2. If AM
         t >    (!) (1    ), then

      the Conditional Malthusian Frontier is below the LL locus, i.e.,

                                           ^ AR ; A M < L
                                           L            ~ LL AR ; ! ,
                                              t     t         t




                                                       65
      and, for all Lt ,
                                                Lt+1       Lt > 0.

Proof. Part (1) follows immediately from Lemmas A.5 and A.7, and Corollary A.1. Part (2) follows
from the same results while observing that, above the Conditional Malthusian Frontier, Lt+1 Lt > 0
if AM
    t >   (!) (1     ), and if Lt is below the LL locus.




                                                 66
B        Microfoundations of the Productivity Dynamics
This appendix presents some microfoundations of the knowledge creation process and of the dynamics
of sectoral productivity as modeled in the paper.

Knowledge Creation. In every period t, members of the adult generation develop new knowledge,
which emerges as a by-product (i.e., externality) of the production process in the current period and
becomes available to all …rms for adoption in the next period. Speci…cally, assume that individuals
are matched together to work in pairs, and that new ideas arise from their on-the-job interactions.
Moreover, assume that the production of new knowledge depends crucially on the heterogeneity
of knowledge across individuals within the pair. In particular, for simplicity, suppose that only
those pairs composed of one conformist and one nonconformist individual are productive in terms of
discovering knowledge, with each such pair generating one unit of new knowledge.
          The total mass of working pairs in the economy is Lt =2. Further, the probability of a match
between a conformist and a nonconformist is 2! (1                 !), which is equal to the fraction of productive
pairs. Hence, the total number of productive pairs in the economy and, consequently, the amount
of new ideas available for adoption is equal to ! (1              !) Lt . Now, suppose that duplication of e¤ort
in the creation of knowledge diminishes the total number of new ideas produced by productive pairs
so that what e¤ectively enters the “R&D equation” is Lt ,                 2 (0; 1), rather than Lt . Therefore, as
presented in Section 4.1, the change in the stock of knowledge,                  t,   between periods t and t + 1, is
given by
                                       t   = ! (1       !) Lt ;         2 (0; 1),                                 (B.1)

which demonstrates that knowledge creation is fueled by (i) the cultural fractionalization of the labor
force,     = 2! (1   !), and (ii) the size of the labor force, Lt .

Productivity Dynamics. In both rural and manufacturing sectors, the advancement of sectoral
productivity between periods t and t + 1 occurs via the adoption of new knowledge,                        t.    Suppose
that the extent to which new knowledge is adopted by …rms in a given sector depends on the existing
technology base in that sector. Moreover, the existing base of technology is more complementary
to new knowledge in the advancement of productivity in industry than in agriculture. Thus, the
advancement of productivity that results from the adoption of new knowledge is equal to                             M
                                                                                                                 t At   in
the manufacturing sector and to            R
                                        t At        ,    2 (0; 1), in the rural sector.
          The advancement of productivity in each sector, however, is directly hampered by the
prevalence of nonconformism, !. In particular, suppose that knowledge regarding the operation of
the existing technologies in each sector is transmitted to the next generation only by the conformists
in the current adult (working) population. As such, in each sector, only a fraction (1                         !) of the
existing technology base becomes available in the next period.
          Thus, in line with the laws of motion of manufacturing and rural productivity presented in
Section 4.2, the advancement of productivity between periods t and t+1 in the manufacturing sector,
  AM
   t , is
                                       AM
                                        t = ! (1          !) Lt AM
                                                                 t       !AM
                                                                           t ,                                    (B.2)




                                                          67
and that in the rural sector,   AR
                                 t , is


                                    AR
                                     t = ! (1    !) Lt AR
                                                        t        !AR
                                                                   t .                             (B.3)

The …rst component in both equations captures the advancement in sectoral productivity due to the
application of new knowledge to the existing level of technology, while the second component re‡ects
the “erosion e¤ect” due to disruptive e¤ect of nonconformism on the intergenerational transmission
of society-speci…c human capital.
         Note that, with the exception of the novel erosion e¤ect, (B.2) and (B.3) are just discretized
versions of the R&D equation in semi-endogenous growth models:

                                              A_ = L A .                                           (B.4)

The current setup thus provides microfoundations for the so-called “arrival rate”in semi-endogenous
growth theory. Speci…cally, noting that     = ! (1    !), the arrival rate in the current setup is driven
by the cultural diversity of the working population. Also, the parameter       from the R&D equation
equals    in the case of rural productivity in the current setup (which corresponds to the baseline case
of semi-endogenous growth theory where 0 <       < 1), and it equals unity in the case of manufacturing
productivity (which corresponds to the baseline case of endogenous growth theory where        = 1). The
laws of motion of manufacturing and rural productivity in the current setup are therefore entirely in
line with the (semi-) endogenous growth theory literature.




                                                     68
C     Proofs
Proof of Lemma 8. Under AM
                         t < = (1                             ), the Jacobian matrix of the conditional dynamical
system, comprised of (18) and (19), is given by
                                   2                                                       3
                                       @AR      R
                                         t+1 =@At                   @AR
                                                                      t+1 =@Lt
                               6                                                           7
               J AR
                  t ; Lt     = 4                                                           5
                                       @Lt+1 =@AR
                                                t                   @Lt+1 =@Lt
                                   2                                                                                             3
                                                                         (Lt )                                       (AR
                                                                                                                       t )
                               6 (1             !) 1 + !
                                                                    (AR
                                                                              1                    ! (1         !)
                                                                                                                     (Lt )1      7
                               6                                      t )                                                        7
                             = 6
                               6
                                                                                                                                 7,
                                                                                                                                 7    (C.1)
                               4                                                                                         1       5
                                                         1               Lt                         1            AR
                                           (1       )                    AR
                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                 Lt
                                                                          t


which, when evaluated at the conditional steady state given by (24) and (25), yields
                                       2                                                                    1   3
                                                                                                        1
                                                1   ! (1             )                 !
                                    6                                                          1                7
                                    6                                                                           7
                   J   AR
                        ss ; Lss   =6                                                                           7       Jss .         (C.2)
                                    4                                    1                                      5
                                                         1           1
                                           (1       )

It follows directly from (C.2) and assumption (A2) that the trace of the matrix Jss is positive for
any !, i.e.,
                             T r (Jss ) = 1         ! (1            )+            > 0, 8! 2 (0; 1) .                                  (C.3)

Therefore, to establish that AR
                              ss ; Lss is a locally asymptotically stable node of the conditional
dynamical system for any !, it su¢ ces to show that, for all ! 2 (0; 1), the following restriction holds
on the determinant, Det (Jss ), of the matrix Jss ,
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                    T r (Jss )2
                                   Det (Jss ) 2         T r (Jss )               1;                     ,                             (C.4)
                                                                                         4

where the (open) upper bound on the determinant rules out the steady state as being either a spiral
sink or a spiral source, and the (open) lower bound rules out the steady state as being either a saddle
or an unstable node. In this regard, observe …rst that (C.2) yields

                              Det (Jss ) =          f1        ! (1                )g   (1           ) !.                              (C.5)

To verify the upper bound in (C.4) using (C.3) and (C.5), notice that

                   4Det (Jss ) < T r (Jss )2 ,               4 (1            ) ! < [1              ! (1          )        ]2 ,




                                                                69
where the inequality always holds for any ! since (1                              ) ! > 0, 8! 2 (0; 1). To verify the lower
bound in (C.4) using (C.3) and (C.5), notice that

                          Det (Jss ) > T r (Jss )               1 , (1            ) ! (1               ) > 0,

where, again, the inequality always holds under assumption (A2) for any ! 2 (0; 1), which completes
the part of the proof that AR
                            ss ; Lss                  is a locally asymptotically stable node of the conditional
dynamical system comprised of (18) and (19).
       To establish the necessary and su¢ cient condition for the local monotonic evolution of the
state variables, recall that such a condition must be necessary and su¢ cient to ensure that the
eigenvalues of Jss are both real and positive. The fact that the steady state is neither a spiral sink
nor a spiral source ensures that the eigenvalues of Jss are indeed real. Moreover, it follows from
(C.3) that, under assumption (A2), at least one of the eigenvalues must be positive. Therefore, the
condition reduces to one that is necessary and su¢ cient to ensure that (C.5) is positive. Speci…cally,

                                        Det (Jss ) > 0 ,                                        > !,
                                                                    (1                )+

where the last inequality is precisely the condition speci…ed in Lemma 8 for the monotonic evolution
of the state variables, thereby completing the proof.

Proof of Lemma 10. For the …rst part of the lemma, it follows directly from (27) that

                                                                                       1
                                    gss (!) T 0 , ! S 1                                           !
                                                                                                  ^,
                                                                         1

where !
      ^ 2 (0; 1) under assumption (A4).
       For the sign of the derivative at 0 in the second part of the lemma, di¤erentiating gss , as
speci…ed in (27), with respect to ! yields, upon algebraic simpli…cation,

                                "                 1                 #1
                dgss (!)                1         1                                        2           2
                         =                             (1       !)                1                         !   1,           (C.6)
                  d!                                                                        1

which, when evaluated at ! = 0, reduces to
                                                                     1
                                        dgss (0)           1         1   1
                                                 =                                     1 > 0,                                (C.7)
                                          d!

where the positivity follows from assumptions (A2) and (A4). To derive the in‡ection point, twice
di¤erentiating gss with respect to ! yields, upon algebraic simpli…cation,

                            "                 1                 #1
           d2 gss (!)               1         1                              (1        ) [(2    2 ) (1 !)            ]
                      =                               (1       !)                                                        .   (C.8)
            (d!)2                                                                      (1 !) (1        )2




                                                                    70
It then follows immediately from (C.8) that

                             d2 gss (!)       2 (1             )
                                     2  T0,!T                       !
                                                                    ~,
                              (d!)             2           2

where, under assumption (A2), !
                              ~ 2 (0; 1). Moreover, noting !
                                                           ~ above, evaluating (C.6) at ! = !
                                                                                            ~
yields
                                "             1                #1
                   dgss (~
                         !)         1         1
                            =                                            1 < 0,         (C.9)
                     d!                           2    2

where the negativity follows directly from assumptions (A2) and (A4), thereby completing the
proof.




                                                  71
D     Historical Evidence
This appendix presents some historical evidence suggesting that, in line with the proposed theory,
the geographically governed intensities of cultural assimilation and di¤usion were indeed signi…cant
determinants of comparative economic performance during the Malthusian epoch and in the shift
from agriculture to industry. Speci…cally, Section D.1 discusses evidence that geographical isolation
enhanced cultural homogeneity and stability, which permitted a relatively unimpeded accumulation of
society-speci…c human capital and conferred Malthusian gains in terms of population density during
the agricultural stage of development. In addition, Section D.2 provides evidence demonstrating the
long-run bene…ts of cultural di¤usion in the promotion of innovation and, thereby, in fostering the
transition from agriculture to industry.

D.1    Isolation, Assimilation, and Malthusian Prosperity
The historical record on the experience of Chinese civilization throughout the agricultural stage of
development is broadly consistent with the hypothesis of this research regarding the links between
relative isolation from cross-cultural contact, cultural stability, and Malthusian prosperity. It has long
been argued by historians (e.g., Cressey, 1934; Elvin, 1973) that the remarkable stability and unity
of Chinese civilization, that has remained culturally homogenous for some four thousand years, was
due in large part to its geographic isolation from the civilizations of India and the Western world in
ancient times. China’s location in the extreme eastern quarter of the Eurasian landmass as well as its
natural barriers such as the Himalayas, the Tian Shan and Altay mountain ranges, the Taklamakan
and Gobi deserts, and the Paci…c Ocean ensured that, throughout most of its early history, China
had relatively infrequent exposure to cultural in‡uence from other advanced civilizations. Indeed,
the origin of the sinocentric notion of China as the “Middle Kingdom,” or the center of human
civilization, is often attributed to its early isolation from cross-cultural contact (Cressey, 1934). The
lower geographical vulnerability to cultural di¤usion therefore permitted an unimpeded accumulation
of society-speci…c human capital in China as manifested in the Confucian traditions of …lial piety and
reverence for highly-codi…ed social hierarchies. The intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c
human capital was further enhanced in China by such institutions as the world’s oldest civil service
examination system, and by technological inventions such as paper-making and printing, all of which
were instrumental for the preservation and e¢ cient dissemination of Confucian ideology.
        Despite the natural insulation o¤ered by China’s geographical barriers, historical evidence
demonstrates some major instances of external cultural in…ltration in China as exempli…ed by the
introduction of Buddhism from India during the Han dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE), and by the Mongol
and Manchu invasions in the 13th and 17th centuries. Nevertheless, in each of these instances,
the force of assimilation assured relatively minimal disruptions to the long-standing sociocultural
traditions of Chinese civilization. For example, by the time Buddhism gained prominence as one of
the major state religions in China during the Tang dynasty (618–907 CE), it had already been infused
with existing Chinese philosophies, particularly Taoism, and was being disseminated in a distinctly
sinicized form known as Ch’an (Zen) Buddhism. Subsequently, during the Song dynasty (960–1279
CE), elements of Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism were successfully synthesized to produce


                                                   72
the reconstituted philosophy of Neo-Confucianism, which remained the orthodox state doctrine until
the end of the Chinese imperial system (Ch’en, 1964). Moreover, the historical record on the Yuan
(Mongol) dynasty (1279–1368 CE) as well as the Qing (Manchu) dynasty (1644–1912 CE) indicates
that the nomadic steppe invaders of China, especially the Manchus, were largely absorbed into the
existing sociocultural fabric of Chinese civilization, with the conquerors ruling almost entirely in the
well-established Confucian tradition (Ho, 1967).
         Historical evidence coming from some of the most prosperous dynastic periods of Chinese
civilization, encompassing the Han, Tang, and Song dynasties, is consistent with the link between
the intense accumulation of society-speci…c human capital and higher Malthusian returns in the
proposed theory. While agrarian technological progress, such as the introduction of iron ploughing
techniques during the Han period or the state promotion of early-ripening rice strains by the Song,
undoubtedly contributed to the greater Malthusian prosperity of these periods (Needham and Bray,
1984; Elvin, 1973), the evidence is also suggestive of higher demographic returns to enhanced society-
speci…c human capital. In particular, the society-speci…c human capital promoting institution of
the civil service examination system was established by the Han dynasty and re…ned during the
Tang and Song periods (Fairbank, 1992). Further, technologies like paper-making and printing
that signi…cantly enhanced the dissemination and perpetuation of Confucian philosophies were also
invented and improved upon in these eras (Needham and Tsuen-Hsuin, 1985). Interestingly, as
depicted in Figure D.1, the Han, Tang, and Song dynastic eras are also associated with periods of
progressive growth in the population density of China. The Song dynasty, in particular, witnessed
an unprecedented demographic explosion occurring between the 11th and 12th centuries when the
population of China surpassed 100 million (McEvedy and Jones, 1978).
         While the homogenizing force of assimilation ultimately ensured the successful sinicization of
external in‡uences throughout China’s history, the evidence on population recession during episodes
of foreign cultural in‡ux accords well with the proposed hypothesis in terms of the disruptive e¤ects of
heterogeneity on Malthusian returns. For example, the collapse of the powerful Han dynasty ushered
in nearly four centuries of cultural instability and fragmentation. The period was marred by civil
wars during the Three Kingdoms era (220–280 CE), and by relatively minor but frequent nomadic
invasions, forcing the southward migration of the Jin dynasty (265–420 CE), which eventually led to
further social disunity during the turbulent period of the Northern and Southern dynasties (420–589
CE) (see, e.g., Gernet, 1982). In line with the theory of this research, the unstable environment
of this era, that also experienced an increase in religious heterogeneity with the rise of Buddhist
thought and practices at the expense of Confucian ideology, saw about a 20% decline in China’s
population.D.1
 D .1
    It is interesting to note that processes leading to greater cultural heterogeneity were also associated with declining
population density over this period in Europe. Following the height of prosperity under the Roman Empire, which
represented 36 million European subjects at around 200 CE, the population declined to 26 million by 600 CE and
only climbed to about 29 million by 800 CE, representing an overall decline of 19% across six centuries (McEvedy and
Jones, 1978). While climatic downturns have been held partially responsible for this decline, the fact that this period
also witnessed increased cultural instability and heterogeneity resulting from the “Barbarian Invasions” is supportive
of the hypothesis set forth in this paper. To elaborate, the …rst phase of this migration period (300–500 CE) saw
the movement of various Germanic peoples into areas of the former Roman empire (e.g. the Ostrogoths in Italy, the
Franks and Visigoths in France and Spain, and the Angles and Saxons in Britain) while the second phase (500–700
CE) comprised the migration of Slavic tribes, particularly the Bulgars, into Eastern Europe in the 7th century as well


                                                           73
         Figure D.1: The Time Path of Population in Dynastic China, 400 BCE–1800 CE
                                        (Source: McEvedy and Jones, 1978)


        Further evidence on the detrimental e¤ects of cultural heterogeneity, that introduces higher
ine¢ ciencies in the intergenerational transmission of society-speci…c human capital according to the
proposed hypothesis, is provided by the demographic trends in the aftermath of the Mongol and
Manchu invasions of imperial China. As depicted in Figure D.1, while the recovery of the population
occurred over the course of only 50 years following the Manchu invasion, it took about three times
longer for the population to regain the level that existed prior to the Mongol invasion.D.2 Although
this discrepancy is in part due to the greater devastation in‡icted by the Mongols, the di¤erence in the
extent to which these groups were assimilated into the sociocultural traditions of Chinese civilization
is also regarded as a contributing factor. Indeed, the relatively lower instability resulting from the
establishment of the Qing dynasty has been attributed to the fact that, as vassals of the preceding
Ming dynasty (1368–1644 CE), the Manchus, unlike their Mongol counterparts four centuries earlier,
were already highly sinicized by the time of conquest (Ho, 1967).
        Following the disruptions associated with the Mongol invasion, China embarked on a trajec-
tory of rapid demographic expansion that lasted well into the modern era. The population doubled
from about 80 million to 160 million in the Ming era and tripled under the Qing dynasty, reaching over
430 million by the mid-19th century (McEvedy and Jones, 1978). This monumental growth is partly
attributable to an increase in food supply resulting from the introduction of “New World” crops,
as the invasion of the Iberian peninsula by the Arabs in the 8th century (McNeill, 1963).
 D .2
      The depiction of smooth demographic downturns during episodes of invasion in Figure D.1 is, of course, entirely
a by-product of the unavailability of su¢ cient data points. It is more likely that these nomadic invasions in‡icted
negative demographic “shocks,” with the population expansion regimes of the preceding periods lasting just until the
onset of the conquests.



                                                         74
such as maize and sweet potatoes, and the spread of innovative Song period cultivation methods like
multiple-cropping that led to substantially higher yields (Deng, 1993). Beyond agrarian technological
progress, the relatively high degree of cultural and institutional stability of the Ming and Qing periods
are also considered to be signi…cant factors contributing to the population expansion during this era.
Consistent with the hypothesis of this research regarding the Malthusian returns to enhanced society-
speci…c human capital, Confucian ideology was more widespread in this period of China’s history
than ever before (Chow, 1994; Elman, 2000). The state-imposed isolation throughout most of the
Ming-Qing era further ensured that traditional Chinese culture was almost impervious to external
in‡uence during this period. More schools in both rural and urban areas were established as the
cost of education fell with technological improvements in printing while the number of academies
preparing candidates for the civil service examination multiplied. The publishing of Neo-Confucian
texts ‡ourished and the period saw a general increase in ideological literacy, thereby strengthening
the unique cultural uniformity of Chinese civilization that remained largely unchanged through the
beginning of the modern era.

D.2    Di¤usion, Innovation, and the Transition to Industry
The proposed theory suggests that a society’s exposure to cultural di¤usion, which leads to greater
cultural heterogeneity through the introduction of external cultural in‡uences, played a signi…cant
role in the promotion of innovation and technological creativity throughout its history. In line with
this hypothesis, both creativity researchers and historians have long stressed the important link
between cultural diversity and creative ‡orescence. It has been suggested, for example, that the
“exposure to di¤erent and even contrasting cultural stimuli”is indeed a fundamental “creativogenic
factor” (Arieti, 1976, p. 320) and that “a [cultural] milieu [of di¤erent ideas, beliefs, and patterns]
contains richer material for a new synthesis or creative combinations than a cultural milieu of
monotonous stereotypes”(Sorokin, 1947, p. 542). Moreover, the historical record of world civilization
demonstrates that many societies had experienced a surge in creativity after having been exposed to
foreign ideas and peoples (see, e.g., Toynbee, 1957; McNeill, 1963). The Golden Age of Hellenistic
civilization in Greece, for instance, is thought to have occurred as a result of the di¤usion of diverse
ideas from the civilizations of Egypt, Persia, and Mesopotamia that culminated to a new creative
synthesis. In addition, the European Renaissance of the 12th century, that ultimately paved the
way to the Scienti…c Revolution of the 17th century, is historically attributed to the di¤usion of
scienti…c thought and philosophies resulting directly from cross-cultural contact between Europe
and the Islamic world (Sarton, 1927, 1931).
       Beyond the history of Western civilization and consistent with the generality of the proposed
hypothesis, evidence on the link between cultural di¤usion and innovation is present in the historical
record of Asian civilizations as well. In particular, the spread of Buddhism to China from India
initiated a period of intellectually productive exchange between the two civilizations that lasted
several centuries (see, e.g., Ch’en, 1964; Gernet, 1982). The returns arising from this di¤usion are best
exempli…ed by scienti…c progress in China, particularly in the …elds of astronomy and mathematics,
during the Tang dynasty. Chinese scholars of this period, most of them Buddhist monks who were



                                                   75
familiar with Sanskrit, are known to have translated the Indian literature on mathematics and, in
the process, introduced the Hindu decimal system in China.D.3
        Further evidence on the innovation promoting e¤ects of cultural di¤usion comes from a socio-
metric study by Simonton (1997) that applied generational time-series analysis to detect whether cul-
tural cross-fertilization and the in‡ux of alien ideas had a positive in‡uence on national achievement
in Japan over the period spanning CE 580–1940. Using a sample of 1803 eminent Japanese …gures
grouped into 20-year generations, together with time-series data on various measures of openness
to extracultural in‡uence (such as the number of foreign immigrants who left a mark on Japanese
history and the number of eminent Japanese who travelled abroad or studied under foreigners), the
research found some signi…cant cross-lagged correlations between creative achievement and cultural
openness to the non-Japanese world.D.4
        Historical evidence coming from the Golden Age of Islamic civilization is also consistent
with the hypothesis of this research regarding the association of innovative activity with cultural
heterogeneity. At the height of Islam under the Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258 CE), the city of
Baghdad was one of the largest and most cosmopolitan in the world, representing a highly diverse
population composed of Muslims, Jews, Christians, and polytheistic adherents from various parts of
a vast empire encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia. Moreover, in line with
the proposition that “the point of junction of various cultural streams supplies a larger number of
the elements necessary for a new creation” (Sorokin, 1947, p. 542), Baghdad was also the center of
international scholarly achievement in the High Middle Ages (Nasr, 1968). Building on the scienti…c
traditions of the Greek and Hindu civilizations, eminent …gures from diverse religious and ethnic
backgrounds, such as the Persians Al-Khwarizmi and Ibn Sina (Avicenna), the Nestorian Hunayn
ibn Ishaq, and the Sabean Thabit ibn Qurra (Thebit), to name a few, made several signi…cant
contributions in the …elds of mathematics, astronomy, medicine, and chemistry (Sarton, 1927). As
noted by historians in recognition of the returns from cultural heterogeneity, “the fusion of Indian
and perhaps Babylonian with Hellenistic ideas stimulated fresh discoveries and the development of
some important scienti…c devices [in this period]” (McNeill, 1963, p. 438). Nonetheless, while these
accomplishments were being further expanded and improved upon in Europe during the 12th and
13th centuries, Islamic civilization ultimately declined into intellectual stagnation by the beginning
of the early modern era. Consistent with the arguments of the proposed theory, creativity researchers
and historians (e.g., Simonton, 1997; Landes, 1998) have attributed this descent in innovative activity
to an increase in cultural homogeneity resulting from a deliberate resistance to the in‡ux of new ideas
from the non-Islamic world.
        Finally, the examples of migrant minority groups, particularly within Europe in the 16th and
17th centuries, that conferred substantial economic gains to their host societies provide additional
 D .3
      One of the many intellectual products of this cultural di¤usion regime was the Buddhist monk Yi Xing, identi…ed
as “the greatest Chinese mathematician and astronomer of his time” (Needham, 1956, p. 427), who made signi…cant
contributions in combinatorics and employed Indian trigonometry for advances in calendrical calculations.
 D .4
      For instance, the number of eminent Japanese …gures in medicine in generation t was found to have a signi…cant
correlation of 0.27 with foreign travel in generation t 2 while achievements in the spheres of business and religion
were contemporaneously correlated with a composite measure of outside in‡uence, possessing signi…cant correlation
coe¢ cients of 0.25 and 0.5 respectively (Simonton, 1997).




                                                         76
documented evidence in support of the proposed hypothesis.D.5 Historical studies on the signi…cant
economic e¤ects of the Protestant migrations in Europe during this period suggest that these migrant
groups “frequently transplanted new ideologies and attitudes towards economic activity as well as
widely diversi…ed technical knowledge” (Scoville, 1951, p. 350). Some of these in‡uential migratory
waves include the movement of Flemish, Walloon, and Dutch Protestants from the Low Countries
to England, Holland, and Switzerland in the late 16th century, and the migration of the French
Huguenots to England, Ireland, Prussia, and elsewhere as a result of events following the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes by Louis XIV in 1685. Indeed, historical records demonstrate that the Protestant
migrations of the late 16th century were associated with notable improvements in several industries,
including textiles, glass-making, and printing, as well as the introduction of new agricultural practices
in the host countries. Commenting on the extraordinary impact of the Dutch Protestant migrations,
Scoville (1951, p. 355) has argued that “it could not have been entirely fortuitous that England
and Holland in particular, and to a lesser extent Switzerland, experienced a marked acceleration
in their economic and industrial growth at about the same time that the refugees were arriving.”
Evidence of similar e¤ects resulting from the French Huguenot migrations comes, for example, from
Ireland where substantial developments in textile manufacturing resulted in a 16-fold increase in the
country’s linen exports between 1700 and 1750 (Scoville, 1951).
 D .5
      Another documented example of the bene…cial role of minorities comes from the history of the Jewish community
in Islamic Spain under the Caliphate of Córdoba in the 10th and 11th centuries. During this period, typically referred
to as the Golden Age of Al Andalus, the Sephardic Jewry contributed signi…cantly to the economic and commercial
fabric of Islamic Spain, specializing in a diverse set of skilled occupations and playing a dominant role in both local
and foreign trade (Ashtor, 1973; Botticini and Eckstein, 2007). In addition, members of the Jewish community also
held important state o¢ ces as exempli…ed by Hasdai ibn Shaprut who was an appointed court physician and counselor
to the Caliph Abd ar-Rahman III. Interestingly, consistent with the link between cultural heterogeneity and creative
activity in the proposed hypothesis, this period also witnessed a surge in diverse intellectual accomplishments, typi…ed
by the works of such in‡uential scholars as the Muslim physician Ibn Rushd (Averroes) and the Jewish philosopher
Moshe ben Maimon (Maimonides).




                                                          77
E     Variable De…nitions and Sources
Geographical Isolation Index. The average number of weeks required to travel to a country’s capital
city, in the absence of steam-powered transportation technologies, from all square-km locations in the Old
World. Travel times are calculated along “optimal” land- and sea-based paths that minimize the time cost
of traversing the surface of the Earth (Özak, 2010). The optimality of a path is determined by incorporating
geospatial information on natural impediments to human mobility on land such as the meteorological and
topographical conditions prevalent along the path, as well as information on the time cost of travelling under
such conditions as reported by Hayes (1996). This information on the time cost associated with traversing
each square km on land is complemented with estimates of the time required to cross any square km on water,
based on documented travel times from historical sources for various nautical voyages in the Old World during
the time period 500 BCE–1000 CE. The interested reader is referred to Özak (2010) for additional details and
primary data sources cited therein.

Cultural Diversity Index. An index of the extent of cultural heterogeneity across respondents of the World
Values Survey (WVS) in two dimensions of cultural variation identi…ed by the factor analysis of Inglehart
and Baker (2000) – the “traditional vs. secular-rational” dimension and the “survival vs. self-expression”
dimension. These dimensions represent individual-level factor scores extracted from responses to 10 di¤erent
questions in the WVS. The construction of the index proceeds by …rst performing a hierarchical average-
linkage cluster analysis across respondents within a country based on their pairwise Euclidean distances in the
two aforementioned cultural dimensions. This yields a cultural tree or dendrogram, re‡ecting the hierarchical
relationships amongst di¤erent cultural clusters identi…ed by the analysis. The data obtained from the cluster
analysis are then used to calculate fractionalization indices at di¤erent levels of cultural dissimilarity (i.e.,
at di¤erent “heights” of the cultural tree) based on the number of identi…ed clusters and their proportional
representation in the population at each level of dissimilarity. The cultural diversity index is then calculated
as the sum of these fractionalization indices across all levels of dissimilarity (i.e., across the entire “height”
of the cultural tree). For details on the speci…c WVS questions underlying the two dimensions of cultural
variation, the interested reader is referred to Inglehart and Baker (2000).

Population Density in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE. Population density (in persons per square km)
for given year is calculated as population in that year, as reported by McEvedy and Jones (1978), divided
by total land area as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The cross-sectional unit
of observation in McEvedy and Jones’ (1978) data set is a region delineated by its international borders in
1975. Historical population estimates are provided for regions corresponding to either individual countries
or, in some cases, to sets comprised of 2–3 neighboring countries (e.g., India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh). In
the latter case, a set-speci…c population density …gure is calculated based on total land area and the …gure
is then assigned to each of the component countries in the set. The same methodology is also employed to
obtain population density for countries that exist today but were part of a larger political unit (e.g., the former
Yugoslavia) in 1975. The data reported by the authors are based on a wide variety of country and region-
speci…c historical sources, the enumeration of which would be impractical for this appendix. The interested
reader is therefore referred to McEvedy and Jones (1978) for more details on the original data sources cited
therein.



                                                        78
Income Per Capita in 1820, 1870, 1913, and 1960. Real GDP per capita for a given year, in 1990
international Geary-Khamis dollars as reported by Maddison (2003). The data as well as accompanying
explanations behind their construction are available on the author’s web site.

Ethnic Fractionalization. A fractionalization index, constructed by Alesina et al. (2003), that captures
the probability that two individuals, selected at random from a country’s population, will belong to di¤erent
ethnic groups.

Years since Neolithic Revolution. The number of thousand years elapsed, until the year 2000, since the
majority of the population residing within a country’s modern national borders began practicing sedentary
agriculture as the primary mode of subsistence. This measure, reported by Putterman (2008), is compiled using
a wide variety of both regional and country-speci…c archaeological studies as well as more general encyclopedic
works on the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture during the Neolithic. The reader is referred
to the author’s web site at for a detailed description of the primary and secondary data sources employed by
the author in the construction of this variable.

Percentage of Arable Land. The percentage of a country’s total land area that is arable as reported by
the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Absolute Latitude. The absolute value of the latitude of a country’s approximate geodesic centroid as
reported by the CIA’s World Factbook.

Percentage of Land within 100 km of Waterway. The percentage of a country’s total land area that is
located within 100 km of an ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river. This variable was originally constructed
by Gallup et al. (1999) and is part of Harvard University’s CID Research Datasets on General Measures of
Geography available online.

Distance to Regional Frontier in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE. The number of weeks required to travel
from a country’s capital city to the closest regional technological frontier for a given year. Travel times are
calculated along “optimal” land-restricted paths that minimize the time cost of traversing the surface of the
Earth (Özak, 2010). The optimality of a path is determined by incorporating geospatial information on natural
impediments to human mobility on land such as the meteorological and topographical conditions prevalent
along the path, as well as information on the time cost of travelling under such conditions as reported by Hayes
(1996). The year-speci…c set of regional frontiers, identi…ed by Ashraf and Galor (2011b) based on historical
urban population data from Chandler (1987) and Modelski (2003), comprises the two most populous cities,
reported for that year and belonging to di¤erent sociopolitical entities, from each Old World continent. The
frontiers for 1500 CE include Cairo (Egypt), Fez (Morocco), London (UK), Paris (France), Constantinople
(Turkey), and Peking (China). The reader is referred to Ashraf and Galor (2011b) for the set of regional
frontiers relevant in 1 CE and 1000 CE.

Aerial Isolation. The average great-circle or “as the crow ‡ies”distance, in thousands of km, from a country’s
capital city to the capital cities of all other countries in the world. Pairwise distances between capital cities
are calculated using the Haversine formula. Capital cities and their geographical coordinates are obtained
from the CIA’s World Factbook.

Total Land Area. The total land area of a country in millions of square km as reported by the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators.

                                                       79
Range of Land Quality. Land quality is an index of the suitability of land for cultivation, based on
geospatial data on various ecological factors including (i) growing degree days, (ii) the ratio of potential to
actual evapotranspiration, (iii) soil carbon density, and (iv) soil pH. The index is reported at a half-degree
resolution by Ramankutty et al. (2002). The range of land quality is thus the di¤erence between the maximum
and minimum values of the index across the grid cells within a country. This measure is obtained from the
data set of Michalopoulos (2011).

Mean Elevation. The mean elevation of a country in thousands of km above sea level, calculated using
geospatial elevation data reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution. The
measure is thus the average elevation across the grid cells within a country. The interested reader is referred
to the G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Standard Deviation of Elevation. The standard deviation of the elevation of a country in thousands of
km above sea level, calculated using geospatial elevation data reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus,
2006) at a 1-degree resolution. The measure is thus the standard deviation of elevation across the grid cells
within a country. The interested reader is referred to the G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Landlocked. An indicator for whether or not a country is landlocked as reported by the CIA’s World
Factbook. The variable equals 1 for landlocked countries.

Atlantic Trader. An indicator for whether or not a Western European country was engaged in Atlantic
trade during the time period 1500–1850 CE as coded by Acemoglu et al. (2005b). The variable equals 1 for
Britain, France, the Netherlands, Spain, and Portugal.

British Legal Origin (or English Common Law). An indicator for the legal origin of the Common Law
or Commercial Code of a country as reported by La Porta et al. (1999). The variable equals 1 for English
common-law countries.

French Legal Origin (or French Civil Law). An indicator for the legal origin of the Common Law or
Commercial Code of a country as reported by La Porta et al. (1999). The variable equals 1 for French civil-law
countries.

European Colony. An indicator for whether or not a country was colonized by a European nation as coded
by Acemoglu et al. (2005a). The variable equals 1 for colonized countries.

Mean Generalized Trust. The fraction of World Values Survey (WVS) respondents that agreed with the
statement “most people can be trusted.”

Mean Secular-Rationalism. The mean score of the “traditional vs. secular-rational”dimension of cultural
variation, identi…ed by the factor analysis of Inglehart and Baker (2000), across respondents of the World
Values Survey (WVS).

Executive Constraints. The 1910–1980 mean of an index, reported annually as a 7-point categorical
variable (from 1 to 7) by the Polity IV data set, quantifying the extent of institutionalized constraints on the
decision-making power of chief executives.

Malaria Ecology. A geographically-based index gauging the extent of malaria endemicity as reported by
Kiszewski et al. (2004).


                                                      80
Years of Schooling. The mean, over the 1910–1960 time period, of the 10-yearly …gure, reported by Morrisson
and Murtin (2009), on average years of schooling amongst the population aged 15 to 64.

Trade Share of GDP in 1960. The sum of exports and imports in 1960, measured as a percentage of total
GDP, as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Foreign Migrant Share of the Population in 1960. The stock of foreign migrants in 1960, measured as
a percentage of the total population, as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.




                                                    81
     F      Descriptive Statistics


                                     Table F.1: Descriptive Statistics for the Analysis of the Impact of Isolation on Diversity
                                                               Summary Statistics                                                                   Pairwise Correlations
                                                      Mean        S.D.      Min.       Max.         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)      (10)      (11)
      (1)       Cultural Diversity Index               1.385     0.202      1.006    1.804        1.000
      (2)       Isolation Index                       12.759     3.680      7.389   22.449       -0.547      1.000
      (3)       Ethnic Fractionalization               0.374     0.254      0.002    0.930       -0.414      0.308       1.000
      (4)       Linguistic Fractionalization           0.386     0.298      0.002    0.923       -0.335      0.281       0.857       1.000
      (5)       Years since Neolithic Revolution       5.823     2.187      1.400   10.500        0.239     -0.096      -0.356      -0.456       1.000
      (6)       % of Arable Land                       0.224     0.154      0.027    0.621        0.239     -0.378      -0.173      -0.129       0.259         1.000
      (7)       Log Absolute Latitude                  3.377     0.826      0.000    4.159        0.576     -0.580      -0.611      -0.614       0.382         0.211       1.000
      (8)       % of Land w/in 100km of Waterway       0.518     0.377      0.000    1.000        0.493     -0.345      -0.536      -0.443       0.236         0.443       0.340       1.000
      (9)       Total Land Area                        0.838     2.408      0.020   16.381       -0.075     -0.094      -0.047      -0.011       0.011        -0.156       0.037      -0.297       1.000
     (10)       Range of Land Quality                  0.780     0.202      0.032    0.999        0.184     -0.078       0.016       0.133      -0.003         0.132      -0.094      -0.073       0.239      1.000
     (11)       Mean Elevation                         0.527     0.465      0.024    2.432       -0.209      0.355       0.314       0.232       0.157        -0.343      -0.161      -0.607       0.135      0.203     1.000
     (12)       Standard Deviation of Elevation        0.062     0.092      0.000    0.497       -0.102      0.221       0.123       0.070       0.304        -0.190       0.042      -0.314      -0.040      0.198     0.791
     Note: Number of observations = 60.




82
                     Table F.2: Descriptive Statistics for the Analysis of the Impact of Isolation on Development in the Malthusian Stage
                                                                 Summary Statistics                                                             Pairwise Correlations
                                                         Mean        S.D.      Min.      Max.             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)     (9)      (10)
          (1)     Log Population Density in 1500 CE      1.207      1.303     -1.939     3.564       1.000
          (2)     Isolation Index                       14.729      4.373      5.147    24.664      -0.112       1.000
          (3)     Years since Neolithic Revolution       5.388      2.461      1.000    10.500       0.395      -0.314       1.000
          (4)     % of Arable Land                       0.171      0.145      0.001     0.621       0.635      -0.342       0.227       1.000
          (5)     Log Absolute Latitude                  3.073      0.986      0.000     4.159       0.115      -0.443       0.482       0.230         1.000
          (6)     % of Land w/in 100km of Waterway       0.385      0.362      0.000     1.000       0.492      -0.201       0.278       0.435         0.359       1.000
          (7)     Distance to Regional Frontier          3.418      2.591      0.000    10.321      -0.513       0.434      -0.698      -0.368        -0.591      -0.443       1.000
          (8)     Total Land Area                        0.713      1.834      0.010    16.381      -0.166      -0.149       0.028      -0.139         0.062      -0.260      -0.062       1.000
          (9)     Range of Land Quality                  0.704      0.256      0.000     0.999       0.371      -0.240       0.061       0.236         0.066      -0.046      -0.175       0.191      1.000
         (10)     Mean Elevation                         0.600      0.514      0.033     2.674      -0.100       0.050       0.070      -0.187        -0.056      -0.518       0.173       0.079      0.151     1.000
         (11)     Standard Deviation of Elevation        0.060      0.100      0.000     0.677       0.123      -0.068       0.304      -0.032         0.158      -0.201      -0.132      -0.054      0.209     0.744
         Note: Number of observations = 110.
                  Table F.3: Descriptive Statistics for the Analysis of the Impact of Isolation on Development in the Industrial Stage
                                                            Summary Statistics                                                      Pairwise Correlations
                                                    Mean       S.D.     Min.      Max.         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)     (10)
         (1)   Log Income per Capita in 1960        7.416     1.007    5.972     10.398      1.000
         (2)   Isolation Index                     15.392     4.067    7.389     24.664     -0.418      1.000
         (3)   Years since Neolithic Revolution     5.170     2.507    1.000     10.500      0.435     -0.332      1.000
         (4)   % of Arable Land                     0.161     0.141    0.001      0.621      0.064     -0.301      0.264      1.000
         (5)   Log Absolute Latitude                2.931     1.001    0.000      4.159      0.472     -0.376      0.471      0.213      1.000
         (6)   % of Land w/in 100km of Waterway     0.411     0.362    0.000      1.000      0.529     -0.140      0.325      0.364      0.358      1.000
         (7)   Aerial Isolation                     8.055     1.649    6.724     14.377     -0.245      0.027     -0.086     -0.026      0.013      0.137     1.000
         (8)   Total Land Area                      0.765     1.906    0.010     16.381     -0.047     -0.185      0.041     -0.128      0.087     -0.270     0.099      1.000
         (9)   Range of Land Quality                0.699     0.274    0.000      0.999     -0.041     -0.279     -0.013      0.308      0.065      0.014     0.141      0.189     1.000
        (10)   Mean Elevation                       0.545     0.439    0.024      2.300     -0.369      0.003     -0.001     -0.106     -0.098     -0.557     0.099      0.141     0.116     1.000
        (11)   Standard Deviation of Elevation      0.047     0.078    0.000      0.677     -0.114     -0.123      0.282      0.076      0.101     -0.098     0.135     -0.011     0.175     0.656
        Note: Number of observations = 100.




83
                  Table F.4: Descriptive Statistics for the Analysis of the Impact of Diversity on Development in the Industrial Stage
                                                         Summary Statistics                                                            Pairwise Correlations
                                                  Mean      S.D.      Min.      Max.         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)     (10)     (11)
      (1)   Log Income per Capita in 1960       7.771      0.923    6.129       9.430      1.000
      (2)   Cultural Diversity Index            1.233      0.311    0.462       1.682      0.748      1.000
      (3)   Isolation Index                    13.062      3.727    7.389      22.449     -0.608     -0.529      1.000
      (4)   Years since Neolithic Revolution    5.893      2.301    1.400      10.500      0.237      0.246     -0.140      1.000
      (5)   % of Arable Land                    0.232      0.153    0.027       0.621     -0.077      0.163     -0.248      0.282      1.000
      (6)   Log Absolute Latitude               3.360      0.771    0.693       4.159      0.739      0.592     -0.594      0.447      0.043      1.000
      (7)   % of Land w/in 100km of Waterway    0.543      0.357    0.000       1.000      0.439      0.416     -0.193      0.353      0.366      0.413      1.000
      (8)   Aerial Isolation                    8.098      1.898    6.789      14.377     -0.296     -0.190      0.333     -0.247     -0.054     -0.252      0.224      1.000
      (9)   Mean Generalized Trust              0.309      0.159    0.032       0.656      0.321      0.175     -0.234     -0.017     -0.139      0.276      0.179      0.217      1.000
     (10)   Mean Secular-Rationalism           -0.247      0.625   -1.325       0.814      0.708      0.695     -0.509      0.233      0.080      0.608      0.482      0.068      0.409     1.000
     (11)   Executive Constraints               4.268      2.091    1.000       7.000      0.585      0.491     -0.182      0.003     -0.089      0.440      0.263     -0.025      0.378     0.374    1.000
     (12)   Malaria Ecology                     2.748      6.806    0.000      31.548     -0.470     -0.320      0.423     -0.431     -0.061     -0.503     -0.381     -0.036     -0.112    -0.441   -0.296
     Note: Number of observations = 42.
References
Abu-Lughod, J. L. (1989). Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250-1350, Oxford
  University Press, New York, NY.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A. (2005a). Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of
  Long-Run Growth, in P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (eds), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. IA,
  Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 385–472.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A. (2005b). The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
  Institutional Change, and Economic Growth, American Economic Review 95(3): 546–579.

Alesina, A., Algan, Y., Cahuc, P. and Giuliano, P. (2010). Family Values and the Regulation of
  Labor. NBER Working Paper No. 15747.

Alesina, A., Devleeschauwer, A., Easterly, W., Kurlat, S. and Wacziarg, R. (2003). Fractionalization,
  Journal of Economic Growth 8(2): 155–194.

Alesina, A. and Giuliano, P. (2010). The Power of the Family, Journal of Economic Growth 15(2): 93–
  125.

Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and Nunn, N. (2011). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
  Plough. NBER Working Paper No. 17098.

Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2005). Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance, Journal of
  Economic Literature 43(3): 762–800.

Algan, Y. and Cahuc, P. (2010).       Inherited Trust and Growth, American Economic Review
  100(5): 2060–2092.

Andersen, T. B., Bentzen, J., Dalgaard, C.-J. and Sharp, P. (2011). Religious Orders and Growth
  through Cultural Change in Pre-Industrial England. University of Copenhagen Discussion Paper
  No. 11-07.

Andersen, T. B. and Dalgaard, C.-J. (2011). Flows of People, Flows of Ideas, and the Inequality of
  Nations, Journal of Economic Growth 16(1): 1–32.

Arieti, S. (1976). Creativity: The Magic Synthesis, Basic Books, New York, NY.

Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2011a). Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch, American
  Economic Review 101(5): 2003–2041.

Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2011b). The Out-of-Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and
  Comparative Economic Development. NBER Working Paper No. 17216.

Ashtor, E. (1973). The Jews of Moslem Spain, Vol. 1, Translated by A. Klein and J. M. Klein.
  Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia, PA.



                                                 84
Banerjee, A. and Iyer, L. (2005). History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The Legacy of
  Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India, American Economic Review 95(4): 1190–1213.

Barro, R. J. and McCleary, R. M. (2003). Religion and Economic Growth across Countries, American
  Sociological Review 68(5): 760–781.

Becker, S. O., Cinnirella, F. and Woessman, L. (2010).      The Trade-O¤ Between Fertility and
  Education: Evidence from Before the Demographic Transition, Journal of Economic Growth
  15(3): 177–204.

Becker, S. O., Hornung, E. and Woessman, L. (2011). Education and Catch-Up in the Industrial
  Revolution, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(3): 92–126.

Becker, S. O. and Woessman, L. (2009). Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant
  Economic History, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 531–596.

Berliant, M. and Fujita, M. (2008). Knowledge Creation as a Square Dance on the Hilbert Cube,
  International Economic Review 49(4): 1251–1295.

Berliant, M., Reed III, R. R. and Wang, P. (2006).          Knowledge Exchange, Matching, and
  Agglomeration, Journal of Urban Economics 60(1): 69–95.

Bertocchi, G. and Canova, F. (2002). Did Colonization Matter for Growth? An Empirical Exploration
  into the Historical Causes of Africa’s Underdevelopment, European Economic Review 46(10): 1851–
  1871.

Bisin, A. and Verdier, T. (2000). Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and
  the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 955–988.

Bisin, A. and Verdier, T. (2001). The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of
  Preferences, Journal of Economic Theory 97(2): 298–319.

Boserup, E. (1965). The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change
  under Population Pressure, Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago, IL.

Botticini, M. and Eckstein, Z. (2007). From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions and Diaspora:
  Human Capital and Jewish History, Journal of the European Economic Association 5(5): 885–926.

Bowles, S. (1998). Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and Other
  Economic Institutions, Journal of Economic Literature 36(1): 75–111.

Boyd, R. and Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary Process, University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago, IL.

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Feldman, M. W. (1981).       Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
  Quantitative Approach, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Chandler, T. (1987). Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census, The Edwin
  Mellen Press, Lewiston, NY.

                                               85
Chaudhuri, K. N. (1990). Asia before Europe: Economy and Civilization of the Indian Ocean from
  the Rise of Islam to 1750, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Ch’en, K. K. S. (1964). Buddhism in China: A Historical Survey, Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, NJ.

Chow, K. (1994). The Rise of Confucian Ritualism in Late Imperial China: Ethics, Classics, and
  Lineage Discourse, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Collier, P. (2000). Ethnicity, Politics and Economic Performance, Economics and Politics 12(3): 225–
  245.

Cressey, G. B. (1934). China’s Geographic Foundations: A Survey of the Land and Its People,
  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, NY.

Deng, G. (1993). Development Versus Stagnation: Technological Continuity and Agricultural Progress
  in Pre-modern China, Greenwood Press, Westport, CT.

Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, W. W. Norton & Co.,
  New York, NY.

Doepke, M. and Zilibotti, F. (2008). Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 123(2): 747–793.

Easterly, W. and Levine, R. (1997). Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1203–1250.

Easterly, W. and Levine, R. (2003). Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments In‡uence Economic
  Development, Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1): 3–39.

Elman, B. A. (2000). A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial China, University
  of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Elvin, M. (1973). The Pattern of the Chinese Past, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Engerman, S. L. and Sokolo¤, K. L. (2000). History Lessons: Institutions, Factor Endowments, and
  Paths of Development in the New World, Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3): 217–232.

Fairbank, J. K. (1992).   China: A New History, Bellknap Press of Harvard University Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

Fernández, R. (2011). Does Culture Matter?, in J. Benhabib, A. Bisin and M. O. Jackson (eds),
  Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. IA, Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
  pp. 481–510.

Fernández, R. and Fogli, A. (2009). Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and
  Fertility, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 146–177.



                                                86
Fernández, R., Fogli, A. and Olivetti, C. (2004). Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
  Female Labor Force Dynamics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4): 1249–1299.

Frank, A. G. (1998). Re-Orient: Global Economy in the Asian Age, University of California Press,
  Berkeley, CA.

Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: The Social Virtues and The Creation of Prosperity, Free Press, New
  York, NY.

Gallup, J. L., Sachs, J. D. and Mellinger, A. D. (1999). Geography and Economic Development,
  International Regional Science Review 22(2): 179–232.

Galor, O. (2007). Discrete Dynamical Systems, Springer, Berlin, Germany.

Galor, O. (2011). Uni…ed Growth Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Galor, O. and Michalopoulos, S. (2011). Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection of
  Entrepreneurial Traits. Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Galor, O. and Moav, O. (2002). Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic growth, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117(4): 1133–1191.

Galor, O., Moav, O. and Vollrath, D. (2009). Inequality in Land Ownership, the Emergence of
  Human Capital Promoting Institutions, and the Great Divergence, Review of Economic Studies
  76(1): 143–179.

Galor, O. and Weil, D. N. (2000). Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation
  to the Demographic Transition and Beyond, American Economic Review 90(4): 806–828.

Gernet, J. (1982).   A History of Chinese Civilization, Translated by J. R. Foster. Cambridge
  University Press, New York, NY.

Giuliano, P. (2007). Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?, Journal
  of the European Economic Association 5(5): 927–952.

Glaeser, E. L., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F. and Shleifer, A. (2004). Do Institutions Cause
  Growth?, Journal of Economic Growth 9(3): 271–303.

Goody, J. (1996). The East in the West, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Gradstein, M. and Justman, M. (2002).       Education, Social Cohesion, and Economic Growth,
  American Economic Review 92(4): 1192–1204.

Greif, A. (1993). Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi
  Traders’Coalition, American Economic Review 83(3): 525–548.

Greif, A. (1994). Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
  Re‡ection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies, Journal of Political Economy 102(5): 912–
  950.

                                               87
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2009). Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 124(3): 1095–1131.

Hall, J. A. (1986). Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the Rise of the West,
  University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Harrington, Jr., J. E. (1998). The Social Selection of Flexible and Rigid Agents, American Economic
  Review 88(1): 63–82.

Harrington, Jr., J. E. (1999). Rigidity of Social Systems, Journal of Political Economy 107(1): 40–64.

Hayes, T. R. (1996). Dismounted Infantry Movement Rate Study, Technical report, U.S. Army
  Research Institute of Environmental Medicine.

Heiner, R. A. (1983). The Origin of Predictable Behavior, American Economic Review 73(4): 560–
  595.

Ho, P. (1967). The Signi…cance of the Ch’ing Period in Chinese History, Journal of Asian Studies
  26(2): 189–195.

Hobson, J. M. (2004). The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, UK.

Hong, L. and Page, S. E. (2001). Problem Solving by Heterogeneous Agents, Journal of Economic
  Theory 97(1): 123–163.

Inglehart, R. and Baker, W. E. (2000). Modernization, Cultural Change, and the Persistence of
  Traditional Values, American Sociological Review 65(1): 19–51.

Jones, E. L. (1981). The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History
  of Europe and Asia, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Jovanovic, B. and Rob, R. (1989). The Growth and Di¤usion of Knowledge, Review of Economic
  Studies 56(4): 569–582.

Kandori, M. (1992). Social Norms and Community Enforcement, Review of Economic Studies
  59(1): 63–80.

Kiszewski, A., Mellinger, A., Spielman, A., Malaney, P., Sachs, S. E. and Sachs, J. (2004). A Global
  Index Representing the Stability of Malaria, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
  70(5): 486–498.

Knack, S. and Keefer, P. (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payo¤? A Cross-Country
  Investigation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1251–1288.

Kremer, M. (1993). Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3): 681–716.



                                                  88
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1999).      The Quality of
  Government, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1): 222–279.

Lagerlöf, N.-P. (2006).   The Galor-Weil Model Revisited: A Quantitative Exercise, Review of
  Economic Dynamics 9(1): 116–142.

Lal, D. (1998). Unintended Consequences: The Impact of Factor Endowments, Culture and Politics
  on Long-Run Economic Performance, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Landes, D. S. (1998). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So
  Poor, W. W. Norton & Co., New York, NY.

Landes, D. S. (2006).     Why Europe and the West?     Why Not China?, Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 20(2): 3–22.

Lazear, E. P. (1999a). Culture and Language, Journal of Political Economy 107(6-2): S95–S126.

Lazear, E. P. (1999b).        Globalisation and the Market for Team-Mates, Economic Journal
  109(454): C15–C40.

Lian, B. and Oneal, J. R. (1997). Cultural Diversity and Economic Development: A Cross-National
  Study of 98 Countries, 1960-1985, Economic Development and Cultural Change 46(1): 61–77.

Maddison, A. (2001). The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD, Paris.

Maddison, A. (2003). The World Economy: Historical Statistics, OECD, Paris.

McEvedy, C. and Jones, R. (1978). Atlas of World Population History, Penguin Books Ltd., New
  York, NY.

McNeill, W. H. (1963). The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community, University of
  Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Michalopoulos, S. (2011). The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity. American Economic Review,
  forthcoming.

Michalopoulos, S. and Papaioannou, E. (2011a). Divide and Rule or the Rule of the Divided?
  Evidence from Africa. NBER Working Paper No. 17184.

Michalopoulos, S. and Papaioannou, E. (2011b). The Long-Run E¤ects of the Scramble for Africa.
  NBER Working Paper No. 17620.

Modelski, G. (2003). World Cities: -3000 to 2000, FAROS 2000, Washington, DC.

Mokyr, J. (2002). The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton
  University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Montalvo, J. G. and Reynal-Querol, M. (2005). Ethnic Diversity and Economic Development, Journal
  of Development Economics 76(2): 293–323.


                                               89
Morrisson, C. and Murtin, F. (2009). The Century of Education, Journal of Human Capital 3(1): 1–
  42.

Nasr, S. H. (1968). Science and Civilization in Islam, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Needham, J. (1956). Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. II, Cambridge University Press, New
  York, NY.

Needham, J. and Bray, F. (1984). Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. VI:2, Cambridge University
  Press, New York, NY.

Needham, J. and Tsuen-Hsuin, T. (1985). Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. V:1, Cambridge
  University Press, New York, NY.

Nordhaus, W. D. (2006). Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings, Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences 103(10): 3510–3517.

North, D. C. (1981). Structure and Change in Economic History, W. W. Norton & Co., New York,
  NY.

North, D. C. (1991). Institutions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 5(1): 97–112.

North, D. C. and Thomas, R. P. (1973). The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Nunn, N. (2008). The Long-Term E¤ects of Africa’s Slave Trades, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  123(1): 139–176.

Nunn, N. and Wantchekon, L. (2010). The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa.
  American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Olsson, O. and Hibbs, Jr., D. A. (2005). Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development,
  European Economic Review 49(4): 909–938.

Ottaviano, G. I. P. and Peri, G. (2005). Cities and Cultures, Journal of Urban Economics 58(2): 304–
  337.

Özak, Ö. (2010). The Voyage of Homo-Economicus: Some Economic Measures of Distance. Mimeo,
  Brown University.

Pomeranz, K. (2000). The Great Divergence: Europe, China and the Making of the Modern World
  Economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Prat, A. (2002). Should a Team be Homogenous?, European Economic Review 46(7): 1187–1207.

Putterman, L. (2008). Agriculture, Di¤usion, and Development: Ripple E¤ects of the Neolithic
  Revolution, Economica 75(300): 729–748.

Putterman, L. and Weil, D. N. (2010). Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run Determinants
  of Economic Growth and Inequality, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(4): 1627–1682.

                                                90
Ramankutty, N., Foley, J. A., Norman, J. and McSweeney, K. (2002). The Global Distribution of
  Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change, Global Ecology
  and Biogeography 11(5): 377–392.

Rodrik, D., Subramanian, A. and Trebbi, F. (2004). Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions
  Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development, Journal of Economic Growth
  9(2): 131–165.

Sarton, G. (1927). Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. I: From Homer to Omar Khayyam,
  Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore, MD.

Sarton, G. (1931). Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. II: From Rabbi Ben Ezra to Roger
  Bacon, Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore, MD.

Scoville, W. C. (1951). Spread of Techniques: Minority Migrations and the Di¤usion of Technology,
  Journal of Economic History 11(4): 347–360.

Simonton, D. K. (1997). Foreign In‡uence and National Achievement: The Impact of Open Milieus
  on Japanese Civilization, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 72(1): 86–94.

Sorokin, P. A. (1947). Society, Culture, and Personality: Their Structure and Dynamics, Harper &
  Brothers, New York, NY.

Spolaore, E. and Wacziarg, R. (2009). The Di¤usion of Development, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  124(2): 469–529.

Spolaore, E. and Wacziarg, R. (2011).        Long Term Barriers to the International Di¤usion of
  Innovations. NBER Working Paper No. 17271.

Tabellini, G. (2008).   Presidential Address: Institutions and Culture, Journal of the European
  Economic Association 6(2-3): 255–294.

Temple, J. and Johnson, P. A. (1998). Social Capability and Economic Growth, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 113(3): 965–990.

Toynbee, A. J. (1957). A Study of History, Abridgement of Vols. VII-X by D. C. Somervell. Oxford
  University Press, Oxford, UK.

Weber, M. (1905). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Translated by T. Parsons, and
  A. Giddens, 1930. Allen & Unwin, London, UK.

Weber, M. (1922). The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism, Translated and edited by H.
  H. Gerth, 1951. Free Press, Glencoe, IL.

Wong, R. B. (1997). China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European Experience,
  Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

Zak, P. J. and Knack, S. (2001). Trust and Growth, Economic Journal 111(470): 295–321.


                                                 91
