NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AVOIDING THE ASK:
A FIELD EXPERIMENT ON ALTRUISM, EMPATHY, AND CHARITABLE GIVING
James Andreoni
Justin M. Rao
Hannah Trachtman
Working Paper 17648
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17648

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

A version of this paper constituted Trachtman's senior thesis at Harvard College, for which it was
awarded the best thesis prize and summa cum laude honors. We would like to note that
Trachtman took the lead responsibility in coordinating and executing the experiment. Erzo
Luttmer provided exceptionally helpful advice along the way. We would also like to thank Ned
Augenblick, Douglas Bernheim, Rob Boyd, Stefano DellaVigna, Daniel Fessler, Ed Glaeser,
David Laibson, Randall Lewis, John List, Stephan Meier, Stephanie Preston, David Reiley,
Alison Sanchez, Michael Schwarz, Joan Silk, and Lise Vesterlund for helpful comments, and
Harvard College (Trachtman) and the National Science Foundation, Grant SES-1427355
(Andreoni) for financial support. We especially thank the Salvation Army for cooperation in
running the experiment. This research was conducted under full IRB approval. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2011 by James Andreoni, Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Avoiding The Ask: A Field Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving
James Andreoni, Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman
NBER Working Paper No. 17648
December 2011, Revised November 2016
JEL No. D03,D64,H41
ABSTRACT
If people get joy from giving, then why might they avoid fundraisers? We explore this in a
randomized natural field experiment during the Salvation Army's annual campaign. The familiar
bell-ringers were placed at one or both of two main entrances to a supermarket, making the ask
for a charitable donation either easy or difficult to avoid. Additionally, solicitors either simply
rang the bell, or asked "please give" to passersby. Verbally asking dramatically increases
the number of givers and the amount of giving, as does having solicitors at both main
entrances. However, we also found dramatic avoidance of verbal solicitation, between 26.2%
and 32.6%, but negligible avoidance of non-verbal solicitation. Asking has a powerful effect on
both giving when asked, and on avoidance. We argue that this pattern likely illustrates givers'
sophisticated awareness of the empathy-altruism link, rather than pernicious social costs of
fundraising.
James Andreoni
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
andreoni@ucsd.edu
Justin M. Rao
99/4630
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052
justinra@microsoft.com

Hannah Trachtman
Department of Economics
Yale University
PO Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06511
htrachtm@gmail.com

1

Introduction

It is beyond debate that humans have a great capacity to be generous. People are polite to
strangers, give money to charities, volunteer to help others, and sometimes even risk their lives in
heroic acts of selflessness. Such apparent altruism was initially attributed to indirect selfishness.1
But when economists removed these incentives in anonymous, one-shot dictator games among
unrelated strangers, the initial findings surprised many. Subjects often eschewed selfish choices,
with many even choosing equal splits (Forsythe et al., 1994; Roth, 1995). If giving cannot be
explained by indirect selfishness, then perhaps it can be explained by a taste for altruism (Becker,
1974). We learned quickly, however, that individuals were concerned not only with final allocations
of consumption, but also with the means to that allocation (Andreoni, 1988; Andreoni et al.,
2002). The implication is that utility depends on the act of giving; that there is some warm-glow
from helping others (Andreoni, 1989; Andreoni, 1990).2 But the warm-glow hypothesis provides
a direction for research rather than an answer to the puzzle of why people give—the concept of
warm-glow is a placeholder for more specific models of individual and social motivations.
Subsequent laboratory experiments clarified the ways in which people experience utility from
the act of giving. In particular, social concerns often underlie the warm-glow. First, giving tends
to increase when social distance is reduced (Roth, 1995; Hoffman et al., 1996; Bohnet and Frey,
1999), when subjects communicate (Xiao and Houser, 2005; Andreoni and Rao, 2011), or when
the recipient is identified specifically rather than statistically (Small and Loewenstein, 2003). This
indicates that warm-glow increases with the vividness of the recipient in the mind of the giver.
This process would be consistent with the idea that individuals wish to maintain self -images as
fair or moral people. Second, giving is more likely when givers believe their donations will be vivid
in the mind of the recipient. As the ability of recipients to detect unselfish acts becomes easier,
altruistic acts increase sharply (Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Ariely et al., 2009), implying that
maintaining a positive social -image—where the recipient perceives the giver as generous—is another
component of warm-glow. Third, when people see a way to avoid an opportunity to be generous,
they are sometimes willing to incur a cost to do so, while those who are not given the opportunity
to avoid often decide to give. For example, in the context of the Dictator Game, many “dictators”
choose to pay a portion of their endowment for the right to exit the game (Dana et al., 2006;
Lazear et al., 2012; Broberg et al., 2007). This avoidance has led some people to wonder whether
giving really does increase utility. Work by Andreoni and Rao (2011), however, suggests that both
giving and avoiding can be consistent with warm glow. The authors asked one group of potential
givers to participate in a brief written conversation with recipients, and asked another group to
simply write the message they would send in this conversation if placed in the role of the recipient.
1
Examples include mutualistic cooperation (Grice, 1957), kin selection (Hamilton, 1964), repeated-game reciprocity (Trivers, 1971) and norm adherence through sanctions (Boyd and Richerson, 1992).
2
Many experiments have demonstrated that preferences depend on more than the outcomes of consumption,
beginning with Andreoni (1993), up to most recently Crumpler and Grossman (2008) and Luccasen et al. (2012)

1

Both the real and the imagined conversations substantially increased giving relative to a control
group. Surprisingly, imagined conversations were just as effective as real conversations. The two
results can be consistent if subjects in the control naturally “avoided” considering what receivers
would think is fair, whereas the empathic stimulation in the conversation treatments rendered this
emotional avoidance infeasible and thus led to a dramatic increase in giving. Moreover, analysis of
the conversations and post-questionnaires indicated those that gave were happy to have done so.3
This suggests a new psychological mechanism for warm-glow giving. Psychologists posit that
giving is initiated by a stimulus that elevates sympathy or empathy in the mind of the potential
giver, much like the smell of freshly baked bread can pique appetite. Resolving this feeling comes
either by giving and feeling good, or not giving and feeling guilt. However, someone with (implicit
or explicit) knowledge of their vulnerability to such stimuli can, by controlling the input of that
stimuli, control both their emotions and the actions that result. Just as we should not eat our
favorite dessert at every opportunity, we also cannot give at every opportunity, even though we
might wish we could do both. Just as a sophisticated eater will avoid exposure to the chocolate
cake, a sophisticated altruist can avoid being asked.4 In contrast, a purely selfish person gains
nothing from avoidance. Importantly, this mechanism can explain both avoidance and positive
utility from giving.
We explore these ideas with a natural field experiment on charitable giving. Our experiment
partnered with the globally renowned Salvation Army’s annual Red Kettle Campaign. In the
Christmas season, volunteers for the Salvation Army stand at entrances to stores and shopping
malls. They ring a bell, implicitly inviting people to put cash into their trademarked “Red Kettle.”
We positioned solicitors at one of or both of two main entrances to a grocery store in suburban
Boston over four days and measured how the presence of the solicitors at one or both doors affected
traffic and donations. We combined this with another manipulation: solicitors either asked for
donations by saying “please give today,” or were verbally silent (they still rang the bell), avoiding
even eye contact. Notice that the silent bell-ringer is still obviously requesting a donation, but the
verbal ask is adding a more stimulating layer of social interaction.
Our primary question is whether avoiding the ask is an indication that altruistic people are
(consciously or subconsciously) attempting to control their empathic emotions. Our experimental
data inform this question in three ways. First, when we strengthen the social interaction by verbally
asking for money, does this extra appeal to empathy increase the frequency of giving and the amount
donated? Second, when we make it easier to avoid the solicitation, how many people do so, and
are they avoiding giving or simply avoiding being asked? Finally, how many potential givers go out
of their way to “seek” an inconveniently located solicitor?
The results are as follows. When the solicitor(s) were silent, there was no discernible impact on
3

This evidence is also consistent with more recent evidence on happiness and giving. See Anik, et al. (2011). .
We use the word sophisticated in the sense as used by O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), Laibson (1997), and Strotz
(1956).
4

2

store traffic—few people avoided the solicitor(s), and fewer still sought them out in order to give.
Putting a solicitor at both doors, rather than just one, nearly doubled the total number of givers
and amount given. In the presence of a verbal request, the results were dramatically different.
Asking had a powerful effect on giving rates and total donations, which increased 45% to 69%
in the verbal request conditions as compared to their “silent” counterparts. When avoidance was
easy because only one door had a solicitor, nearly one-third of those intending to pass through
the occupied door instead chose to use an unoccupied entrance. That is, they avoided the explicit
verbal ask, but not the ask implicit in ringing the bell. Doubling the solicitation did not double the
number of givers or total donations—the increase was 65% to 80%—indicating that some givers
sought out the solicitor when only one was present.
In general, giving was highly sensitive to our conditions: donations varied from $0.30 per
minute in the one-door silent condition to $1.00 per minute in the two-door verbal Ask condition.
Why do so many people reveal a preference to give in one setting, and then reveal the opposite
preference in another? Our findings provide two clues. First, the dramatic increases in giving when
a second solicitor is added suggest that “passive-givers”—those who do not avoid or seek giving
opportunities—account for a large fraction of giving. Second, the ask is indeed powerful: the data
indicate that asking is both effective when experienced, and aversive from afar. Moreover, our data
rule out several common explanations for the power of the ask. The request script intentionally
did not convey any information, which implies that the effect of asking cannot be explained by
increased awareness about the fundraiser. Social- or self-image concerns are also unable to explain
the power of asking in our setting—positive image can be burnished equally well in both a silent
opportunity and an active request.
We are left to conclude that the power of the ask derives from the emotional reaction it induces
in a potential giver. This is consistent with other research demonstrating that altruistic acts are
often preceded by empathic stimuli (Batson, 1991; Preston and deWaal, 2002; Andreoni and Rao,
2011).5 Under this motivation, the desire to give must follow the ask, and not precede it, and by
controlling exposure to the ask, one can regulate both emotions and giving. Those who avoid the
ask are not callous or selfish, but rather are “good people” who are avoiding empathic stimuli, such
as an ask, as a means to regulate their giving and guilt.6
This research raises a natural policy question. If so many people avoid the ask, might fundraising
have a negative impact on welfare? The answer to this question will depend critically on parameters
that are difficult or impossible to measure, such as the marginal utility of money for recipients of
charity and the psychological costs of saying yes or saying no. Because in our setting people actually
have to exert physical effort to avoid being asked to give, we have the potential to put some bounds
5

This explanation has much in common with theory of cue-triggered choices of Bernheim and Rangel (2004) and
the willpower depletion model of Ozdenoren et al. (2011).
6
Authors in the neuroscience literature have argued in favor of this view. See, for instance, De Vignemont and
Singer (2006) and Hare et al. (2010).

3

on some of these otherwise unobservable parameters. For instance, if a person prefers to go out
of their way by about 70 feet, we can view that cost as a lower bound on the cost of facing a
charitable solicitation. Using what we learn from subjects sorting among entrances we are able
to say, for instance, that for our sample of the Salvation Army Red Kettle campaign, the cost of
saying no plus the cost of avoiding being asked are almost equal in value to the donations collected
in the campaign. Furthermore, we are able to provide somewhat informal bounds on the utility
from saying yes and on the value of donations to society that could show that fundraising in our
experiment either was or was not welfare enhancing.
To arrive at the above conclusions, we took very seriously three shortcomings of our experimental
design. First, and most importantly, there was a third door around the corner that led to a recycling
area, and we neglected to realize that patrons were actually using this door to enter and exit the
store. Second, although we observe 17,622 passings, we have only 16 treatment blocks. Third,
in the original experiment we had no “pure” control treatment with no solicitors, and measured
avoidance relative to the treatment with solicitors at both doors. Throughout the paper we will
describe the ways in which these flaws might be problematic for our results, and address each in
detail.
In related work, DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012) use a design similar to ours (though
conceived independently) with the chief aim of estimating the welfare impact of fundraising. In their
field experiment, some residents were given an opportunity to opt-out of door-to-door solicitation
by checking a “do not disturb” box on a card left at their front doors. Many residents took this
option, while the average gift was higher for those who actively consented to solicitation. We view
our study as complementary to theirs. With regard to empirics, their study was designed to measure
time costs and define “social pressure” costs in order to estimate the welfare impact of the optingout manipulation. Our study is aimed more squarely at understanding the motives behind giving.7
With regard to theory, DellaVigna et al. put forward a model with social pressure as the driving
force, where social pressure is defined to be a utility cost that is decreasing in donations and that is
felt only in the presence of solicitation. Indeed, this model is also capable of explaining our results
(provided social pressure can be “avoided”), and shares many similarities with the mechanism we
have in mind.8 Despite predicting similar behavior in many contexts, the two models are distinct.
Our notion of “empathic stimulation” captures the idea of inner conflict between the “planning”
7

For example, avoidance of solicitation in their study might be attributable to factors such as the time cost of
answering the door, or uncertainty about safety. Both are unrelated to motives for giving. The increase in giving
might be due to the fact that givers make an effort to be available when they know the solicitor is coming, or the
fact that people have more time to deliberate and prepare, as indicated by Landry et al. 2010. In evaluating an
opt-out policy, it does not per se matter if giving increases because it allows people to “seek” or because of increased
verifiability; what matters is the impact on donations and overall time saved for the solicitor and solicitee.
8
This applies under two conditions. First that increased anticipated social pressure make the solicitation both
more effective and more aversive. Second, one needs to accept that the social pressure is higher during the verbal
ask than in simple bell ringing. We think both of these are sensible and defensible applications of the DellaVigna, et
al., model.

4

self and the self who, when asked, has an emotional response that tempts her to give. Under this
view, the ask is not a direct cost, but rather a cue that triggers sub-optimal deviations in giving
behavior.
Finally, recent work on the reliability of “positive results” has highlighted the importance of
using related literature to form priors and conducting independent replications (Doyen et al., 2012;
Open Science Collaboration, 2012; Maniadis et al., 2014a). In terms of priors, this study was
motivated by the “power of the ask” found by Andreoni and Rao (2011) in a laboratory dictator
game, which provides a relatively strong prior on this dimension. Indeed, we designed this experiment very much as a “field replication” of the lab findings. Castillo, Petrie and Wardell (2014)
also subsequently found the power of asking in a field fundraising context. With regard to finding
avoidance, DellaVigna et al. (2012) provide a strong prior in a fundraising setting similar to ours.
Finally, the statistically significant results in the only known replication of our protocol, Trachtman
et al. (2015), dramatically increases our confidence in the finding on avoidance in this particular
context, since a false positive would require two independent outcomes with very low probability.
Thus we conclude that the collective evidence places our findings on very firm ground.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the design of the field experiment. Section 3
presents the results. Section 4 offers a discussion, and Section 5 concludes.

2

Design of the Field Experiment

The Salvation Army Red Kettle Campaign is one of the best-known and largest street fundraising campaigns in the United States. The campaign occurs annually in the weeks leading up to
Christmas Day. Volunteers, clad in distinctive red aprons and a Santa hat, ring bells to solicit
passersby for donations, which are placed in a locked red kettle. The campaign raises over $100
million annually and the funds help provide “food, toys and clothing to over 6 million people,”
(see www.ringbells.org). The prominence of the Red Kettle Campaign makes it likely that subjects
viewed the solicitor as representing a legitimate and worthy cause.
We chose a location in the Boston area to satisfy the following criteria: 1) the store had two
main doors that were far enough apart to create a meaningful opportunity to seek or avoid a
solicitation; 2) both main doors were visible from the parking lot; 3) traffic amounted to at least
180 people per hour. An aerial photo of the selected store is shown in Figure 1. In our text, we will
refer to the doors as labeled in this figure, with Door 1 on the left and Door 2 on the right. Both
doors opened in the direction of the main parking lot. As identified in the figure, the store also had
a side door, Door 3, which was around the corner from Door 1. Door 3 was marked “recycling”
because it led directly to an area for recycling plastic bags.9
9

Door 3 was different from the other doors only in its visibility (it was around the corner) and the fact that its
users had to pass through a small recycling area before entering the store. It was similar in every other way.

5

Figure 1: The Store Studied. Doors 1 and 2 were the main entrances, while door 3 was the side
“recycling” door.

We implemented a 2×2 design. Solicitation occurred in two modes: only bell ringing, or bellringing with a verbal request. We will refer to these two as Opportunity, or “Opp,” and Ask,
receptively. In the Opportunity conditions solicitors rang the bell as usual, but did not speak nor
attempt eye-contact, except to thank those that gave, as per Red Kettle custom. The Ask condition
was the same as the Opportunity condition except that solicitors attempted eye-contact with each
passerby and said, “Hi, how are you? Merry Christmas. Please give today.” The other dimension
is whether we had solicitors at only Door 1, or at both Doors 1 and 2. Hence, for ease of exposition
we will refer to our four conditions as Opp1, Opp1&2, Ask1, and Ask1&2.
Each solicitor discreetly recorded the number of givers using a counter in her apron pocket.
Two additional research assistants recorded shopper traffic in and out of Doors 1 and 2 from cars
parked nearby. Only individuals who appeared 18 or over were counted.10 If two adults arrived
together, both were counted. The study was conducted from 11:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. over four
weekdays (Monday through Thursday), December 7-10, 2009. Each day was divided into four
treatment “blocks” lasting 1 hour and 32 minutes each. Each block was further divided into 23minute “sessions.” The solicitors and observers all carried synchronized watches that beeped at
the end of each session. At this juncture, solicitors recorded session tallies for traffic and givers.
The counters were then quickly reset and the new session began. The kettles were switched after
10

Taxi drivers and store employees were not counted. They enter and exit the store many times during the day
but are not shoppers.

6

Block
Block
Block
Block

1:
2:
3:
4:

Table 1: Experiment Schedule: December 7th to 10th, 2009
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday
12/7
12/8
12/9
12/10
11:00 a.m. to 12:32 p.m. Ask1&2
Opp1
Ask1
Opp1&2
12:50 p.m. to 2:22 p.m.
Ask1
Opp1&2
Ask1&2
Opp1
3:40 p.m. to 5:12 p.m.
Opp1
Ask1&2
Opp1&2
Ask1
5:30 p.m. to 7:02 p.m. Opp1&2
Ask1
Opp1
Ask1&2

each block, when the solicitor appeared to be taking a break, in order to minimize any unnatural
behavior. This means that donations are only observed at the block level.11
Conditions were assigned to blocks according to the Latin square configuration shown in Table 1.
The configuration ensures blocks were balanced across days and time-of-day. Daily balance helps
ensure that factors such as weather, day-of-week, and solicitor identity were evenly distributed.
Time-slot balance ensures that time-of-day effects were also evenly distributed across the four
treatments. This design does not, however, eliminate potential day-of-week by time-of-day effects.
For example, suppose Monday evening at 4pm was a particularly busy time, and that a particular
door is favored during busy periods. Although we guarded against this confound by choosing nonFriday weekdays, it cannot directly test for it with our original data. As such, we later returned
to the store and collected data on customer traffic for four days without any solicitation, which
we refer to as the placebo data.12 As we discuss in detail further on, the placebo data reveal that
day-of-week by time-of-day interactions are not a concern in our setting.
In order to minimize the possibility of a shopper entering with verbal asks and leaving with
silent opportunities (or visa versa), the two blocks in the morning were either both Ask or both
Opportunity sessions, as were the blocks in the afternoon. This meant that one-door and two-door
treatments had to be interspersed throughout the day, making it possible for a shopper to enter
during a two-door treatment and exit during a one-door treatment, or vice versa. We note, however,
that this only dilutes our results and cannot confound them, as lack of (or false) knowledge of the
solicitors’ locations works against the ability to sort.13
Unfortunately, we did not count traffic through Door 3. The reason is simple: in our initial
selection of the story we did not realize that one could actually get from the recycling area to the
store proper. That shoppers could enter and exit Door 3 only became known to us after the data
11

The data collection was overseen by Trachtman. Across all conditions, Trachtman acted as the solicitor at Door
1. The solicitor at Door 2 was a paid research assistant. All the bell-ringers in this study were 22 year-old white
females at the time of the study. Trachtman administered a 45-minute training session prior to the study.
12
The placebo data was collected in July of 2013.
13
If the shopper enters during a two-door treatment and exits during a one-door treatment, the door through which
the shopper exits should be neutral with respect to the treatments since the shopper believes there are solicitors at
both doors. If the shopper enters during a one-door treatment and exits during a two-door treatment, the shopper
may choose to exit through Door 2 in belief that there is no solicitor there, which would bias the estimate of sorting
downward.

7

collection. The main drawback that this oversight creates is that we are unable to directly measure
avoidance to Door 3 and must instead infer it from traffic patterns at the two main doors. For
example, if the two main doors have a surprisingly low number of people for a certain condition,
provided the experiment is balanced across other traffic factors, this indicates avoidance to door 3.
“Surprisingly low,” however, has to be relative to some baseline. In our primary analysis we treat
traffic under Opp1 as the “baseline.” This means we are unable to measure avoidance to Door 3 in
this condition, but we can measure avoidance to Door 2, which turns out to be very close to zero,
indicating this is not major concern.
A potentially larger concern is that the Door 3 inference rests heavily on the measurement
of total traffic through Doors 1 and 2. Since experimental blocks were randomized in a balanced
fashion, this is an unbiased inference, and the variation in traffic captures the statistical uncertainty
around the measurement. However, the fact that there were only 64 experimental sessions (traffic
measurements) assigned to 16 four-session blocks raises two concerns. First, there might be dayof-week by time-of-day anomalies in certain experimental cells. Second, these statistics cannot rely
solely on asymptotics and instead rest on normality assumptions that we cannot directly verify with
the original data since observed traffic is endogenous to the type of solicitation. The placebo data
provide traffic measurements that are not contaminated by varying charitable solicitation, allowing
us to address both concerns. They enable us to directly control for the interaction between dayof-week and time-of-day by using fixed effects in a regression framework. Furthermore, in the
appendix, we show that both total traffic and the residuals from a regression on day and time
dummies are well approximated by a normal distribution (Shapiro-Wilk tests give p-values of 0.97
and 0.44 for total traffic and residuals respectively), indicating our test statistics rest on empirically
valid assumptions.
In the remainder of the paper, we will use “bell-ringing conditions” to refer the conditions where
a solicitor was actually present and “placebo conditions” to refer to the same day-time slots in the
absence of solicitation (each bell ringing treatment cell is matched to the placebo cell from the
same day-of-week and time-of-day). Finally we note that while the oversight in measurement of
Door 3 does not directly affect our analysis of the giving behavior, the placebo data lend valuable
reassurance about our statistical inference in this domain as well.

3

A Simple Framework for Giving, Avoiding, and Seeking

Imagine a shopper stepping from her car and immediately hearing the ring of the Salvation Army’s
bell. Depending on the shopper’s self-awareness, she may imagine what she would do and how she
would feel if she passed a bell-ringer. She can also evaluate how she would feel if she instead chose
an entrance without a solicitor and did not donate on this occasion. Finally, she considers the cost
of each path. From her car, the shopper chooses the path with the highest utility ex ante. That is,
she makes the choice before feeling the impact of the social and emotional incentives that guide her
8

choice. This can be viewed as an intertemporal choice problem: in the “cold state” of the parking
lot, she chooses which “hot state” to put her future self in.
Let us be the utility from passing a solicitor and choosing the optimal gift, gs , conditional on
passing. Likewise, let u0 the utility from avoiding one a solicitor and giving 0. Clearly, avoiding
an ask has the benefit of saving money, but may come with some guilt. Passing a solicitor may
result in a donation, if the ask is persuasive enough, or it may result in guilt at saying no. If the
solicitation is “passive” in the sense of not creating any more than a simple opportunity to give,
then perhaps the shopper can choose her cold-state optimum, say g ∗ , which could be 0. If there
is a heightened emotional appeal to give, which could come from the solicitor making eye-contact
and saying “please give today,” then giving g ∗ = 0 according to the original plan may produce
feelings of guilt, and may even motivate the shopper to give gs > 0 instead. Depending on the
individual’s preferences for giving, tolerance for guilt, vulnerability to asking, and costs of changing
entrances, the shopper in the parking lot may decide to choose a door without a solicitor as a means
of commitment. Otherwise, she anticipates that her emotional short-run self will either feel guilty
or overrule her calculating planner self and give too much.
It is fair to treat parking spots as approximately randomly assigned, and thus we can think
of shoppers as endowed with a “most convenient door.” Normalize the cost of going to the most
convenient entrance at 0, and let c > 0 be the cost of changing entrances. Then people who give
can be of two types: those who pass through their endowed door, passive-givers (us > u0 − c and
gs > 0), and those who change from their endowed door to seek an opportunity to give, seekinggivers (us − c > u0 and gs > 0). What about people who don’t give? These can be of three types.
First is passive-non-givers (us > u0 − c and gs = 0), that is, people who use their endowed entrance
but don’t give. Second are giving-avoiders (u0 − c > us and gs > g0 ). These are people who, if they
passed a solicitor, would give more than the planner-self would prefer, and thus steer themselves
away from the ask. Finally, there are saying-no-avoiders (u0 − c > us and gs = g0 = 0). As the
name suggests, these people have the self-control to say no if they pass, but the cost of guilt at
saying now makes it worth paying the cost to choose another entrance.
Our experiment provides exogenous variation to help identify the relative sizes of these groups.
First, by adding a second solicitor at the other main entrance, we are increasing the cost of avoiding
being asked, as it is now harder to find an unoccupied door. Based on the physical layout of the
store, this cost will be much higher for those endowed with Door 2 as compared to Door 1. This
can be seen in Figure 1: those parked near Door 2 have to actually walk past Door 1 to find the
unmanned Door 3. Next we vary the intensity of the ask. A simple bell-ringer is a familiar sight
and is seen by many as a “passive” ask. By contrast, the direct verbal ask of “please give today”
is expected to have heightened psychological consequences (Andreoni and Rao, 2011). This has
three effects conditional on being asked: relative to bell-ringing alone, it raises the probability of
giving, the size of donations, and the guilt of saying no. Working backwards, if any of these three

9

effects lower the planner’s utility enough, avoiding the ask becomes more attractive in the cold
state of the parking lot. We can measure this avoidance by exploiting the variation in the intensity
of requests and costs of avoidance induced by the experiment. The net impact of a more emotional
ask will depend on the distribution of types in the population. In the next section we characterize
the general preferences of our sample using this framework.

4

Results

We begin by looking at giving in the bell-ringing treatments. We next examine how charitable
solicitation affected traffic patterns. Finally, we comment on what our results imply about the
psychological mechanisms behind giving and the welfare effects of fundraising.

4.1

Total Giving

Figure 2 displays the total number of givers per 23-minute session (left axis) and total money
donated per 92-minute block (right axis) by condition. The global average number of givers per
session was 12.6, or about 0.55 givers per minute, which netted $58.57 in donations per block, or
about $0.64 per minute. The number of givers varied widely across conditions, from 0.32 givers
per minute in one-door Opportunity condition (Opp1) to 0.83 per minute in the two-door Ask
condition (Ask1&2). Total donations showed similar variation, exhibiting a three-fold difference
across conditions, $0.33 to $0.99 per minute. This is our first evidence that relatively small changes
in the fundraising approach can lead to large differences in giving rates and money raised.
Table 2 confirms the statistical significance of the differences across conditions using an OLS
framework that allows for day-of-week and time-of-day fixed effects. The number of givers is the
dependent variable in Column (1), donations is the dependent variable in Column (2), and Opp1
is the omitted group. First, comparing the simple bell-ringing to the verbal ask, we see that asking
is indeed powerful. The coefficient on Ask1 reveals that in the one-door conditions, the presence
of a verbal request raised the number of donors by 55% and total donations by 69%. The power
of asking was also observed in the two-door conditions, increasing givers by 53% (column 1) and
donations by 45% (column 2). All of the above differences are significant beyond the 0.01 level. For
both giving rates and donations, Ask1 does not differ significantly from Opp1&2, which indicates
that the short verbal request was about as effective as adding an additional silent solicitor.
Second, Table 2 provides initial evidence about the extent to which giving can be attributed to
people who sort. In our framework, giving comes from three types: seeking-givers, giving-avoiders,
and passive-givers. The first two types change their preferred door based on the level of solicitation,
and thus giving depends on sorting (or the inability to do so). Differential giving rates across
conditions identifies the relative importance of givers that sort. In the Opportunity conditions the
second solicitor increased the number of givers by 67% (5 givers per session) and dollars donated

10

Table 2: OLS Regressions of Total Giving in Bell-Ringing Treatments
(1)
(2)
Number of Givers
Dollars of Donations
VARIABLES
per 23-minute Session per 92-minute Block
5.00∗∗∗
(1.164)
4.06∗∗∗
(1.135)
11.56∗∗∗
(1.308)

32.86∗∗∗
(4.166)
20.63∗∗∗
(4.785)
60.90∗∗∗
(4.901)

Observations
R-squared
Mean of Opp1
Date and Time fixed effects

64
0.726
7.44
yes

16
0.977
29.97
yes

Predicted levels:
Opp1
Opp1&2
Increase

7.44
12.44
67%

29.97
62.83
110%

11.51
19.00
65%

50.60
90.87
80%

0.000
0.000
0.395

0.000
0.000
0.008

Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2

Ask1
Ask1&2
Increase
F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1

Column 1: standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
Column 2: robust standard errors in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1

11

Figure 2: Total givers and donations by condition. Bars give 1.96 standard errors.

by 110% ($32.86 per block). In the Ask conditions, the second solicitor raised giving by 65% (7.5
givers per session) and donations by 80% ($40.27 per block). Since the doors had roughly equal
baseline usage rates, in the absence of any sorting, we would expect the two-door conditions to do
twice as well as their one-door counterparts. We observe statistically significant deviations from
this prediction, especially in the Ask conditions. However, the evidence also rules out the possibility
that sorting accounts for all of giving. If giving were dominated by seeking-givers, then the one- and
two-door conditions should perform similarly. Conversely, if giving-avoiders accounted for the bulk
of giving, then one-door conditions, when avoiding was easy for all shoppers, would be expected
to garner very few donations. We strongly reject both these hypotheses as well. In the next two
subsections we incorporate traffic patterns to further understand sorting and giving behavior.

4.2

Avoiding the Ask

We define traffic to be the total “passings” in and out of the store. A single shopper thus accounts
for two passings, a fact we account for in our statistics. Panel 1 of Table 3 reports the raw traffic
for the bell-ringing conditions. Since our late discovery of Door 3 meant that we did not count
traffic through this door, the totals at Doors 1 and 2 do not represent total shoppers but are rather
endogenous to avoidance induced by each condition. Total counted passings were highest in the
condition Opp1, with the most passive and most easily avoided solicitation (to Door 2, as well
12

as Door 3). Comparing total traffic in Opp1 to Ask1 and Ask1&2, we observe a steep decline
under the Ask conditions. Around 800 fewer people passed through Doors 1 and 2 under Ask1
relative to Opp1, with the entire difference between the two totals due to traffic through Door 1
(where the solicitor was located). Ask1&2 sees a similar drop in total traffic that is more evenly
distributed between Doors 1 and 2. Using Opp1 as a baseline, in the second panel of Table 3 we
impute avoidance to Door 3 under the other conditions. Insofar as there was indeed avoidance
in Opp1, these measurements will understate total avoidance. The additional avoidance imputed
for Opp1&2 is relatively small, at 3.4% of total passings, whereas the adjustment to both Ask
conditions is much more substantial, at 16%.
Table 3: Gross Traffic in Bell-Ringing Conditions and Placebo Conditions
Silent Opportunity
Door 1
Doors 1 & 2
(Opp1)
(Opp1&2)
Panel 1. Actual Bell-Ringing Traffic
Door 1
2563
Door 2
2284
Total Doors 1 and 2
4847

Direct Ask
Doors 1 & 2
(Ask1&2)

8717
8945
17662

Panel 2. Imputed Door 3 Bell-Ringing Traffic, Opp1 Total as Baseline
Imputed Total All Doors
4847
4847
4847
Imputed Door 3 Increase
0
165
798

4847
763

19388
1726

Panel 3. Actual Placebo Traffic
Door 1
Door 2
Door 3
Total Doors 1 and 2
Total All Doors

2242
2088
867
4330
5197

2249
2194
853
4443
5296

8806
8625
3492
17431
20923

Panel 4. Imputed Door 3 Placebo Traffic, Opp1 Total as Baseline
Imputed Total All Doors
4342
4342
4342
Imputed Door 3 Increase
0
26
12

4342
-101

17368
-63

2092
2224
901
4316
5217

1728
2321
4049

Total

1918
2166
4084

2223
2119
871
4342
5213

2508
2174
4682

Door 1
(Ask1)

Note: Panel 1 reports observed traffic under the bell-ringing conditions (December 2009). Panel 2 imputes
traffic in Door 3 as the deviation in Doors 1 and 2 traffic from that of Opp1 (4847). Panel 3 reports observed
traffic under the placebo conditions; i.e. without solicitation (July-August 2013). Panel 4 imputes traffic
in Door 3 in the same way as Panel 2, using the placebo data.

The surprising lack of shoppers entering Doors 1 and 2 under the Ask conditions is our first
evidence of net avoidance. A standard statistical test, such a t-test in an OLS framework, reveals
this difference is significant beyond the 0.01 level. Such a test relies on two important assumptions.
First, the null hypotheses require that the treatment blocks be independent and identically distributed conditional on the day of the week, time of the day, and the product. We consider the first
13

two reasonable assumptions because the Latin square configuration ensured that each 92-minute
treatment block occurred once in each of the four time slots and once on each of the four days
(Mon–Thurs). It is possible, however, that a certain time was particularly popular on a certain
weekday. For example, it might be that the Ask conditions just happened to be assigned to unpopular day-of-week by time-of-day spots, which would explain the low counted passings. Since there
were only 16 treatment blocks, random assignment does not ensure the independence of treatment
blocks from the day-time slot. Moreover, with only 16 treatment blocks, traditional test statistics
require a normality assumption.14
We use the placebo data to validate both of these assumptions. In Panel 3 of Table 3 the
“conditions” in the placebo data occupy the same time-of-day and day-of-week positions as they
did in the original data, but there is no charitable solicitation. Total traffic is stable in the placebo
conditions; counted traffic through Doors 1 and 2 is around 4,350 in all conditions. In the placebo
data we have an accurate count of traffic at Door 3, which is stable at about 17% of traffic. In
Panel 4 we conduct the same exercise as Panel 2 with the placebo data, that is, supposing we did
not have access to Door 3 data and had to infer it as deviations using Opp1. The deviations range
from 26 to -101, and sum to -63, which stands in stark contrast to the total 1726 displaced passings
in the bell-ringing conditions. These results suggest that time-of-day by day-of-week interaction
effects cannot explain the substantial differences in traffic we observe in the bell-ringing treatments.
Second, we show in the Appendix that both total traffic and the residuals from a regression on
day and time dummies are well approximated by a normal distribution (Shapiro-Wilk tests give
p-values of 0.97 and 0.44 for total traffic and residuals respectively), indicating that this assumption
was not problematic either.
A final robustness check is to look at the distributions of session-level traffic by treatment.
Of the 32 Opportunity sessions, the one with the lowest traffic was a one-door session with 235
passings. In comparison, 15 of 32 Ask sessions had fewer than 235 passings. That is, nearly half
the Ask sessions had less traffic through Doors 1 and 2 than the lowest Opportunity session. Given
the Latin square design, the probability of this happening by chance is less than 1 in 10,000. In
Figure A5 of the Appendix, we present kernel density plots the further illustrate the stark differences
in the traffic distributions.
With our measures of statistical uncertainty on solid ground, we now formally quantify avoidance. Column 1 of Table 4 uses an OLS specification with Opp1 as the omitted condition. The
coefficients thus represent deviations in total counted traffic under the bell-ringing conditions (reflecting avoidance to Door 3) as compared to Opp1. We find substantial and statistically significant
avoidance to Door 3 under in both Ask conditions. The increase is 16.5% for Ask1 and 15.7% for
Ask1&2. These coefficients are statistically significant beyond the 0.01 level, but are not statistically distinguishable from each other. This indicates that avoidance to Door 3 was not influenced
14

This is less of a concern because the significance is so strong. Standard bootstrapping procedures and other
methods that get around normality assumptions still easily produce statistical significance.

14

Table 4: OLS Regressions of Doors 1&2 Traffic on Bell-Ringing and Placebo Conditions
(1)
(2)
VARIABLES

Opp1
Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2

Observations
R-squared
Mean of omitted group
Date and Time fixed effects
Date × Time fixed effects

Doors 1&2 Traffic
under Bell-Ringing
Conditions

Doors 1&2 Traffic
under Bell-Ringing
and Placebo Conditions†

omitted group
-10.31
(12.71)
-49.87∗∗∗
(15.11)
-47.69∗∗∗
(14.18)

4.425
(30.08)
-4.100
(21.33)
-44.62∗
(23.26)
-50.21∗∗∗
(14.77)

64
0.760
302.93
yes
no

128
0.807
299.59
no
yes

0.006
0.880
0.007

0.096
0.842
0.219
0.820
0.217

F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1
Opp1 = Opp1&2
Opp1 = Ask1
†

Bell-ringing traffic if 2009, θ×(placebo traffic) if 2013

Standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1

by the presence of a solicitor at Door 2. This has a natural explanation given the physical layout of
the store, as shown in Figure 1: shoppers parked between Doors 1 and 2 who observe a solicitor at
both doors would have to walk in front of Door 1 to reach Door 3. The evidence indicates that, as
anticipated, this was not an attractive avoidance strategy. Finally we observe that the coefficient
on Opp1&2 is within one standard error of zero.
In column (2) we incorporate the placebo data directly into our regression framework in order
to include 64 day-of-week by time-of-day interactions. To do so we must overcome a hurdle.
The counted traffic in Doors 1 and 2 in the placebo conditions was stable at about 4,350 per
condition, less than the 4800 or so we observed in the Opportunity bell-ringing conditions. This
likely represents a level shift in popularity of the store between the two collection periods. In

15

particular, the evidence in Section 4.1 rules out that the higher traffic in the bell-ringing conditions
is due to seeking of the solicitor.15 Given these differences, we need to inflate total traffic under
the placebo sessions to make it comparable to the bell-ringing sessions, otherwise all the bellringing condition coefficients will be biased upwards. We do so by specifying a multiplier, θ, to
apply uniformly to all placebo sessions. Since the counted traffic in the bell-ringing conditions is
endogenous, it is not possible to perfectly identify θ. Our strategy is to compute the multipliers
under three reasonable assumptions about displacement under the bell-ringing treatments.16 The
three assumptions generate multipliers of 1.1163, 1.1006, and 1.0848 respectively (see Appendix
Table A1 for more details).17 We interpret this as consistent evidence that there were about 10%
more shoppers in the time period of the bell-ringing treatment; as such we specify a preferred
multiplier of 1.1.
Returning to Table 4, in column (2) the placebo data, multiplied by θ, form the omitted group,
and we include 64 temporal fixed effects. Given the large number of regressors, the standard errors
naturally rise, but the point estimates are similar to those in column (1). This is what we would
expect since in both specifications the Opportunity conditions were effectively used as a baseline.
This is because we used the Opportunity conditions to calculate the multiplier, meaning are unable
to speak to baseline avoidance in Opp1, but report the estimate for completeness, noting that it
is constrained to be close to 0 by construction. In Tables A2 and A3 in the Appendix, we show
that the main results are robust to using any plausible multiplier. Overall, the direct inclusion of
time-of-day cross day-of-week fixed effects further confirms our finding of substantial avoidance.
We have thus far focused on avoidance to Door 3 by examining deviations in total traffic in
Doors 1 and 2. In Table 5 we use the same regression framework to examine the distribution of
traffic between Doors 1 and 2. Column (1) shows that relative to Opp1, Door 1 traffic drops by
32.6% in Ask1 and by 25.2% in Ask1&2. The larger drop in Ask1 traffic is expected (since avoidance
to Door 2 is possible), but the magnitude of the difference is not statistically significant. Column
(2) indicates why: there is little variation at Door 2 overall. In Ask1&2, the solicitor at Door 2 has
little impact on Door 2 traffic, consistent with the idea that for a shopper endowed with Door 2,
avoiding through Door 3 is not an attractive strategy.
Finally, in column (3) we regress the fraction of observed traffic (Doors 1 and 2) at Door 1
on the bell-ringing conditions. Importantly, we have already shown that the denominator falls
substantially in Ask1 and Ask1&2 due to avoidance to Door 3, so the coefficients will be biased
towards zero.18 Consistent with this logic, the avoidance estimates are lower than in column (1),
15

We are assuming that people only seek in order to give. That is, they gain no pleasure from saying no.
First, we take displacement to be zero in Doors 1 and 2 under Opp1, since under this condition displacement
effects were the smallest. Second, to use more data, we take displacement to be zero in Doors 1 and 2 under both
Opp1 and Opp1&2 (which also had low displacement). Finally, we take displacement to be zero in Door 2 under
Opp1, since we expect Door 2 displacement to be especially low given the layout of the doors.
17
For example, 1.1006 = (4847+4682)/(4342+4316)
18
To see this consider the following example. Suppose in the baseline 50 people use Door 1 and 50 people use Door
2. Door 1 share is 50%. In the treatment, 40 use Door 1, 50 use Door 2 and 10 use Door 3. The true share of traffic
16

16

Table 5: OLS Regressions of Traffic Distribution on Bell-Ringing Conditions
(1)
(2)
(3)
VARIABLES

Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2

Observations
R-squared
Mean of omitted group
Date and Time fixed effects

Door 1
Traffic

Door 2
Traffic

Door 1 Traffic
as Fraction of
Doors 1&2 Traffic

-3.44
(10.34)
-52.19∗∗∗
(11.96)
-40.31∗∗∗
(9.757)

-6.88
(7.958)
2.318
(7.61)
-7.375
(10.07)

0.0046
(0.0268)
-0.111∗∗∗
(0.027)
-0.067∗∗
(0.025)

64
0.664
160.19
yes

64
0.802
142.75
yes

64
0.689
.537
yes

0.865
0.410
0.335

0.865
0.410
0.335

0.008
0.085
0.000

F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1

Standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1

17

Figure 3: Door 1 givers and donations by condition. Bars give 1.96 standard errors.

but highly significant nonetheless, at 20.7% and 12.5% under Ask1 and Ask1&2, respectively.

4.3

Seeking and the Types of Avoidance

It the last section we estimated avoidance net of seeking behavior. Avoidance dominates seeking
in terms of magnitudes, but this does not rule out seeking. Do most donations come from seeker
types? When people avoid the solicitor, are they avoiding giving, or are they avoiding “saying no?”
In this section we try to disentangle underlying motives by examining giving rates and avoidance
patterns together.
Since Door 1 always had a solicitor, we start by look at giving rates under differential traffic
patterns induced by the experiment. Figure 3 shows the number of givers and total donations
at Door 1 across conditions. The placebo data indicates that traffic is nearly equally split across
doors when there is no solicitation (50.6% go to Door 1).19 There are three extreme outcomes we
could observe if giving is dominated by one of the three giving types. First, if all giving came from
passive-givers, we would expect givers and donations at Door 1 to be the same in the one- and twothrough Door 1 is 40%, suggesting avoidance of 10 percentage points, but calculating just using Doors 1 and 2, we
get 44%, or avoidance of only 6 percentage points.
19
The fraction going to each door does depend a bit on the lagged volume of traffic, presumably due to how the
parking lot fills up. However the impact is very small and the results are robust to using any estimates in the range
observed.

18

Table 6: OLS Regressions of Door 1 Giving on Bell-Ringing Treatments
(1)
(2)
VARIABLES
Givers Door 1 Donations Door 1
Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2

Observations
R-squared
Mean of Opp1
Date and Time fixed effects

-0.56
(0.91)
4.06∗∗∗
(0.96)
2.50∗∗
(1.04)

3.98
(3.56 )
20.63∗∗∗
(4.52)
17.46∗∗∗
(3.23)

64
0.523
7.44
yes

16
0.901
29.97
yes

0.005
0.132
0.000

0.004
0.464
0.008

F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1

Column 1: standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
Column 2: robust standard errors in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05,

∗

p<0.1

door conditions. Second, if all giving came from seeking-givers, then we would expect the number
of givers at Door 1 to double in the one-door conditions (givers that would enter Door 2 re-route
to Door 1). Third, if all donations came from giving-avoiders, people that choose to avoid when
possible, then we would expected Door 1 to raise very little money in one-door conditions.
We start by examining the silent Opportunity conditions. Since these conditions produced
minimal avoidance, giving cannot be dominated by giving-avoiders. At Door 1 there are 7.44 givers
per 23-minutes Opp1 and 8.0 givers per 23-minutes in Opp1&2. These estimates are statistically
indistinguishable. The implication is that under the Opportunity conditions, giving is dominated
by passive-givers. This is consistent with the evidence in Table 2 that adding a second solicitor
doubles donations.
We now turn to the Ask conditions, which require closer examination since giving-avoiders
may well constitute a large share of givers. In column (1) of Table 6 we see that the number of
givers per 23-minute session in Ask1 is 1.56 givers higher than in Ask 1&2. The F-test below
indicates that this difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.13). However, since there are
5.94 more avoiders per 23-minutes than in Ask1 as compared to Ask 1&2 this test is not sufficient
to conclude that there is no evidence of seeking. Unfortunately, we cannot separately identify

19

seeking-givers from giving-avoiders. We can, however, give some useful calibrations. If there are
no giving-avoiders, then the above comparison reveals statistically insignificant evidence of seeking.
To raise the F-statistic to the 0.05 significance level, we require that at least 8.87% (0.527/5.94)
of avoiders be giving-avoiders.20 This in turn implies that 11.0% of givers are seeking-givers. As
a final benchmark, if we assume that the fraction of giving-avoiders is the same as the global base
rate of givers, which is roughly 14% in the Ask conditions, then the estimate of seeking-givers is
comparable at 12.6% of givers.
We can provide a more specific measure of seeking by returning to our estimates on total
giving. When considering Door 1 alone, roughly equal proportions of seeking-givers and givingavoiders can explain observed giving rates. But recall that in the Ask conditions, the second
solicitor raised giving by 65% and donations by 80%, both short of doubling. This rules out both
the hypothesis that most giving is generated by seeking-givers and the hypothesis that there are no
seeking-givers whatsoever. This can perhaps most clearly be seen by the observation that despite
the high avoidance and limited overall evidence of seeking, the solicitor at Door 1 in Ask1 raised
the most money per-minute and garnered the highest giving participation. Taken as a whole,
seeking-givers generate a relatively small fraction of giving, which in turn implies that the fraction
of giving-avoiders is small.
In summary, we find that the verbal ask raises total giving but also generates substantial
avoidance. Seeking is negligible under the Opportunity conditions and positive but small under
the Ask conditions. Evidence of limited seeking in combination with high levels of giving at Door
1 under Ask1 suggests that most avoiders would not give if asked, which is consistent with the fact
that the verbal ask raises total giving on net. In other words, most people who actively changed
the door they entered were avoiding the psychological cost of saying no. In the next section we
discuss the psychological motives for giving and avoidance that can reconcile this constellation of
findings.

5

Understanding Avoidance and the “Power of the Ask”

In this section we first explore two potential psychological mechanisms behind the utility of being
solicited, us from Section 3, and the decision to avoid the ask. The first concerns the managing
of signals of generosity to oneself or to others. The second is about strategic manipulation of
the impulse to give. Next, we present evidence from a recent replication of our experiment that
indicates avoidance responds to cost. Finally, we discuss what our findings imply about the overall
welfare impact of this form of fundraising.
20

This calculation assumes constant standard errors.

20

5.1

Self- and Social-Signalling

Can models of social- or self-signaling explain avoidance? What if avoiding provides a credible
excuse for not sending a signal about one’s generosity? Suppose, for instance, that giving is not
determined by altruistic feelings but instead by personal or social goals, such as appearing generous
in the eyes of the solicitor or other patrons of the store, or maintaining a self-image as a generous
person. In the formal model of Andreoni and Bernheim (2009), individuals care about matching
social expectations of generosity, although the “higher” types care more than others. In addition,
people get utility from others believing they are a high type. In our context, the model predicts
that “low” types look for credible excuses to not give. Our treatments could be seen as providing
shoppers with a credible excuses: that they happened to “naturally” use a door without a solicitor.
The easier it is to access a credible excuse, the more likely it is that someone of a “lower” type will
pool with other lower types at giving nothing. By contrast, high types may be willing to give, and
extremely high types, for whom the cost of seeking solicitation is less than the gain in utility from
both warm-glow and social-image, may actually go out of their way to give.
In order for this model to explain our data, we would have to reconcile the lack of avoidance in
the Opportunity conditions. This is only possible by appealing to a second credible excuse, namely
that people legitimately did not notice the solicitor or felt unobservable when the solicitation lacked
a verbal request. One could further argue that the rise in giving under the Ask conditions is driven
by higher “visibility.” The strength of this explanation relies on the plausibility of not noticing the
verbally silent solicitor. In the end, the physical parameters at play render this highly unlikely. The
solicitor was a few feet from the store entrance, was wearing a bright red apron, and was loudly
ringing a bell. Moreover, the Salvation Army regularly conducted solicitation in this manner in the
area, and would be known to virtually anyone.
Since self -signaling requires these assumptions and an additional caveat that avoiders are somehow unaware that they are going out of their way to avoid, we conclude that the evidence is not
consistent with signaling explanations. A far more likely story is that non-givers in the Opportunity conditions noticed the solicitor, but did not experience an unanticipated or strong emotional
response.

5.2

Avoidance as the Mediation of Altruism

Psychological models of altruism claim that the act of giving is a struggle between empathy and
executive function; that is, between the pull of the heartstrings and the the pull of the family
budget. Why, for instance, does one avert the gaze of a beggar? A psychologist’s answer would
be that eye-contact stimulates an empathic response in the brain, either making the altruistic act
harder to resist or heightening the guilt associated with not giving. Like the children in Walter
Michel’s famous self-control tasks who successfully avoided eating the marshmallow by physically
turning their backs, thus reducing the emotional but not the cognitive awareness of the temptations
21

(Mischel et al., 1989), it is distinctly possible that our subjects are exhibiting a natural avoidance
of an emotional stimulus, which makes it easier to keep their empathy from being engaged.
This pathway to avoidance is also evident in the laboratory experiments of Andreoni and Rao
(2011). They asked subjects to play Dictator Games with controlled degrees of communication.
When “receivers” could ask “allocators” for a share of the pie but dictators could not respond, the
receivers tended to get what they asked for. By contrast, when dictators could explain what they
chose, and receivers were kept silent, dictators nearly always gave nothing and offered an apology.
However, in a condition designed to heighten empathy, the experiment required all players to
make decisions as recipients (and ask) and as dictators (and explain), but were told that their
true roles would be assigned randomly after both decisions were made. Putting oneself in the
other’s shoes causes the empathy-inducing ask to completely erase the effects of the would-be
apologetic explanation. Having thought of what they themselves would ask for, dictators were
far more generous, and the messages were more likely to center around fairness. Taken together,
this experiment indicates that verbal requests engage empathy but that people take steps to avoid
thinking about what others would request if given a chance. When they are forced to consider
requests, either explicitly through communication or implicitly by delaying the assignment of roles,
giving goes up dramatically.
What if someone with high “empathic vulnerability” were to pass a silent solicitation by a Red
Kettle bell-ringer? Would they have the strength or willpower to resist if they stopped and chatted
with the solicitor about the Salvation Army? Perhaps not. Instead, like Michel’s child subjects,
they can turn their gaze, look straight ahead and walk on by. However, when the solicitor is making
a verbal request and attempting eye contact, this strategy of avoidance is defeated by the social
norm of acknowledging a request, leaving only three options: pass and give, pass and feel guilty, or
use another door.21 The evidence indicates that some subjects opt for another door while others
are induced to give.

5.3

An Extension: The Cost of Avoidance

Is avoidance in this context sensitive to changing the cost of eliminating contact with the solicitor?
In our experiment, people avoid more when there are more escape routes, but the costs of doing so
were roughly constant across days and conditions. A recent replication of our protocol, Trachtman
et al. (2015), provides both a robustness check of our primary finding and evidence on cost responsiveness. Trachtman et al. ran their experiment at a large supermarket in Anchorage, Alaska.
The supermarket had only two doors and the researchers used two conditions to study sorting:
treatment, in which a solicitor was positioned at one of the doors and made a verbal request to
21

Psychologists have also shown that eye contact alone is a powerful stimulus to helping, as initially shown by
Ellsworth and Langer (1976). Thus we view the “verbal request” as a combination of both the actual call to action to
give and eye contact. Future work could determine if eye contact alone is sufficient to generate an increase in giving.
It would be highly unlikely to generate as much avoidance, as it is not as noticeable as verbal requests.

22

shoppers; and control, in which there was no solicitation. Another important difference is that
instead of using the well-known Salvation Army the researchers raised money for a far lesser-known
group, the Polycistic Kidney Disease Foundation, by selling awareness buttons for $1. Finally,
solicitors were male instead of female.
The results of the replication support the findings in this paper in several ways. First and most
importantly, the researchers found significant avoidance of the solicitor in the presence of a verbal
request. The magnitude of the avoidance was lower—a likely explanation, at least in part, is the
lack of an escape route as convenient and well-hidden as Door 3 in our study. It also may indicate
that the degree of avoidance depends on the recognizably of the charity, visibility of the solicitors,
or factors such as the gender of the solicitor (as in Landry et al., 2010). Second, temperature
variation provided an instrument for costs. When it was just above freezing—a temperature the
locals reportedly consider rather balmy—avoidance was relatively high. However when it dropped
to 0 Fahrenheit—uncomfortably cold by anyone’s standards—avoidance disappeared entirely. These
findings lend important insights to the internal cost-benefit decision governing the decision to avoid.

5.4

Avoidance, Asking and Welfare

The significant levels of avoidance in this study and the replication just discussed raises the question
of how such fundraising might affect welfare, since the physical and psychic costs of avoidance
appear to be pure deadweight loss, as is the guilt of turning down a request. DellaVigna et al.
(2012) do a careful job of estimating the welfare implications of door-to-door solicitation. Their
approach is to use a secondary study to estimate the opportunity cost of participants’ time and
avoidance, and then apply the estimates to a structural model of utility, resulting in a calculation
of the welfare consequences of an “opt out” policy for door-to-door fundraising. They conclude
that first canvassing a neighborhood to notify residents when a solicitor will be present, and then
offering an opt-out, is superior to simply knocking on doors unannounced, both for residents and
for the charity.
Our design could not accommodate pricing time and avoidance this precisely; however we can
still construct informative bounds on the welfare impact of this type of solicitation. A detailed
description of these derivations is presented in Appendix D. Here we focus on the most intrusive
solicitation condition, Ask1&2, and we will draw traffic and donation information from Tables 2
and 4. We merge our five types into three broader categories: givers, non-givers, and avoiders.
First, we can estimate the cost of avoidance. One component of this is the time cost of going
to the less favored entrance. We first note that to avoid by going to Door 3 from Door 1 required
about 70 feet of extra walking. According to Wikipedia, the average American’s speed of walking
is about 4.4 feet per second. Since wages in this area are average about $18 per hour, the time cost
of avoiding can be roughly estimated to be $0.08. For a person on the margin between avoiding
and passing the solicitor (the “marginal non-avoider”), the cost of avoidance ($0.08) should equal

23

the cost of “saying no.” If we assume that the “saying no” costs of non-avoiders are uniformly
distributed between 0 and $0.08, then the mean cost is $0.04 for a non-avoider and $0.08 for an
avoider. What about the psychic cost to avoiders? They are saying no, but are not facing any social
pressure from being asked; thus their psychic cost is lower than non-avoiders who say no. To be
conservative we set it at $0.03. Finally, there are the costs of the donations themselves. Conditional
on donating, the average donation is $1.20. Averaging these together by their population weights,
the average cost, including donations, to shoppers is 0.124. However, 40% of this cost is from either
saying no (25%) or from avoiding (15%).
On the benefits side, we can assume that those who donate get some utility y from saying yes,
either from warm-glow or possible self- and social-image. Likewise, the recipient of the donation
will receive an amount µ per dollar donated. Without frictions, µ would represent the marginal
utility of money for the recipient, relative to the giver. This would be fair to assume to be greater
than 1. However, if the givers are fairly poor, and if the Salvation Army pays some friction costs
of getting benefits to the poor, then it could also be that µ < 1.22
The variables y and µ represent our free parameters. Since a giver chose to give, however, we
know that this must yield more utility than passing a solicitor and saying no. Thus y − 1.20 ≥ −0.4
which means that y ≥ 1.16. Notice that this means it is possible for some givers to feel worse off
by giving than had the Salvation Army not been at the store. Summing across givers, non-givers,
and avoiders, weighted appropriately, we find that fundraising will be welfare improving if it is also
true that y ≥ 1.91 − 1.2µ.
Consider these benchmarks. Suppose all donors are indifferent to giving, that is, y = 1.16.
Then fundraising will only be welfare improving if µ ≥ 0.625. The value of µ could be this low if,
for instance, there are large friction costs associated with the transfer. Conversely, another way
to say this is that as long at µ > 0.625, our fundraising experiment was surely welfare improving.
Suppose instead that the value of saying yes and giving $1.20 is at least 1.91 on average for all
donors. Then as long as µ > 0 fundraising will increase welfare.
In sum, this exercise shows that the social costs of saying no or of avoiding the ask can be
a significant share of the total cost of the donations. In our particular experiment there is no
clear answer to whether these fundraising costs were large enough to make the endeavor welfare
diminishing, or whether the benefits of more charity were great enough to swamp the extra costs.
This, in our view, remains an open question for all fundraising, and one worth serious further
research.
22

For instance, we do not explicitly count the opportunity cost of the bell-ringers’ time, nor the other costs absorbed
by the Salvation Army and the grocery store in coordinating solicitations and disbursements of donations to the needy.
All of these costs will be reflected in lower values of µ

24

6

Discussion and Conclusion

We study how giving and avoidance respond to the presence of Salvation Army bell-ringers at the
doors of a large supermarket. We find that verbal requests increase the number of givers by 55%
and total donations by 69%. Adding a second solicitor has similarly large impacts on givers and
total donations. Shoppers do little to avoid the bell ringers who do not verbally engage or make eye
contact with them, but we estimate that the simple act of looking at shoppers and saying “please
give today” causes between 25.2% and 32.6% of would-be entrants to “avoid the ask.” Asking, it
seems, is both aversive and effective. There is no significant evidence of seeking in the absence of a
verbal ask. However, the fact that adding a solicitor under the Ask conditions falls short of doubling
total giving suggests that seeking exists, though it cannot explain the bulk of giving. Still, in order
to justify limited seeking together with the high levels of giving at Door 1 when there is just one
verbal solicitor, we infer that most avoiders do not give when they are unable to avoid, meaning
they are in fact avoiding saying no to the request. More broadly, we see that every outcome of
interest—giving, avoidance, and seeking—is transformed by the verbal request.
Why does asking have such a powerful, but nuanced, impact on behavior? We argue that the
underlying psychological mechanism is empathy. Stimulating someone’s empathy through a direct
and vocal ask can create an impulse to be generous that is difficult for humans to resist. While our
experiment does not test this theory directly, it does guide the discussion of altruism toward the
act of asking itself as the linchpin to understanding the costs and benefits of the giving interaction.
We believe that our paper serves a useful methodological purpose as well. Directly asking people
to give to charity is a different frame than a donation booth with a “silent” solicitor, which in turn
is a different frame than simply posting a sign with instructions as to how to give if one desires
to do so. A recent application of our experimental protocol modified the frame to one in which
verbal requests were used to sell “awareness buttons” for a little-known kidney disease foundation.
Significant avoidance was observed in this frame as well, but less than in the verbal requests from
Salvation Army volunteers. Laboratory experiments on the dictator games also provide a frame
that allows individuals to “allocate” money to another player, and when players are allowed to make
requests from each other, the ask greatly increases donations (Andreoni and Rao, 2011), whereas
total donations drop when dictators can “opt out” of the experiment entirely (Lazear et al., 2012).
Although differing in scope and magnitude, the patterns of results in both the field and lab are
quite similar. This gives us some assurance that the frames we create in laboratory experiments
do provide informative parallels to real-world giving, and are not wholly contaminated by artificial
experimenter demand effects.

25

References
Andreoni, J. (1988). Privately provided public goods in a large economy: The limits of altruism.
Journal of Publlic Economics, 35:57–73.
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and ricardian equivalence. Journal of Political Economy, 97:1447–58.
Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warm-glow giving.
Economic Journal, 100:464–477.
Andreoni, J. (1993). An experimental test of the public goods crowding-out hypothesis. American
Economic Review, 83(5):1317–1327.
Andreoni, J. and Bernheim, B. (2009). Social image and the 50–50 norm: A theoretical and
experimental analysis of audience effects. Econometrica, 77(5):1607–1636.
Andreoni, J., Brown, P., and Vesterlund, L. (2002). What makes an allocation fair? some experimental evidence. Games and Economic Behavior, 40(1):1–24.
Andreoni, J. and Rao, J. M. (2011). The power of the ask: How communication affects selfishness,
empathy and altruism. Journal of Public Economics, 95:513–520.
Anik, L., Aknin, L. B., Norton, M. I., and Dunn, E. W. (2011). Feeling good about giving: The
benefits (and costs) of self-interested charitable behavior. in D.M. Oppenheimer and C.Y.
Oliveria, Eds., Experimental Approaches to the Study of Charity, Psychology Press.
Ariely, D., Bracha, A., and Meier, S. (2009). Doing good or doing well? image motivation and
monetary incentives in behaving prosocially. American Economic Review, 99(1):544–555.
Bardsley, N. (2008). Dictator game giving: altruism or artefact?

Experimental Economics,

11(2):122–133.
Batson, C. (1991). The altruism question: Toward a social psychological answer. Lawrence Erlbaum
Assoc Inc.
Becker, G. S. (1974). A theory of social interactions. Journal of Political Economy, 82(6):1063–1093.
Bernheim, B. and Rangel, A. (2004). Addiction and cue-triggered decision processes. American
Economic Review, pages 1558–1590.
Bohnet, I. and Frey, B. (1999). The sound of silence in prisoner’s dilemma and dictator games.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 38(1):43–57.

26

Boyd, R. and Richerson, P. (1992). Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation (or anything
else) in sizable groups. Ethology and Sociobiology, 13(3):171–195.
Broberg, T., Ellingsen, T., and Johannesson, M. (2007). Is generosity involuntary? Economics
Letters, 94(1):32–37.
Castillo, M., Petrie, R., and Wardell, C. (2014). Fundraising through online social networks: A
field experiment on peer-to-peer solicitation. Journal of Public Economics, 114:29–35.
Crumpler, H. and Grossman, P. J. (2008). An experimental test of warm glow giving. Journal of
Public Economics, 92:1011–1021.
Dana, J., Cain, D., and Dawes, R. (2006). What you don’t know won’t hurt me: Costly (but quiet)
exit in dictator games. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100(2):193–
201.
De Vignemont, F. and Singer, T. (2006). The empathic brain: How, when and why? Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10(10):435–441.
DellaVigna, S., List, J., and Malmendier, U. (2012). Testing for altruism and social pressure in
charitable giving. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1):1–56.
Doyen, S., Klein, O., Pichon, C.-L., and Cleeremans, A. (2012). Behavioral priming: It’s all in the
mind, but whose mind. PloS one, 7(1):e29081.
Ellsworth, P. C. and Langer, E. (1976). Staring and approach: An interpretation of the stare as a
nonspecific activator. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33(1):117–122.
Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J., Savin, N., and Sefton, M. (1994). Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Games and Economic Behavior, 6(3):347–369.
Grice, H. (1957). Meaning. The Philosophical Review, pages 377–388.
Hamilton, W. (1964). The genetical evolution of social behaviour. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
7(1):1.
Hare, T., Camerer, C., Knoepfle, D., O’Doherty, J., and Rangel, A. (2010). Vale computations
in ventral medial prefrontal cortex during charitable decision making incorporate input from
regions involved in social cognition. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30(2):583–590.
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., and Smith, V. L. (1996). Social distance and other regarding behavior
in dictator games. American Economic Review, 86(3):653–660.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(2):443–478.
27

Landry, C. E., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., and Rupp, N. G. (2010). Is a donor in hand
better than two in the bush? evidence from a natural field experiment. American Economic
Review, 100(3):958–83.
Lazear, E. P., Malmendier, U., and Weber, R. A. (2012). Sorting in experiments with application
to social preferences. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1):136–163.
Levitt, S. and List, J. (2007). What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal
about the real world? The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2):153–174.
List, J. (2007). On the interpretation of giving in dictator games. Journal of Political Economy,
115(3):482–493.
Luccasen, A., Gronberg, T. J., Turocy, T. L., and Huyck, J. B. V. (2012). Are tax-financed
contributions to a public good completely crowded-out? experimental evidence. Journal of
Public Economcis, forthcoming.
Maniadis, Z., Tufano, F., and List, J. A. (2014a). One swallow doesn’t make a summer: New
evidence on anchoring effects. The American Economic Review, 104(1):277–290.
Maniadis, Z., Tufano, F., and List, J. A. (2014b). One swallow doesn’t make a summer: New
evidence on anchoring effects. The American Economic Review, 104(1):277–290.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., and Rodriguez, M. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244(4907):933.
O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999). Doing it now or later. The American Economic Review,
89(1):pp. 103–124.
Open Science Collaboration (2012). An open, large-scale, collaborative effort to estimate the reproducibility of psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6):657–660.
Ozdenoren, E., Salant, S. W., and Silverman, D. (2012). Willpower and the optimal control of
visceral urges. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(2):342–368.
Preston, S. D. and deWaal, F. B. M. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases. Behavior
and Brain Sciences, 25:1–72.
Roth, A. (1995). Bargaining Experiments. In Kagel, J. H. and Roth, A., editors, Handbook of
Experimental Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Small, D. A. and Loewenstein, G. (2003). Helping a victim or helping the; victim: Altruism and
identifiability. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 26:5–16.

28

Strotz, R. H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. Review of Economic Studies, 23(3):165–80.
Trachtman, H., Steinkruger, A., Wood, M., Wooster, A., Andreoni, J., Murphy, J. J., and Rao,
J. M. (2015). Fair weather avoidance: unpacking the costs and benefits of “avoiding the ask”.
Journal of the Economic Science Association, pages 1–7.
Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 46(1):35.
Xiao, E. and Houser, D. (2005). Emotion expression in human punishment behavior. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 102(20):7398–7401.

29

Appendix
To accompany J. Andreoni, J. Rao, and H. Trachtman,
“Avoiding The Ask: A Field Experiment
on Altruism, Empathy,and Charitable Giving”
for online publication only.

A

Verifying Normality of Placebo Traffic and Residuals

Figure A1: Total Placebo Traffic per 23-Minute Session (Doors 1, 2, and 3)

30

Figure A2: Quantiles of Total Placebo Traffic per 23-Minute Session against Quantiles of Normal
Distribution

Figure A3: Residuals from Regression of Total Placebo Traffic (Doors 1, 2, and 3) on Day and
Time Dummies

31

Figure A4: Quantiles of Residuals from Regression of Total Placebo Traffic (Doors 1, 2, and 3) on
Day and Time Dummies against Quantiles of Normal Distribution

Figure A5: Kernel Density Estimates of Total Bell-ringing Traffic (Doors 1 and 2)

32

B

Computation of the Traffic Multiplier (θ)
Table A1: Imputing Displacement Effects of Asking Treatments Using Placebo Traffic
Silent Opportunity
Door 1
Doors 1 & 2
(Opp1)
(Opp1&2)

Door 1
(Ask1)

Direct Ask
Doors 1 & 2
(Ask1&2)

Traffic in Asking Conditions as a Proportion of Traffic in Placebo
Door 1
1.1529
1.1989
0.7707
0.8528
Door 2
1.0779
0.9775
1.1116
0.9872
Total Doors 1&2
1.1163
1.0848
0.9351
0.9192
Imputing Percent Displacement of Traffic Under Four Assumptions
a. θ = 1 (assume traffic is the same in Bell-Ringing and Placebo)
Door 1
0.065
0.080
-0.099
-0.063
Door 2
0.032
-0.010
0.045
-0.005
Door 3
-0.097
-0.070
0.054
0.068
b. θ = 1.1163 (assume displacement is 0 in Opp1, Doors 1 and 2)
Door 1
0.016
0.034
-0.153
-0.115
Door 2
-0.016
-0.061
-0.002
-0.055
Door 3
0.000
0.027
0.154
0.169
c. θ = 1.1006 (assume displacement is 0 in Opp1 and Opp1&2, Doors 1 and 2)
Door 1
0.021
0.036
-0.131
-0.097
Door 2
-0.009
-0.048
0.004
-0.043
Door 3
-0.012
0.012
0.127
0.138
d. θ = 1.0848 (assume displacement is 0 in Opp1, Door 2)
Door 1
0.029
0.044
-0.120
Door 2
0.000
-0.039
0.012
Door 3
-0.029
-0.005
0.108

33

-0.086
-0.034
0.121

C

Traffic Regressions with Placebo Data and Several Multipliers
Table A2: OLS Regressions of Doors 1&2 Traffic on Bell-Ringing and Placebo Conditions†

VARIABLES
Opp1
Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2

Observations
R-squared
Mean of Placebo
Date × Time fixed effects

(1)
θ=1

(2)
θ = 1.05

(3)
θ = 1.1

(4)
θ = 1.15

31.56
(29.64)
22.88
(20.66)
-17.56
(24.72)
-22.44
(14.97)

17.99
(29.85)
9.387
(20.96)
-31.09
(23.97)
-36.32∗∗
(14.81)

4.425
(30.08)
-4.100
(21.33)
-44.62∗
(23.26)
-50.21∗∗∗
(14.77)

-9.144
(30.33)
-17.59
(21.77)
-58.16∗∗
(22.58)
-64.09∗∗∗
(14.86)

128
0.791
272.36
yes

128
0.795
285.98
yes

128
0.807
299.60
yes

128
0.822
313.21
yes

0.0961
0.868
0.229
0.813
0.222

0.0952
0.855
0.223
0.817
0.219

0.0959
0.842
0.219
0.820
0.217

0.0981
0.829
0.215
0.824
0.215

F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1
Opp1 = Opp1&2
Opp1 = Ask1
†

Bell-ringing traffic if 2009, θ×(placebo traffic) if 2013, with θ = 1.1.

Standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1

34

Table A3: Door 1 Traffic as Fraction of θ×Mean Doors 1&2 Traffic under Placebo†

VARIABLES
Opp1
Opp1&2
Ask1
Ask1&2
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Mean of Placebo
Date × Time fixed effects

(1)
θ=1

(2)
θ = 1.05

(3)
θ = 1.1

(4)
θ = 1.15

0.0869
(0.0559)
0.111
(0.0659)
-0.120∗
(0.0575)
-0.0736
(0.0436)
0.540∗∗∗
(0.0218)

0.0583
(0.0534)
0.0831
(0.0629)
-0.139∗∗
(0.0550)
-0.0942∗∗
(0.0413)
0.538∗∗∗
(0.0207)

0.0324
(0.0512)
0.0572
(0.0602)
-0.156∗∗∗
(0.0528)
-0.113∗∗
(0.0392)
0.537∗∗∗
(0.0196)

0.00871
(0.0492)
0.0336
(0.0577)
-0.172∗∗∗
(0.0507)
-0.130∗∗∗
(0.0373)
0.535∗∗∗
(0.0186)

128
0.689
.506
yes

128
0.691
.506
yes

128
0.701
.506
yes

128
0.718
.506
yes

0.0335
0.532
0.0184
0.780
0.0211

0.0325
0.527
0.0181
0.769
0.0214

0.0316
0.523
0.0177
0.758
0.0217

0.0308
0.518
0.0174
0.747
0.0220

F -tests, p values:
Opp1&2 = Ask1&2
Ask1 = Ask1&2
Opp1&2 = Ask1
Opp1 = Opp1&2
Opp1 = Ask1
†

Bell-ringing traffic if 2009, θ×(placebo traffic) if 2013

Standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
∗∗∗

p<0.01,

∗∗

p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1

35

D

Calculating the Welfare Impacts of Fundraising

Calculating the welfare effects of fundraising in our data will require a large number of assumptions.
These are presented in Table A4, with the notes spelling out the sources of the numbers and the
assumptions made. We focus on the condition that raised the most money, Ask 1&2, but the
calculations for the other conditions would be similar.
Table A4: The Elements Used to Calculate a Net Social Benefit of Fundraising in the Ask1&2
Condition.

Weights (freq. of each group)
Costs
1. Avg. donation of givers
2. Cost to avoid
3. Cost of saying no
a. Guilt, Image
b. Social pressure
Total Costs

Givers

Non-givers

Avoiders

Weighted
Sum

0.065a

0.77

0.165b

1.00

0.04e

0.08d
0.03f

0.04

0.11

0.124

1.20c

1.20

Benefits
1. Saying yes
a. Warm-glow
b. Image
2. Recipients

1.20µg

Total Benefits

y + 1.20µ

0

0

0.065y + 0.078µ

−1.20 + y + 1.20µ

-0.04

-0.11

0.065y + 0.078µ − 0.124

Net Benefits

y

a. Table 2: 19 givers and 304 passers per session.
b. Table 4: 50.21 Avoiders and 304 passersby per session.
c. Table 2: $90.87 raises per 92-minute block, or $90.87/4 = $22.71 per session, $22.71/19 = $1.20 per donor.
d. Time cost to avoid: $18/hr × 70f t/(4.4f t/sec × 3600sec/hr) = $0.08.
e. Non-avoider non-donors have cost less than $0.08. Assume costs are uniform over [0, 0.08].
f. Avoiders are saying no but not being asked, so cost is less than 0.04, so assume 0.03.
g. µ represents the utility to a recipient of $1 from the donor, after friction costs of the transfer. µ could be above
or below 1.

36

An important observation here is that a giver will give if the utility of donating exceeds the
utility of saying no, that is, if y − 1.20 ≥ −0.04. Rearranging, this means we will only observe
givers for whom y > 1.16.
The final entry in the table indicates that fundraising will generate a net benefit if 0.065y +
0.078µ − 0.124 ≥ 0. Rearranging this, a net benefit requires y ≥ 1.91 − 1.2µ.
This gives us two equations that must be satisfied for fundraising to improve welfare. Figure
A6 shows that both welfare improvements and welfare decreases are possible from this exercise.

Figure A6: The combinations of utility of saying yes, y, and the value of a $1 donation to the
recipient, µ, that result in welfare improving fundraising (shaded in blue) and welfare diminishing
fundraising (pink).

37

