NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM:
LIVING WITH ASYMMETRY
Maurice Obstfeld
Working Paper 17641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17641

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

Vladimir Asriyan provided expert research assistance. The International Growth Centre (London School
of Economics) and the Center for Equitable Growth (UC Berkeley) provided essential financial support.
This paper will be a chapter in an NBER conference volume to be entitled Globalization in an Age
of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century, edited by Robert C. Feenstra
and Alan M. Taylor. I am grateful for comments from participants at the Bank of England/NBER conference,
as well as my discussants, Takatoshi Ito and Adam Posen The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The International Monetary System: Living with Asymmetry
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 17641
December 2011
JEL No. F32,F33,F36,F42,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes current stresses in the two key areas that concerned the architects of the original
Bretton Woods system: international liquidity and exchange rate management. Despite radical changes
since World War II in the market context for liquidity and exchange rate concerns, they remain central
to discussions of international macroeconomic policy coordination. To take two prominent examples
of specific (and related) coordination problems, liquidity issues are paramount in strategies of national
self-insurance through foreign reserve accumulation, while recent attempts by emerging market economies
(EMEs) to limit real currency appreciation have relied heavily on nominal exchange rate management.
A central message is that a diverse set of potential asymmetries among sovereign member states provides
fertile ground for a variety of coordination failures. The paper goes on to discuss institutions and policies
that might mitigate some of these inefficiencies.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

The global economic crisis of 2007-09 generated calls to re-think the international
monetary system, and indeed, the entire institutional framework within which
international financial integration has advanced since the fall of the Bretton Woods
regime four decades ago. Gaps in national and international structures of financial
regulation were an obvious factor in causing the most severe global crisis since the Great
Depression; another chapter of this book addresses that topic. Interactions between
national macroeconomic policies also played a role, however, and have continued to
generate rancor between countries as a geographically uneven recovery from the crisis
has unfolded. The crisis and its aftermath exposed stresses in the world’s monetary
system, stresses that continue to be felt.1
This chapter analyzes current stresses in the two critical areas that concerned
the architects of the original Bretton Woods system: international liquidity and exchange
rate management.2 Despite radical changes since World War II in the market context for
liquidity and exchange rate concerns, they remain central to discussions of international
macroeconomic policy coordination. To take two prominent examples of specific (and
related) coordination problems, liquidity issues are paramount in strategies of national
self-insurance through foreign reserve accumulation, while recent attempts by emerging
market economies (EMEs) to limit real currency appreciation have relied heavily on
nominal exchange rate management. A key message – an obvious point, but one that
nonetheless is a basic starting place for predicting a range of tensions in any system of
1

The crisis brought home vividly the strong two-way interaction between macroeconomic policies and
financial-sector stability, demonstrating the adverse consequences of viewing macro and prudential policy
as somehow orthogonal to each other. While my discussion thus will focus on macroeconomic policies, I
will inevitably touch upon financial-stability considerations at several points.
2
In the present context, the relevant concept of “liquidity” is funding liquidity, in the sense of
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). For illuminating discussions of international coordination problems as
seen from the perspective of the IMF’s founding, look at Metzler, Triffin, and Haberler (1947).

1

international monetary arrangements – is that a diverse set of potential asymmetries
among sovereign member states provides fertile ground for a variety of coordination
failures.
Despite the progress of technology, financial innovation, globalization, and
development, sharp international asymmetries remain and so coordination failures with
recognizable analogs in earlier historical eras have emerged. Earlier efforts at
international monetary reform attempted to reconcile individual nations’ demands for
domestic economic stability with a smooth international adjustment mechanism. Those
attempts had limited success and even the most ambitious and successful of them – the
Bretton Woods system – crumbled after a quarter century under the weight of its internal
contradictions. The recent global crisis has highlighted once again the twenty-first
century incarnations of a range of time-honored systemic strains. Some of the problems
have become more severe, or problematic in new ways. The resulting pressures on
international economic relations define the current reform agenda.
The plan of this chapter is as follows. Section I sets out some dilemmas, old and
new, relating to the supply of international liquidity in settings where the demand for safe
foreign exchange reserves grows faster than the supply over the long term. The
discussion emphasizes the fiscal dimension of such “Triffin dilemmas.” Section II
describes how financial globalization has increased countries’ needs for international
liquidity, and sketches a structure for liquidity provision that would avoid negative
externalities inherent in self-insurance through large-scale reserve accumulation.
Section III turns to exchange rates and global imbalances, with emphasis on modern
versions of older coordination problems. Section IV concludes.

2

I. International Liquidity and Triffin Dilemmas

Like households and firms, governments need access to liquidity – readily salable assets
(including cash, of course) that may be spent on goods or (particularly in crisis situations)
on other assets. In a closed economy, the government (through its central bank) is always
capable, in principle, of providing for all liquidity needs. In the open economy this is no
longer the case. When the need is for a foreign currency, which the central bank cannot
print, gross holdings (reserves) and available foreign-currency credits constrain the
government’s powers, whether to provide liquidity to markets (as in a foreign exchange
intervention) or directly to market actors (as in an emergency loan to a bank).
Throughout history, international reserves have been an important source of
liquidity. What properties characterize an attractive international reserve asset? In the
broadest terms, the asset should be widely acceptable as payment at a predictable value,
even when liquidated without notice. But in what numeraire should value be measured?
Merely asking the question reveals that “predictability of value” cannot be an absolute
norm, unless the numeraire is a particular money – such as the international vehicle
currency, which the American dollar overwhelmingly remains – or a particular
commodity such as gold. In a world of significant departures from purchasing power
parity, maintenance of real value (in terms of a comprehensive consumption basket)
necessarily depends on the beholder. In a global economy, however, it may be more
relevant to refer to “liquidities” than “liquidity.” If several currencies are widely used
internationally as medium of exchange and/or unit of account, then it may well be

3

desirable for a country to hold liquidity in all of those currencies, regardless of moderate
changes in their relative values – a theme I explore further below.
Changes in value, moreover, can arise in different ways (again depending on the
numeraire against which value is reckoned). Exchange rate and inflation risk are obvious
possibilities, but so are default risk, sovereign or private, and political risk. Foreigncurrency U.S. bonds issued by the Carter Administration inherited the minimal (at the
time) default risk of conventional dollar-denominated Treasury obligations. On the other
hand, liquid dollar liabilities of London eurobanks (typically counted in reserve measures
if owned by monetary authorities) carry counterparty risk (absent an official bailout) but
not currency risk vis-à-vis the dollar. Again, safety is in the eye of the beholder.
Countries experiencing or contemplating political tensions with the U.S. – think of cases
involving Iran, Iraq, Russia, Libya, or Syria – might prefer the counterparty risk intrinsic
to a lightly regulated offshore center to the risk of a retaliatory freeze on assets held in the
United States.3
In the early post-World War II economy, with global capital markets dormant
and much of the industrial world in ruins, the main forms of international liquidity were
gross holdings of gold and U.S. dollars (and, to a lesser extent, sterling). Eichengreen
(2011) paints a vivid picture of this period of virtually unrivaled dollar dominance as a
reserve asset in the 1950s. That dominance persisted through the demise of the Bretton
Woods system in the early 1970s (and indeed far beyond), but not without increasing
tensions.

3

The possibility of holding dollar reserves in banks outside the U.S. shows that it is not necessarily correct
to assert that U.S. balance of payments deficits govern the growth rate of world dollar reserves. Of course,
liquidation of such offshore reserves by the non-U.S. holder will ultimately have the same effect on the
U.S. balance of payments as if the reserve assets liquidated were themselves held in the U.S.

4

Those tensions arose from one of a class of problems to which any reserve-asset
system is potentially susceptible: what may be called a Triffin dilemma. A Triffin
dilemma arises any time increasing demand for a reserve asset strains the ability of the
issuer to supply sufficient amounts while still credibly guaranteeing or stabilizing the
asset’s value in terms of an acceptable numeraire.

The Classic Triffin Dilemma: It’s Mostly Fiscal

Under the Bretton Woods arrangements, countries pegged their currencies to the U.S.
dollar, while the U.S. Treasury continued a longstanding commitment (dating from
January 31, 1934) to redeem dollars held by non-U.S. central banks and governments for
gold “for legitimate monetary purposes” at a price of $35 per ounce.4 While the Treasury
guarantee of the dollar gold link reassured foreign official dollar holders that their
reserves were “as good as gold,” it also led to at least two potential inconsistencies.
The first inconsistency was familiar from the classical gold standard. If world
output growth outpaced world gold production, the relative price of gold would likely
have to rise, implying secular deflation assuming a fixed market gold price of $35 per
ounce. Countries outside the U.S. could maintain their internal price levels by devaluing
against the dollar, but the U.S. itself did not have this option. For a time in the 1950s and
1960s, various fortuitous developments held off the deflationary threat; for example, the
development of new South African mining capacity, along with Russian gold sales

4

This commitment followed from the Gold Reserve Act of January 30, 1934 (Yeager 1976, p. 352). The
Act also gave licensed users in industry and the arts the right to buy gold at the official price. (The Treasury
added a ¼ percent transaction fee to the official price, and applied an identical discount to its gold
purchases.)

5

(which ended in 1966). Eventually, though, the conundrum was resolved in March 1968
through the two-tier gold market, which allowed the nonofficial gold price to float. It was
then that the U.S. currency, and currencies pegged to it, became fiat monies.5
The second inconsistency persisted even after the start of the two-tier market.
The official tier (by design) left intact the U.S. obligation to redeem foreign dollar
reserves for gold at the old official price. Once again, however, world output growth, and
the concomitant growth in world dollar reserves, seemed likely to outpace world gold
production. Were the U.S. Treasury to maintain a $35 buying price for an ounce of gold,
therefore, U.S. monetary gold stocks could not possibly increase. As famously observed
by Triffin (1960), the United States eventually would not have enough gold to redeem all
the official dollar reserves at par, even if it used up the entirety of its holdings. The
reserve currency issuer would become vulnerable to a run by central banks. The problem
might have bee manageable had countries not expected their own currencies to appreciate
against the dollar – it may be easier for a central bank to forgo a gain than to take a loss –
but by the late 1960s the feeling was growing that the dollar would need to be realigned
downward, as eventually happened in the August 1971 Smithsonian accord.
Figure 1 illustrates the trends. In 1948, the United States held most of the
world’s gold reserves. Through 1960, U.S. gold stocks shrank but remained above the
growing stock of dollar foreign reserves. And then the lines cross, seemingly making the
U.S. vulnerable to a Triffinesque run. (That event was marked by speculation in the

5

This stratagem did not, by itself, resolve the (more serious) problem that the dollar itself could be
devalued only through a concerted revaluation of foreign currencies (as occurred in August 1971, when the
U.S. coincidentally suspended gold sales to foreign monetary authorities). One solution suggested for the
Triffin problem before the gold window was closed was to raise the official dollar price of gold. Apart from
other drawbacks, a gold-price change would not automatically have devalued the dollar against other
currencies.

6

London gold market, causing the formation of the gold pool; see Eichengreen 2011.) The
preceding trends continue as world monetary gold stocks fail to keep pace with growing
global foreign exchange reserves. Figure 2 shows that in 1966 – the year that Russian
gold sales ceased (Cooper 1969, p. 580) – world gold production leveled off. In
retrospect, the abandonment of the single-tier gold market soon thereafter is not
surprising. World dollar reserves began a steep upward ascent in 1970 as heavy
speculation against the dollar set in. To defend the dollar parities of stronger currencies
such as the deutsche mark and Swiss franc, the issuing central banks undertook massive
dollar purchases. Global dollar reserves exploded – without reducing U.S. reserves,
absent gold redemptions.
On the surface, Triffin’s point seems obvious. But deeper reflection suggests
that the classic form of the Triffin dilemma was really a fiscal problem. After all, why
couldn’t the U.S. government have purchased more gold on the market, if need be, to pay
off foreign central banks? And what strain on the U.S. fiscal position would have
resulted?
At the end of 1970, the year before U.S. President Richard Nixon suspended
official gold convertibility (August 1971), U.S. gold reserves stood at $11 billion dollars,
while world nongold reserves outside the U.S. stood at $53 billion, leaving the U.S. with
$42 billion in potential official claims that it could not cover with its existing gold
holdings. The sum of $42 billion, however, amounted to 4.2 percent of that year’s GDP,
at a time when the gross U.S. federal debt stood at 28 percent of GDP – a large, but not
insuperable, fiscal cost (especially by today’s standards).

7

The preceding calculation, however, assumes that the Treasury could have
purchased the gold it needed in the world market at $35 per ounce. But this is surely not
the case. World gold production in 1970 (at the $35 price) amounted to $1.8 billion,
whereas total world monetary gold stocks outside the U.S. were $29 billion. The sum of
the new flow and the existing stock, roughly $31 billion, falls far short of what the U.S.
needed to cover its total $53 billion obligation (an obligation that exploded in the
succeeding years). Even if the U.S. Treasury had been able to purchase all the world’s
monetary gold and all current production without bidding up the world price – an
impossibility – it still would have been $11 billion short. It is clearly unlikely that the
Treasury would have been able to buy all the necessary gold at any finite price. Any
Treasury attempt to buy gold in private markets on any substantial scale would likely
have resulted in a gold price so high as to make the resulting fiscal burden unbearable.
This potential fiscal insolvency was the key danger inherent in the Triffin
problem. As Figure 1 shows, of course, the problem became even worse after 1970 as
speculative switches out of dollars into foreign currencies accelerated, and as even some
central banks exchanged dollars for U.S. gold. The result was the Nixon-Connally policy
package of August 1971, leading directly to the Smithsonian realignments in December
1971.

The Modern Triffin Dilemma

After the industrial countries moved to flexible exchange rates in 1973, world reserve
growth, surprisingly at the time, continued. Global nongold reserves have expanded (in

8

nominal dollar terms) in all but three of the years after 1971. Starting in 2002, and
powered by the demand and growth of emerging economies, global reserves have grown
at double digit rates in every year but one (2008, when the yearly growth rate was 9.7
percent). But between 1972 and 1980, global reserves likewise grew at double-digit rates
in all but one year. Motivations for this continuing global demand for international
liquidity have been widely discussed in the academic literature. As I take up in the next
section, one can make a strong case that the evolution of world capital markets over
recent decades has made the potential need for swift and perhaps massive key currency
liquidity support – whether from reserves or some other source – much more pressing
today than it was even in the days of generalized fixed exchange rates.
Nor has the basic Triffin paradox disappeared. The emergence of a modern
species of Triffin dilemma has been diagnosed most clearly by Farhi, Gourinchas, and
Rey (2011). It is a subtler problem than the Bretton Woods version, because there is no
longer a reserve-center promise to redeem liabilities at a fixed price in terms of some
scarce numeraire. It is a Triffin problem nonetheless because the underlying asymmetric
dynamics of global growth guarantee that eventually, the reserve system will become
unsustainable. Moreover, the problem remains even in a multipolar world with several
reserve currencies.6
The problem is not simply that, under floating exchange rates, reserves are subject
to depreciation risk: reserve holders have proved willing to tolerate exchange-rate
fluctuations, provided there is not a continuing trend of sudden depreciations. Thus, for
example, foreign accumulation of dollar reserve claims on the U.S. does not inherently
6

The general problem had already been discerned by some policymakers in connection with the
internationalization of the deutsche mark and yen (see Henning 1994, p. 317).

9

require large U.S. current account deficits, which might predict significant future dollar
devaluation. Dollar reserve growth may be primarily a result of gross capital outflows
from the U.S., as was true during the mid-1960s (when the U.S. had a sizable trade
surplus with trading partners and was still a net foreign creditor).
The modern-day Triffin problem resides instead in the nature of the securities
central banks hold as reserves. A key feature of a reserve asset is that it is liquid and
predictable in value. True, exchange rate fluctuations are not predictable – but for a
country experiencing a localized crisis, any movement of the domestic currency against
major foreign reserve currencies is likely to be downward. And the dollar, at least, has
shown a safe-haven tendency to appreciate in global crises, which helps explain its
attractiveness as a reserve asset (Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot 2010).7
Thus, central banks have gravitated toward the government liabilities of highly
creditworthy countries – or other assets, such as U.S. agency securities, believed likely to
come under the protection of a government guarantee. Such assets could include certain
liabilities of systemically important financial institutions in the creditworthy advanced
countries.
So global reserve growth requires the ongoing issuance of gross government debt.
This requires, in turn, that the government run continuing deficits, or that it issue debt to
acquire assets likely to be inherently riskier than the corresponding liabilities. Just as in
the classic Triffin dilemma, global reserve growth is largely driven by deficits – not
national balance of payments deficits, but government deficits.8

7

For alternative models of the dollar’s international role, see Canzoneri, Cumby, Diba, and López-Salido
(2010) and Maggiori (2011).
8
An analogous problem confronted Federal Reserve policymakers in 2000-01 as they contemplated the
possibility of a disappearing U.S. federal debt. As Greenspan (2007, p. 214) puts it:

10

The additional dynamic element driving the modern-day dilemma is based on two
asymmetries. First, the emerging and developing world is growing more quickly than the
more credit-worthy industrial world. As Figure 3 shows, in 2009 the total GDP of the
emerging and developing world (measured at PPP, and including newly-industrialized
Asia) overtook that of the advanced economies, and the IMF predicts that the advanced
economies will fall farther behind over time. The second asymmetry is that the main
advanced countries remain more creditworthy on average than the poorer countries. The
traditionally rich countries have been able to borrow more easily on world capital
markets, and have therefore have had less need for international reserves than countries
that are vulnerable to sudden stops.9 Furthermore, they are less prone to undertake
foreign exchange intervention, and have less capacity to sterilize. Together, these
asymmetries imply that that the demand for rich-country government debt is likely to
outstrip what can be supplied in the way of safe government debt without bringing the

My colleagues at the FOMC seemed a bit disoriented too. In our late-January meeting,
we spent hours trying to imagine how the Fed would operate in a brave new world of minimal
federal debt. Of course, shedding the debt burden would be a happy development for our country,
but it would nevertheless pose a big dilemma for the Fed. Our primary lever of monetary policy
was buying and selling treasury securities -- Uncle Sam’s IOUs. But as the debt was paid down,
those securities would grow scarce, leaving the Fed in need of a new set of assets to effect
monetary policy. For nearly a year, senior Fed economists and traders had been exploring the
issue of what other assets we might buy and sell.
A result was a dense 380-page study that plopped on our desks in January [of 2001]. The good
news was that we weren’t going out of business; the bad news was that nothing could really match
the treasuries market in size, liquidity, and freedom from risk. To conduct monetary policy, the
report concluded, the Fed would have to learn to manage a complex portfolio of municipal bonds,
bonds issued by foreign governments, mortgage-backed securities, auctioned discount-window
credits, and other debt instruments. It was a daunting prospect. “I feel kind of like Alice in
Wonderland,” Cathy Minehan, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, had said
when the issue first came up, and we all knew what she meant. The very fact of the discussion
showed how profoundly and rapidly we thought the economic landscape might change.
Alas, “the economic landscape” did “profoundly and rapidly” change, but in a way that produced the worst
of both worlds: huge U.S. deficits and debt, coupled with big holdings of exotic securities on the Fed’s
balance sheet.
9
Of course, recent sovereign debt problems in some of the richer countries show the strains on even
advanced-country public finances following the 2007-09 crisis.

11

safety of that debt into question. Figure 4 gives a rough indication of the trend to date.
How will the demand for reserves be satisfied if the richer countries actually succeed in
the fiscal consolidation to which they currently aspire?10
A number of developments could head off this unstable dynamic, but might not
come into effect soon enough. First, countries’ demand for reserves might level off, with
some national wealth shunted into sovereign wealth funds willing to invest in riskier
assets. To the extent that reserve demand is driven by the size of the financial system and
the latter’s growth rate is high, however, strong reserve growth is likely to continue.
Second, growth could decelerate in the emerging and developing world or accelerate in
the currently rich countries. That development seems unlikely in view of the fiscal and
other burdens that currently afflict much of the industrial world. Finally, some major and
swiftly growing emerging markets could graduate in terms of their creditworthiness,
reducing their demand for reserves and, potentially, making them suppliers of reserve
assets. China (currently lacking a fully convertible currency) is the most likely candidate,
but this very observation highlights the significant obstacles to such a development. Thus,
the new incarnation of the Triffin dilemma is likely to bedevil the current system of
international liquidity provision for some time, absent reforms. Danger signs are already
appearing. As the sovereign debts of richer countries have come under pressure, it is no
surprise to see the central banks of emerging economies increasing their gold purchases.

10

Figure 4 graphs general gross government debt growth in the U.S. and euro area against world nongold
reserves. General government debt overstates the debt available for reserve growth, since central
government debt is preferred. In addition, much euro zone central government debt would be viewed as
riskier than, say, German debt lately, and therefore not ideal for reserve holders.

12

The problem is still mostly fiscal. But then, so are the broader questions
concerning the adequacy of international liquidity in a world without a true outside
reserve asset such as gold. I now turn to those questions.

II. Reforming the Liquidity System

The demise of generalized fixed exchange rates in 1973 allowed a solution to the openeconomy macroeconomic trilemma based on flexible exchange rates, domestic monetary
autonomy, and financial-account liberalization (Obstfeld and Taylor 2004). The process
started in the 1970s in the industrial countries. With a lag, and with considerable
individual heterogeneity, the emerging market economies have started to follow down
this path. Domestic financial liberalization has gone hand in hand with the process of
external opening, with strong channels of two-way causation driving the overall freeing
of finance, domestic and international alike. Whether and how this process will continue
in light of the recent global crisis is a major open question.
The main trend raising the level of financial fragility in the world economy,
and thereby liquidity needs, has been financial globalization, which has brought with it a
rapid expansion of gross international asset positions. The latter expansion has been
driven by a range of factors, including expanded risk sharing, financial deepening, and,
less benignly, regulatory and tax arbitrage. At a point in time, a country’s net
international investment position defines the gap that intertemporal solvency dictates
between the present values of expenditure and income. But it is the nature of a country’s
gross positions that determines its vulnerability to financial crisis – just as is the case for

13

individual economic actors. Moreover, given the current magnitude of gross external
asset and liability positions, asymmetric valuation changes can easily imply changes in
net assets that overwhelm the smaller flow increments due to the current account balance.
Figure 5 illustrates the trend in gross external assets for selected countries,
plotting the ratio (Assets + Liabilities)/GDP through 2007 (with data from the update of
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007). Particularly for relatively open industrial countries that
are also financial centers, the multiplication of gross external positions has been extreme.
In such cases, a current account deficit may be a consequence of financial excess, being
associated with a domestic credit boom, but it is not itself the prime locus of financial
vulnerability. The main threat is that of a balance-sheet crisis. Thus, while Ireland had an
external deficit in the run-up to the crisis, banks in surplus countries like Switzerland and
Germany landed in trouble – dragging their governments along with them – because of
toxic foreign assets on their balance sheets.
Figure 6 shows that for emerging and developing countries, gross acquisitions of
claims on advanced countries, whether as reserves or as nonreserve (mainly privatesector) claims, far exceed the net current account balance, a reflection of copious gross
inflows from the industrial world. These flows are cumulating to economically significant
shares of industrial country GDP: In 2007 alone, the annual flow amounted to 6 percent
of industrial country GDP. The rapid GDP growth of the poorer countries is not matched
by a commensurate importance in world financial markets, but the latter is certainly

14

growing, and doing so relative to the shrinking relative scale of the advanced
economies.11
Through their growing gross asset positions, emerging and developing countries,
especially the EMEs, are increasingly important players in financial globalization, and
their financial stability is becoming increasingly tied to that of the global financial
system. Yet they remain more vulnerable to sudden stops in foreign lending than are most
of the advanced countries – notwithstanding the sudden emergence of sovereign debt
problems in some of the latter. All the while, financial channels of contagious
transmission have expanded along with gross positions. If policymakers wish to
restructure the international liquidity system so as to enhance financial stability, these
facts are central considerations.

The Role of Global Last Resort Lending

In the late 1970s, the United Kingdom, Italy, Spain, and Portugal all negotiated standby
arrangements with the IMF. Between Portugal’s last approach to the Fund in 1983 and
Iceland’s in 2008, no industrial country requested Fund resources for balance of
payments support – the Fund’s client base came to be viewed as consisting exclusively of
developing and emerging economies. By the 1990s and 2000s, the high-income countries
appeared to be quite creditworthy, unlikely ever to need Fund resources or even to need
to use large volumes of international reserves. At the same time, the central banks of

11

The figure understates the trend, because the IMF definition of “advanced economies” includes Taiwan,
Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore. This labeling both reduces the IMF’s measures of emerging and
developing country financial flows, and inflates its measure of advanced country GDP.

15

high-income countries were perceived to be well equipped, and willing, to act as lastresort lenders if their home financial systems got into trouble.
Events after August 2007 have changed the picture, highlighting the more
complex and in some respects more dangerous landscape that financial globalization has
produced. Banks throughout the world, and especially in rich Europe, faced urgent needs
for foreign-currency liquidity – liquidity that their home central banks could not create by
the stroke of a pen (or click of a mouse). The result was the creation of a complex
network of central bank swap lines, starting with the U.S. Federal Reserve’s lines to the
ECB and SNB in December 2007.12 Eventually that facility became unlimited in size.
Furthermore, following Iceland’s collapse, the Greek, Irish, and Portuguese governments
suffered funding crises that have been managed so far only with financial support from
the EU, ECB, and IMF. Both Spain and Italy are on the verge of needing such external
support as of this writing, and even France is under pressure. These advanced-country
crises reflected various prior problems, such as garden-variety fiscal improvidence (the
Greek scenario) and government bailout of a collapsed banking system (the primary
culprit for Ireland). But in all cases, globalized financial markets fueled easier access to
large volumes of foreign credit. Furthermore, globalization allowed the sovereign risks to
spread through the European and global banking and shadow banking networks, in some
cases increasing bailout risks and thereby weakening sovereigns further.
What have we learned? There are at least two major lessons.

12

The precedent for such arrangements is the network of reciprocal central bank credits set up in the early
1960s at the urging of U.S. Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon and Undersecretary for Monetary Affairs
Robert Roosa. The Dillon-Roosa swaps, however, were intended to support foreign exchange intervention
for purposes of maintaining par values against the U.S. dollar. See Hirsch (1969, Chapter 11).

16

First, IMF facilities alone, even after being augmented in 2009, remain far below
the magnitudes that rich countries with large public debts might need to fend of selffulfilling bond-market attacks. Furthermore, the speed and flexibility of IMF remains
limited, given the openness of advanced countries to high-speed global financial markets.
The large gross asset liability positions of the advanced countries – think of the external
debts of Ireland, Iceland, or Switzerland, even though the last is a huge international
creditor – have the potential to infect the government balance sheet, resulting in fiscal
crisis. The assets of these countries’ banking systems are in a substantial number of cases
substantial multiples of GDP. While the Irish crisis has been called a crisis of the euro
zone – and adherence to a fixed exchange rate is indeed problematic for Ireland – the
Irish crisis is even more a crisis of globalized finance. Even in cases where sovereign
debt problems arise from garden-variety government profligacy, as in Greece, globalized
finance promotes a potentially wide exposure of financial institutions to the problem, as
noted earlier.
Second, a key feature of a globalized multiple-currency world is that traditional
lenders of last resort (the central banks) are ill equipped to support the needs of their
swollen financial sectors, even when private-sector actors seek to maintain putative
hedges on their foreign-currency exposure. For example, European banks in 2007 and
2008 were big holders of U.S. mortgage-backed securities, these assets being funded by
short-term dollar borrowing. Credit market disruptions sharply raised the cost of rolling
over short-term dollar credits. At the same time, the costs of swapping euros for dollars to
repay dollar credits rose far beyond what covered interest parity would imply. While the
ECB, for example, could freely print euros and lend them to banks, its ability to supply

17

dollars out of reserves was much more limited (although some national central banks did
so). The ECB itself could have borrowed dollars and intervened in spot and forward
exchange markets, at the risk of quasi-fiscal costs – costs that would be higher today,
now that the finances of even some larger euro zone governments are being questioned
by the bond markets. In the circumstances, it was much more expedient to be able to
borrow dollars directly from the Fed, which in any case needed to expand its balance
sheet to meet a heightened global demand for dollar liquidity.13 Effectively, the Fed
became an international last-resort lender in dollars – in the absence of which, European
banks might have had to unload hard-to-sell assets, worsening fire-sale dynamics and
weakening their own capital. Of course, the Fed also lent heavily, and directly, to the
U.S. affiliates of foreign banks when they had eligible collateral. At the same time, other
central banks – including the ECB, SNB, BOJ, Sveriges Riksbank – eventually stepped
up as global last-resort lenders in their own currencies.
As of the start of the global crisis in 2007, the usefulness of foreign-currency lastresort lending to financial institutions was familiar from the EME experience – see
Jeanne and Wyplosz (2003) and Calvo (2006) for insightful analyses. But it was less
obviously a first-order issue for mature economies, where the main use of foreign
exchange reserves (if any) was widely considered to be in cases of foreign exchange
intervention. The Fed has maintained swap facilities throughout the euro zone debt crisis
starting in the spring of 2010.

13

The Fed was conveniently able to shift any credit risk of direct last-resort lending onto the ECB. On the
background for the swap network and its effects, see, for example, McGuire and von Peter (2009),
Goldberg, Kennedy, and Miu (2010), and Rose and Spiegel (2011). While controversy remains, most
empirical researchers have concluded that the swap arrangements were effective in reducing credit market
disruptions,

18

The expansion of gross currency-denominated asset positions, given the
inevitable gaps in global as well as domestic prudential oversight, suggests a demand for
global lenders – to governments as well as central banks and, through them, to the private
financial sector – that is greater than ever before.

Self-Insurance through Reserve Accumulation

Of course, growing financial vulnerability is part of the reason that the emerging and
developing nations have accumulated high volumes of precautionary, hard-currency
foreign exchange reserves – a trend I noted above, and which shows no sign of abating.
Figure 7 illustrates that the resulting aggregate reserve stock, mostly U.S. dollars and
euros, has now reached the neighborhood of one-third of the holders’ collective GDP,
having risen from about 10 percent in 1990, when group GDP was much smaller than it is
today.
This apparent security does not come without costs, both for individual reserveholding countries and for international monetary stability. For the holders, the great
attraction of reserves is that they provide instantaneous and unconditional liquidity. But
even at the level of the individual holder, there are downsides: reserves may come at a
high quasi-fiscal cost (costs also incurred if reserves should depreciate against domestic
currency), and these costs may be incurred even if the marginal liquidity value of the
reserves is illusory (because the process of reserve acquisition generated an equal shortterm private foreign-currency debt as an offsetting counterpart on the national balance
sheet). Sterilization of reserve flows may lead to financial repression costs.

19

Beyond these individual costs, however, national self-insurance through holdings
of gross foreign reserves carries significant potential systemic costs. Reserve
accumulation may influence interest rates in reserve centers – helping to fuel
international resentments about “exorbitant privilege” that often fail to recognize the root
of the problem in systemic congestion. Moreover, such interest-rate effects can
complicate the task of monetary policy in the reserve-center country. Similarly, official
portfolio shifts between different currencies, or between asset classes within currency
areas (think of Chinese transactions in euro zone sovereign debt), alter exchange rates
and bond prices, possibly in destabilizing ways.
Individual countries’ reserve gains may be strategic complements, in the sense
that one country’s gains lower the relative perceived financial stability of its neighbors, in
turn raising their marginal benefit from reserve accumulation. In that case, a noncooperative equilibrium will entail excessive accumulation by all. A further coordination
problem arises when countries compete to keep their currencies weak and limit domestic
demand, so as to generate current account surpluses.14 Finally, in a global crisis, a
country may exacerbate problems elsewhere when it draws on its reserves. For example,
withdrawals of bank deposits in a foreign center may worsen liquidity problems there.
A final negative systemic externality is related to the modern-day Triffin dilemma
of Farhi, Gourinchas, and Rey, which was described above. Each country’s purchase of
more reserves may push other demanders into purchasing marginally riskier assets, or
render their existing reserve holdings marginally more risky.

14

Note, however, that countries need not have current account surpluses to gain reserves if they can attract
private financial inflows that exceed their current account deficits.

20

The basic point is that actions that enhance the apparent financial resilience of the
individual country may well, at the same time, undermine that of the international
financial system as a whole. The fallacy of composition applies in the domain of
international liquidity, just as it does in discussions of the macroprudential approach to
domestic financial supervision.
Notwithstanding these drawbacks, emerging and developing economies are likely
to continue accumulating reserves. And there is no doubt, despite the seeming ambiguity
of formal econometric evidence, that these countries found reserves to be useful in the
crisis.15 Yet the crisis also illustrated systemic problems of reserve accumulation, as
described earlier. Many countries were unwilling to run down their reserves sharply,
precisely because smaller reserves might signal financial weakness compared with
neighboring economies (see the related discussion of Aizenman and Sun 2009). Korea,
for example, was reluctant to let its reserves to fall too low, and thus drew on its $30
billion swap line from the Fed (which itself may have had an important signaling effect)
despite substantially larger remaining reserve holdings.
To avoid losing too many reserves, EMEs found creative ways to stretch them.
Several engaged in nonstandard foreign exchange operations, which effectively targeted
specific financial vulnerabilities implied by private foreign exchange positions, while
allowing the general demand for foreign exchange by relatively nonsystemic agents to go
unsatisfied (see Ishi, Stone, and Yehoue 2009 and, on Brazil, Stone, Walker, and Yasui
2009). For example, rather than injecting reserves generally into the market to counteract
domestic capital flight and the resulting currency depreciation, some authorities provided
foreign exchange at bargain rates to strategic banks and corporations with short-term
15

A recent study pointing to a positive role for reserves is Dominguez, Hashimoto, and Ito (2011).

21

foreign-currency debts. To return to the Korean example once again, the country was able
to tolerate extensive won depreciation during the global crisis without the widespread
financial distress characteristic of earlier crashes.16

The IMF and Global Liquidity

In principle, a world central bank, as envisioned by Keynes in his original blueprint for
an international “Clearing Union,” would be in a position to provide liquidity on a global
basis to troubled financial institutions throughout the world – as well as directly to
troubled sovereigns, were it not bound by statutory prohibitions against such lending, as
the ECB is. Indeed, there is no logical reason why a world central bank would be limited
to the issuance and management of a single currency. In an ideal world, an omniscient
and benevolent central bank could deal in a multiplicity of different national currencies,
allowing exchange rates to float or managing them to whatever degree was optimal. From
a political standpoint, of course, the idea is completely infeasible.
The IMF is the version of Keynes’s ambitious plan that proved politically
feasible, and its capacities, while quite useful and arguably essential (see Fischer 1999
and Goodhart 1999), remain severely limited. Historically, the Fund has truly been the
last resort for sovereigns, typically when it is too late to fend off a crisis, and subject to
conditionality that sometimes strengthens a government’s hand against domestic
opposition, but that also may contribute to political and social unrest. The Fund lends

16

The practice has an analog in the classic debate over whether lenders of last resort should lend into the
market or directly to individual institutions. The collateral benefit of the latter approach in the case of
foreign-currency operations is the benefit to exporters of a large depreciation. For conceptual discussions
see Jeanne and Wyplosz (2003) and Calvo (2006).

22

exclusively to governments, and not directly to central banks or financial institutions, so
as currently designed, it is completely unsuitable for undertaking the type of crisis
lending to banks and other financial actors that proved so important during the global
crisis. Nor can it mimic the ECB’s role in lending to euro zone banks during that
currency area’s crisis.
True, the Fund’s resources increased significantly in 2009. Its flexibility to lend
them quickly based on ex ante qualification, and with relaxed conditionality, was
extended through the Flexible and Precautionary Credit Lines. But the FCL and PCL
have been little more successful than earlier related initiatives. Among other problems,
countries seem to fear stigmatization, both from approaching the Fund to request a credit
line and from the possibility that the IMF Executive Board fails to renew it down the
road. Thus, the uptake on these facilities has been very limited: Mexico, Poland, and
Colombia for the FCL, and only Macedonia for the PCL. In November 2011 the Fund
announced replacement of the PCL by a new facility, the Precautionary and Liquidity
Line (PLL), which extends the PCL in allowing a Fund member to apply for assistance
even if it has an actual crisis at the time the line is approved (rather than just a potential
crisis as the PCL required).
One alternative proposal put forward by IMF staff is for a Global Stabilization
Mechanism (GSM), which could allow the Fund to respond proactively with aid offers
once a systemic event is identified by the Executive Board (see International Monetary
Fund 2010). However, this approach remains controversial – as do related proposals for
the domestic financial sphere that are based on a systemic trigger – and at this stage there
are several versions of GSM on the table, the details of which differ considerably. None

23

seems likely to survive. An obvious problem area concerns the precise criteria under
which the Fund would call a systemic event, and the response of markets in anticipation
of such a declaration.
A prominent mode through which the IMF can augment global liquidity is
through the issuance of the Special Drawing Right (SDR). But the SDR is not currently
used for private transactions, and considerable obstacles impede development of a private
SDR market (Eichengreen 2011). Notwithstanding the SDR’s non-currency status, some
(for example, Zhou 2009) have argued for an international reserve system centered
primarily on the SDR rather than the U.S. dollar. Such recent calls echo the Second
Amendment to the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, which in 1978 set the ambitious goal of
making the SDR the “principal reserve asset in the international monetary system.”
The SDR was launched on January 1, 1970 after long international negotiations
motivated by two main concerns. First, policymakers feared that U.S. balance of
payments deficits might not, in the long run, provide sufficient international liquidity to
meet the demands of a growing world economy. Second, policymakers feared that the
dollar-based gold exchange standard would experience increasing instability because of
the Triffin dilemma. The SDR, characterized at the time as “paper gold,” was designed as
a limited form of unconditional liquidity, which governments could trade to other
governments in exchange for hard-currency reserves.17
Until the recent big allocation of August and September 2009 following the onset
of the global crisis, SDR allocations were infrequent, taking place only over 1970-72 and
1979-81. None of these allocations, not even the most recent one, has pushed the total

17

For accounts of the thinking behind the SDR’s birth, and its early history, see Cumby (1983), Solomon
(1996), and Boughton (2011).

24

stock of SDRs to be a large fraction of global foreign exchange reserves. Figure 8
illustrates the numbers, based on data in the IMF’s International Financial Statistics.
The stock of SDRs has never exceeded about 6 percent of global reserves, and
that global figure declined steadily until 2009 following the 1979-81 allocation. On the
eve of the crisis SDRs were less than 0.5 percent of global reserves, and an even smaller
percentage of emerging and developing country reserves. In April 2009 the IMF allocated
USD 250 billion worth of SDRs as a response to the global crisis, and a further USD 34
billion in a September 2009 special allocation to endow members that had never received
allocations. Except for such extraordinary allocations, SDR allocations are proportional
to IMF quotas, so as to achieve an internationally balanced increase in world reserves.
Thus, the bulk goes to the advanced economies (which also hold much lower stocks of
foreign exchange reserves). Even the nominally large 2009 allocations restored the SDR
share in global and poorer-country reserves only to the levels of the late 1980s (about 2
percent for the latter group).
The SDR framework is in principle a form of reserve pooling. Thus, the prospects
of replacing actual reserve currencies such as the dollar and euro with SDRs are
inherently limited: Because SDRs have no private use and function only as claims on the
reserve pool, they cannot themselves supplant the reserve pool. 18
While the SDR therefore could not become the world’s principal reserve asset
under current arrangements, proposals for a “substitution account” are designed to

18

As a technical matter, SDRs can be exchanged for dollars not only with non-U.S. dollar holders, but also
with the U.S. Treasury, which obtains the dollars from the Fed in exchange for dollar-denominated
Treasury obligations called SDR Certificates. (The Fed will routinely sterilize such money creation, and all
currency risk resides with the Treasury.) However, it is unlikely that the Treasury and Fed would be willing
to undertake such exchanges in the amounts that would be required were SDRs to become the dominant
international reserve asset.

25

replace currency reserves with SDRs on a large scale. Such ideas were debated in 197980, ultimately to no avail, but they have resurfaced recently (for example, Kenen 2010).
Figure 8 shows that substitution would have to be on a huge scale to displace a
substantial portion of currency reserves.
Under a substitution scheme, a country such as China might transfer some of its
dollar reserves to the IMF, receiving SDRs of equal current value in return. (These SDRs
would have to be created outside the usual allocation process, of course.) Two portfolio
shifts occur as a result. China is now long SDRS, and might (or might not) want to
readjust its portfolio in private markets. Presumably, its degree of participation in the
scheme will already reflect its diversification goals. More importantly, the IMF is short
SDRs and long on U.S. dollars, and the substitution account’s solvency is at risk if the
dollar depreciates. China has passed some of its substantial currency risk to the IMF.
Which countries will compensate the IMF for portfolio losses if the dollar
declines against the SDR? How will the IMF finance “exorbitant privilege” discrepancies
between the interest earned on its dollars and that paid on its new SDR liabilities? In the
last discussions of 1979-80, some countries involved thought the U.S. should bear the
bulk of the costs, but the U.S. was unwilling and others refused to step in. Poorer
countries were reluctant to see the IMF use its gold holdings to support the account – they
hoped gold sales might instead subsidize borrowing by poorer countries. So the
negotiations failed. It is unlikely that the U.S. would be more willing today, and even less
so that the euro zone countries – which lack a centralized fiscal organ – would be willing
to underwrite a euro/SDR substitution account.

26

Once again, the fiscal dimension is central. The absence of a fiscal authority at the
global level creates a difficult coordination problem for a centralized and coordinated
move to an SDR-based system, even though that system might confer some stability
advantages (for example, by discouraging large official portfolio shifts).19

Globalized Last-Resort Lending

The IMF’s traditional function of lending to sovereign governments leaves it ill equipped
for the more direct financial-market interventions traditionally associated with domestic
lenders of last resort. Even the newer more flexible lending facilities, which could
channel the needed resources through governments in principle, are likely to involve time
delays and informational frictions. Furthermore, the known quantitative limits of such
facilities can be an obstacle to reassuring markets that the authorities are capable of
intervening with overwhelming force. It is no accident that the Federal Reserve found it
useful to remove the quantitative limits on some of its swap lines as the 2007-09 crisis
unfolded.
A different approach would institutionalize the network of swap lines between
central banks that arose in an ad hoc way during the 2007-09 crisis Operationally,
national central banks could extend the swap lines to a central international institution
such as the IMF or (as some central bankers might prefer) the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS). Other central banks, when in need of foreign currency to support
stressed financial sectors, would then be able to draw on the swaps, just as the ECB
obtained dollars from the Fed under the recent arrangements. Such a system could be
19

For an account of the 1979-80 negotiations over a substitution account, see Boughton (2001, pp. 936-43).

27

based on the SDR, though it need not be. Truman (2008, 2010) has proposed modifying
existing rules to allow countries directly to present SDRs to central banks in return for the
currencies the banks issue. Obstfeld (2009) and Farhi, Gourinchas, and Rey (2011)
suggest systems based on explicit credit lines.
Unlike the recent improvised swap network, a permanent system would be
predictable rather than ad hoc and all countries, not just a select few, would have access.
But the system would avoid the externalities inherent in large-scale self-insurance
through reserve accumulation. For example, there would be no scope for official switches
between reserve currencies in order to manage currency risk. Nor would reserve demands
depress the interest rates of reserve issuers.
The terms of access to the credit network could be conditional. For example,
participating central banks might be required to satisfy criteria of independence and
supervisory diligence. A variable participation fee might cover potential financial losses,
in analogy to the charge Prasad (2011) has suggested for his proposed liquidity insurance
pool. The fee could be structured so as to encourage sound macroeconomic and financial
policies – for example, rising in the face of an unusual and apparently unjustified credit
boom. Staff from the IMF, the BIS, or even from participating central banks could be
deployed to carry out the necessary surveillance. Credit limits might also be structured so
as to alter incentives.
Both graduated participation terms and international surveillance offer partial
brakes on moral hazard – the risk that expanded liquidity facilities encourage key actors
in the financial system to behave more imprudently than they would in the absence of a

28

safety net. But moral hazard could be limited further by complementary reforms that
target government incentives.
There are two main ways in which enhanced international liquidity could
encourage governments toward actions with negative global externalities: by promoting
excessive fiscal deficits (even outside of currency unions) and lax prudential oversight of
domestic private-sector finance. Governments would be better motivated to limit deficits
if any swap network participation fee depended on fiscal variables, as in Prasad’s (2011)
proposal. But more generally, and regardless of the state of international liquidity
arrangements, predictable means of restructuring sovereign debts, even the debts of
mature economies, can push private incentives into better alignment with society’s
interests. Such mechanisms can limit excessive government borrowing through rising
marginal costs, but, as Charles Goodhart stresses in his chapter, they also may improve
the incentives of the creditor-country governments whose financial institutions may be
bankrolling profligate governments (as well as those of the institutions themselves).
If governments wish for institutionalized sovereign restructuring mechanisms
to be credible, however, they should complement them with limits on the banking
sector’s unhedged exposure to risky sovereign debts. Such limits remain difficult to
conceive in the euro zone in the absence of a common “safe” euro area bond, simply
because of the big role sovereign bonds play as collateral.
Mandatory subscription to a set of common regulatory standards and
procedures would serve to limit individual governments’ discretion in prudential
oversight. These norms would more effectively limit private-sector risk seeking if they
encompassed guidelines on institutional size – so as to mitigate the “too big to fail”

29

problem – as well as predictable and credible resolution procedures for systemically
important financial institutions, including resolutions involving multiple governments. As
noted above, implementation of these undertakings could be subject to international
surveillance, with transgressions resulting in higher participation fees.
A general lesson of recent experience is that a system for counteracting
illiquidity needs to account for the possibility that the underlying cause of market panic is
insolvency. There is no uniquely defined dividing line between the two – in no small part
because market perceptions are a key driver of borrowing costs and, thus, of the ability to
service debt – but there will clearly be cases in which state or institutional bankruptcy
becomes inevitable.
The possibility of insolvencies raises the potential fiscal cost any international
arrangements to enhance global liquidity. As Goodhart (1999) has stressed, the backing
for the lender of last resort in cases of insolvency comes from the fiscal authorities. Thus,
as has been painfully evident during the euro zone’s debt crisis, collective action to
promote financial stability must be financed through collective action in the fiscal
sphere.20 Unfortunately, in today’s world of huge banking sectors there also can come a
point at which insolvency problems become so big that they bring the creditworthiness
even of governments into question – at which point it may well be that the only
remaining resort is again the central bank’s printing press.

20

See the further discussion in Obstfeld (2011).

30

III. Exchange Rates and Global Imbalances

The final demise of the Bretton Woods system in 1973 took the form of a disorderly
retreat to floating exchange rates among the main industrial countries. Despite the
unplanned and indeed initially unintended nature of the regime change, a number of
eminent economists such as Milton Friedman and Harry G. Johnson had long espoused
floating rates as a means of reconciling national policy sovereignty with the benefits of
global economic integration. To a considerable degree floating exchange rates have been
successful, which explains why, in this century, even a growing number of EMEs have
been opting for greater exchange rate flexibility. Yet, most of the Friedman-Johnson
claims have not been borne out fully, and it is increasingly clear that floating rate have
left ample room for politically contentious spillovers in economic policy.
Predictions that floating rates would remove the need for international liquidity
have clearly proven wrong, and the earlier part of this chapter discussed the reasons why.
As a group, the EMEs conducted massive foreign reserve accumulation even as many of
them were moving to more flexible exchange rate regimes.
Also problematic, in light of experience, have been the claims that floating or
flexible exchange rates would painlessly facilitate the adjustment to real (output-market)
shocks or ensure the rapid adjustment of current account imbalances. Most
fundamentally, two countries share every bilateral exchange rate, and there is no
guarantee in general that both will take the same view of its optimal level. Due to
asymmetries in economic structure, the difficulties of adjusting to exchange rate changes
have proven greater for emerging and developing countries, igniting talk of “currency

31

wars” and renewed policy attention to capital controls as a means of exchange-rate
management.

Exchange Rates, Resource Allocation, and Coordination in the Short Run

Sharp exchange rate movements driven by financial-market changes can have unwelcome
effects on resource allocation, effects that are especially painful for poorer countries.
These effects lead to “fear of floating” behavior in the mode of Calvo and Reinhart
(2002), and lie behind the recent attacks of some EME governments on the Federal
Reserve’s accommodative monetary response to recession.
Figure 9 illustrates a configuration typical of many EMEs in the post-crisis
period. Assume that domestic nominal wages and nontraded goods prices are sticky,
whereas traded goods’ prices show a full pass-through to the exchange rate. Assume also
that traded goods are priced in world markets, and that the tradables sector is competitive.
Finally, imagine that capital and labor are sector-specific in the short run, that is, unable
to migrate between traded and nontraded goods industries.
In the figure, the downward-sloping locus NN shows combinations of the
nominal exchange rate E (price of foreign currency) and total domestic spending Z such
that labor in the nontradable sector is fully (but not overly) employed. (A rise in Z at a
constant exchange rate would cause excess demand for nontradables, but currency
appreciation lowers tradables prices and shifts demand toward the latter goods.) The
horizontal schedule TT gives the exchange rate at which, given nominal wages, the
tradable sector’s labor supply is fully employed. The upward-sloping schedule XX shows

32

combinations of spending and the exchange rate at which the current account is in
balance (however defined).
The economy is initially at point A, with output above potential in nontradables
and a current account surplus. Because product wages are low in tradables, output is also
above potential there. There is upward cost pressure in both sectors and upward price
pressure in nontradables.
Consider the impact, at a constant spending level, of a sharp nominal
appreciation that moves the economy to point B. Perhaps a large foreign country has
loosened monetary policy; perhaps markets are looking forward to and speculating on
tighter domestic monetary policy. In either case, output falls in both sectors and the
tradables sector experiences a particularly sharp decline in capital income. In the case
shown, inflationary pressures subside but at the cost of underemployment in both sectors.
The current account surplus shrinks as the economy moves closer to XX.
These impacts are painful, so much so that many EMEs in positions like point
A have preferred to resist appreciation, accumulating substantial additional foreign
reserves in the process and sterilizing them in an attempt to avoid feeding domestic
inflation. Figure 10 illustrates the experience of a sample of EMEs with respect to real
appreciation (bilateral, against the U.S. dollar) and reserve accumulation in 2010. As
exchange market pressure rises, countries generally have allowed more appreciation but
also have intervened more heavily, and in some cases massively.
When EMEs as a group face an expansionary global monetary shock
emanating from the industrial countries, the result is a coordination failure reminiscent of
the competitive depreciation of old – or at least, it is competitive nonappreciation. But

33

unlike the currency competition of the Great Depression, more recent rounds have been
adding fuel to inflationary fires. The problem has gained quantitative importance through
the growth of intra-EME trade. How does the coordination failure come about?
The Chinese yuan’s relative weakness against the U.S. dollar, for example,
makes Brazil even less willing to appreciate the real (and vice versa); so both countries
intervene more, and accumulate more dollar reserve claims, the latter being feasible in
unlimited amounts. To the extent that sterilization is imperfect, the latter process fuels
asset-price appreciation and inflation, in a manner reminiscent of the Bretton Woods
system’s collapse in the early 1970s. (Figure 1 showed the explosive growth in foreign
exchange reserves during those few years.)
The problem can conveniently be formalized as a Prisoner’s Dilemma in a
stylized world with three currencies, the real (R), yuan (Y), and U.S. dollar (U).21 If α is
the share of intra-EME trade, then using triangular arbitrage in the foreign exchange
market we may express the (log) nominal effective exchange rates of the real and yuan in
terms of bilateral nominal exchange rates as:

e Re ff = e R / $ + α e $ / Y ,
e Ye ff = e Y / $ + α e $ / R .
The payoffs in the game are determined as follows. Both countries face
medium-term inflationary pressures, which do not affect the price level adjusted
exchange rate in the short run but are counted as costs with present value –0.9 in both
21

In a related strategic analysis, Ogawa and Ito (2002) analyze the interdependence of two neighboring
countries’ choices of optimal basket pegs for their respective currencies.

34

countries. Figure 11 shows the game between Brazil and China in normal form, and it
includes the information (upper left corner) that if both countries fix to the U.S. dollar,
the payoffs are –0.9 for Brazil (first entry) and –0.9 for China (second entry). I will
assume that if a country appreciates by 1 payoff unit, its payoff from that action is the
change in the (log) nominal effective exchange rate (given by the equations above), but
domestic inflation pressures are eliminated. Thus, in the lower left corner of the payoff
matrix, where Brazil appreciates but China continues to peg the yuan, Brazil pays an
effective appreciation cost of –1 (as the cost of future inflation drops to 0) but China pays
a cost of only –(0.9–α), since its inflation cost (equal to –0.9) is partially offset by an
effective nominal depreciation due to the real’s nominal appreciation against the dollar (a
gain equal to α as a result of the rise in e$/R by 1 unit). Critical to the example, of course,
is my assumption that policymakers view appreciation today as being more costly than
inflation tomorrow.
Assuming further that α > 0.1, we see that the efficient solution is for both
countries to appreciate jointly against the dollar, thereby reducing their losses from
inflation as shown in the lower right corner of Figure 11. But this is not a Nash
equilibrium: each country has an incentive to defect so as to free ride on the other’s
appreciation. The sole Nash equilibrium – the noncooperative solution – is where both
countries fix to the dollar and suffer inflation later as a result.
Notice that EMEs lose no matter what (in this simplified game). But even if
there is nothing they can do to change U.S. monetary policy, they can limit their losses
more effectively if they can coordinate amongst each other. The gains to cooperation are
greater the greater is the extent of intra-EME trade (or competition in third markets), as

35

roughly measured by α in the example above. As a coordination mechanism, the IMF
could deploy its staff’s analytical firepower so as to quantify and advertise the
availability to such cooperation gains among EMEs. If policymakers want the Fund to be
more effective in promoting global cooperation, they should encourage it to provide very
concrete illustrations of the gains such cooperation would provide for individual member
countries. The Fund is ideally positioned to explain how the pieces of the global economy
fit together.
The costs of allowing currency appreciation (and larger currency fluctuations
in general) appear somewhat lower for the mature industrial economies (with Japan a
possible exception). These economies have larger domestic markets for their tradable
goods and more ability to price to market so as to cushion exchange-rate effects on
domestic prices.

Capital Inflow Controls

In the example just discussed, countries face a tradeoff: appreciation would lower
domestic inflation pressure, but at the cost of lower employment. Domestic monetary
tightening would dampen inflation, but at the cost of even sharper currency appreciation.
This is a classic instance of the trilemma.
Some EMEs have turned increasingly to capital inflow controls as a way out,
with apparently limited success. (For the moment no mature economy – not even the
ultimate safe haven, Switzerland – appears likely to embrace controls, although
Switzerland has placed a ceiling on its franc’s value.) The IMF has moved increasingly to

36

acceptance that capital inflow controls are a legitimate policy tool in some circumstances,
turning from what once was fairly monolithic opposition to discussions of the appropriate
use of controls (see Ostry and others, 2010, 2011).
In principle there are two (often correlated in practice but conceptually
distinct) motivations for inflow controls. First, there is the macroeconomic motivation of
reducing exchange market pressure in the form of the volume of capital inflows –
basically, escape from the trilemma. Second, there is the macroprudential motivation,
which certainly includes changing the composition of capital flows but might also target
the volume if the capacity of the financial sector safely to intermediate funds is limited.
Available evidence suggests that controls have been more successful in influencing the
composition of flows – for example, inducing a lengthening of debt maturities (Chile) or
a shift from external debt to equity (India) – than in moderating volumes or real
appreciation pressures.22
From a macroprudential standpoint, however, capital inflow controls would
often appear to be a second-best tool, the first best being a response that more directly
targets the relevant financial distortion. For example, a country concerned about banks’
currency mismatch should restrict or tax all foreign-currency liabilities, not just those
contracted with nonresidents. In theory, however, one can certainly devise cases in which
the optimal feasible policy intervention, from a nationalistic or even global welfare
standpoint (Korinek 2011), is to tax foreign borrowing or debt.23 Ostry and others (2011)
suggest that capital inflow controls be deployed in preference to macroprudential
22

See Magud, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2011) for a recent survey.
I would conjecture that in cases where global rather than just national efficiency is impaired, the secondbest intervention could involve not only taxation of capital inflows, but also taxation of outflows on the part
of source countries. If true, this result would furnish a formal case for symmetric adjustment on the part of
lending and borrowing countries (see below).

23

37

instruments mainly when financial inflows enter the economy through nonbank entities
such as large nonfinancial corporations. Some countries, of course, have used putative
macroprudential tools in attempts to escape the constraints of the trilemma.
If capital inflow controls were to become generally accepted as part of the
policy toolkit, however, transparency would be enhanced if the international community
were to develop guidelines as to which instruments are admissible and the circumstances
in which they will be used. A regime based on rules, rather than discretion, seems more
likely to enhance predictability and thereby avoid financial-market volatility. It should
also be recognized that inflow controls entail possible negative international spillovers. A
country imposing them unilaterally may simply divert financial inflows to neighboring
economies. Capital inflow controls, as in China’s case, give a country more latitude to
maintain an artificially competitive exchange rate and thereby contribute to larger global
imbalances. Thus, if policymakers wish to reduce global externalities from the use of
controls, internationally coordinated surveillance, most plausibly conducted by the IMF,
is likely to be helpful.

Global Imbalances

Current account imbalances have not become smaller and less persistent in the era of
floating exchange rates. Instead, increasing financial capital mobility (in part supported
by floating rates, as suggested by Obstfeld and Taylor 2004) has eased the financing of
deficits and allowed easier disposition of excess national savings. Moreover, the “long
run” in which the real exchange rate should reflect the requirement of external balance

38

has become considerably more distant. (Figure 12 shows the aggregates of measured
world current account surpluses and deficits after 1980, which both peaked at about 3
percent of world output just before the crisis broke in 2006.) The time-honored problem
of asymmetric adjustment pressure on surplus and deficit countries remains as intractable
as ever, as Charles Goodhart emphasizes in his chapter.
In the mid-2000s, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2008, 2009) advanced
a “Bretton Woods II” paradigm according to which the big global imbalances of the
period, driven in part by the Chinese authorities’ desire and capacity to industrialize on
the back of exports, might be sustainable for a decade or more. That hypothesis led to a
lively debate. For examples of the critiques see Roubini (2006), Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2007), Wolf (2008), and Hall and Tavlas (2011).
The global imbalance configuration of the mid-2000s appears in retrospect to
have been problematic, which should not be too surprising because it bears a resemblance
to several other episodes that ended in tears (and perhaps also to the current configuration
of imbalances). Asia in general (outside of Japan) was growing at a rate exceeding that of
the mature economies, with China in particular pursuing a “vent for surplus” growth
model (Caves 1965).24 Several mature economies, but most notably the United States,
were absorbing Asian exports through growing consumption and indebtedness (not
through growing productive investment, much of which was taking place anyway in
residential housing).
While a soft landing is theoretically possible in this scenario, the rapid increase
in U.S. household debt that made America the world’s spending locomotive relied on the

24

There are analogies in the early postwar experiences in Western Europe and Japan. On Europe, see
Kindleberger (1967).

39

collateral of rising and inflated home values, which were bound to collapse and did
starting in 2006. Given actual and prospective U.S. income growth in the middle 2000s,
there was no way that China could maintain its own more rapid export-led growth for
much longer on the back of growing U.S. household debt, without U.S. households
becoming insolvent. The virulence of the resulting financial meltdown, of course,
reflected the gross positions that financial actors in the U.S. and Europe had unwisely
assumed prior to the start of the U.S. housing collapse.
In analyzing potential perils due to global imbalances, it is once again
important to ask how the pieces fit together. When large surplus countries grow more
rapidly than deficit countries, consumption growth in the latter is necessarily increasing
faster than income, a process that is very likely to end in crisis unless the debtor’s income
growth catches up. Indeed, just this problem underlies the sovereign debt crisis within the
euro zone; see the insightful analysis by Giavazzi and Spaventa (2010). Similarly, the
current account deficit of the U.S. in the early 2010s, while diminished compared to
2006, is underpinned by large fiscal deficits that are unsustainable over the longer term.
In such situations, a main brake on the behavior of surplus countries is the fear
that the assets they are accumulating (whether held by the public sector – Chinese dollar
reserves – or the private sector – German banks’ holdings of Greek sovereign debt) might
be devalued. (Another is the threat of protection.) If policymakers wish international
lenders to be cognizant of risks they are running, then it is important that the international
financial system be structured so as to make such fears rational, as Goodhart stresses in
his chapter.25 But we should not expect such a system substantially to reduce the

25

Keynes (1924) may have been the first to observe that the risk of default on foreign investments might
render their level excessive from a purely nationalistic perspective. The fact that nowadays, default losses

40

adjustment burdens of deficit countries, which will still suffer more tightly constrained or
more expensive credit as they appear riskier.
The IMF has the standing to speak out when, in its view, large and persistent
external imbalances threaten to result in a solvency crisis, whether in the public or private
sectors. The IMF also is in a position to urge cooperative policy scenarios that can make
the process of reducing global imbalances easier for all participants. If policymakers wish
to raise the weight of the IMF’s advice in the international community, they should
support reforms of IMF governance that make such pronouncements politically feasible
and credible regardless of the countries involved.
A system of liquidity credit lines, as described in the last section, could
discourage precautionary reserve accumulation, although the latter can occur even in the
absence of current account surpluses.26 Proposals to formally tax large reserve holders,
either in an SDR-based reserve system or one based on currencies, are unlikely to gain
any traction, just as Keynes’s similar proposal failed in the 1940s.

IV. Conclusion
Problems of international liquidity and exchange rate management – staple fare in the
international monetary reform literature over many decades – remain painfully relevant
today, but in forms that sometimes differ from past incarnations. At bottom, many of the

may imperil entire domestic financial systems greatly reinforces Keynes’s insight. Subsequent literature has
reiterated the point (for example, Kemp 1962 and Krugman and Obstfeld 1988, p. 504) but perhaps not
often enough. In today’s world of large two-way capital flows, which may be highly unbalanced between
bilateral partners even when overall current account imbalances are small, one must recognize that the issue
really concerns gross rather than net international investment flows per se. In practice, however, current
account surplus countries can reduce their exposure over time by reducing their surpluses.
26
Recall the much discussed “capital inflows problem” of disinflating developing countries. See Borio and
Disyatat (2011) for a reminder on the potential decoupling of the current account and balance of payments.

41

coordination problems that arise stem from asymmetries in the structures, growth rates,
and cyclical positions of the mature economies and the developing world. These two
segments of the global economy are fast approaching (and on some measures have
reached) equal size, as measured by real GDP.
Many years ago, Richard Cooper (1969, p. 600) drew an intriguing connection
between the extent of policy cooperation over macroeconomic policies and the need for
international liquidity. I believe that his point remains valid:

The degree of … international cooperation … influences the amount of liquidity
needed to finance imbalances in the face of temporarily divergent and conflicting
national policies. The more cooperation, the more carefully coordinated national
policies are in timing and nature, the lower the need for international liquidity to
finance imbalances.
I have argued that, in addition, there is considerable scope for a cooperative
approach to global liquidity provision today. A collateral benefit of such cooperation is
that it can mitigate other coordination failures in national economic policies.
Unfortunately, these continue to cause tensions between governments, and there are no
easy solutions in a world of sovereign nations.

42

References
Aizenman, Joshua and Yi Sun. “The Financial Crisis and Sizable International Reserves
Depletion: From ‘Fear of Floating’ to the ‘Fear of Losing International Reserves’?”
Working Paper 15308, National Bureau of Economic Research (October 2009).
Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat (2010). “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Link or No Link?” BIS Working Papers No. 346, Bank for International Settlements
(May 2011).
Boughton, James M. Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund, 1979-1989
(Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 2001).
Boughton, James M. “Jacques J. Polak and the Evolution of the International Monetary
System.” IMF Economic Review 59 (June 2011): 379-399.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse Heje Pedersen. “Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity.” Review of Financial Studies 22 (June 2009): 2201-2238.
Calvo, Guillermo A. “Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden Stop,
Liability Dollarization, and Lender of Last Resort.” Working Paper 12788, National
Bureau of Economic Research (December 2006).
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart. “Fear of Floating.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107 (May 2002): 397-408.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby, Behzad Diba, and David López-Salido, “Key
Currency Status: An Exorbitant Privilege and an Extraordinary Risk.” Typescript,
Georgetown University, November 2010.
Caves, Richard E. “‘Vent for Surplus’ Models of Trade and Growth.” In Richard E.
Caves, Harry G. Johnson, and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Trade, Growth, and the Balance of
Payments: Essays in Honor of Gottfried Haberler (Chicago: Rand McNally & Company,
1965).
Cooper, Richard N. “Postscript: Updating International Money.” In Fred Hirsch, Money
International (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books, 1969).
Cumby, Robert E. “Special Drawing Rights and Plans for Reform of the International
Monetary System.” In George M. von Furstenberg, ed., International Money and Credit:
The Policy Roles (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1983).
Dominguez, Kathryn M. E., Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito. “International Reserves
and the Global Financial Crisis.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
17362, August 2011.

43

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. Asia, Interest Rates, and the
Dollar, 2nd edition (New York: Deutsche Bank Securities, 2008).
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. “Bretton Woods II Still
Defines the International Monetary System.” Pacific Economic Review 14 (2009): 297311.
Eichengreen, Barry. Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future
of the International Monetary System (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).
Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey. Reforming the
International Monetary System. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research,
September 2011. Available at: http://www.cepr.org/pubs/books/P226.asp
Fischer, Stanley. “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 13 (Fall 1999): 85-104
Giavazzi, Francesco and Luigi Spaventa. “Why the Current Account May Matter in a
Monetary Union: Lessons from the Financial Crisis in the Euro Area,” Discussion Paper
8008, Centre for Economic Policy Research (September 2010).
Goldberg, Linda S., Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu. “Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines
and Overseas Dollar Funding Costs.” Working Paper 15763, National Bureau of
Economic Research (February 2010).
Goodhart, Charles A. E. “Myths about the Lender of Last Resort.” International Finance
2 (November 1999): 339-360.
Greenspan, Alan. The Age of Turbulence (New York: Penguin Press, 2007).
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. “Exorbitant Privilege and
Exorbitant Duty.” Typescript, UC Berkeley, London Business School, and École des
Mines (May 2010).
Hall, Stephen G. and George S. Tavlas. “The Debate about the Revived Bretton Woods
Regime: A Survey and Extension of the Literature.” Typescript, Bank of Greece (August
2011).
Henning, C. Randall. Currencies and Politics in the United States, Germany, and Japan
(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1994).
Hirsch, Fred. Money International (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books, 1969).
International Monetary Fund. “The Fund’s Mandate – The Future Financing Role:
Reform Proposals.” Finance, Legal, and Strategy, Policy, and Review Departments,
International Monetary Fund (June 2010).

44

Ishi, Kotaro, Mark Stone, and Etienne B. Yehoue. “Unconventional Central Bank
Measures for Emerging Economies.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/226 (October 2009).
Jeanne, Olivier and Charles Wyplosz. “The International Lender of Last Resort: How Big
Is Big Enough?” In Michael P. Dooley and Jeffrey A. Frankel, eds., Managing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003).
Kemp, Murray C. “Foreign Investment and the National Advantage.” Economic Record
38 (March 1962): 56-62.
Kenen, Peter. “An SDR Based Reserve System.” Journal of Globalization and
Development 1(2, 2010), Article 13. Available at: http://www.bepress.com/jgd/vol1/iss2/art13
Keynes, J. M. “Foreign Investment and National Advantage.” The Nation and Athenaeum
35 (August 1924): 584-587.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Europe’s Postwar Growth: The Role of Labor Supply
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967).
Korinek, Anton. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls.” IMF Economic
Review 59 (August 2011): 523-561.
Krugman, Paul R. and Maurice Obstfeld. International Economics: Theory and Policy
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1988).
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.” Journal
of International Economics 73 (November 2007): 223-250.
McGuire, Patrick and Götz von Peter. “The US Dollar Shortage in Global Banking and
the International Policy Response.” BIS Working Papers No. 291, Bank for International
Settlements (October 2009).
Maggiori, Matteo. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve
Currencies.” Typescript, University of California, Berkeley, November 2011.
Magud , Nicolás E., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. “Capital Controls:
Myth and Reality – A Portfolio Balance Approach.” Working Paper 16805, National
Bureau of Economic Research, February 2011.
Metzler, Lloyd A., Robert Triffin, and Gottfried Haberler. International Monetary
Policies. Postwar Economic Studies No. 7 (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, 1947).
Obstfeld, Maurice. “Lenders of Last Resort in a Globalized World.” Monetary and
Economic Studies (Bank of Japan) 27 (November 2009): 35-52. Available at:
http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/english/publication/mes/fmes.html

45

Obstfeld, Maurice. “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension.” Monetary and
Economic Studies (Bank of Japan) 29 (November 2011): 33-48. Available at:
http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/research/abstracts/english/me29-3.html

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited.” In Richard H. Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
Growth (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Ogawa, Eiji and Takatoshi Ito. “On the Desirability of a Regional Basket Currency
Arrangement.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 16 (September
2002): 317-334.
Ostry, Jonathan D. and others. “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls.” IMF Staff
Position Note SPN/10/04 (February 2010).
Ostry, Jonathan D. and others. “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?” IMF
Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/06 (April 2011).
Prasad, Eswar S. “Role Reversal in Global Finance.” Paper presented at the 2011
Economic Policy Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (August
2011). Available at: http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/escp-2011.cfm
Rose, Andrew K. and Mark. M. Spiegel. “Dollar Illiquidity and Central Bank Swap
Arrangements during the Global Financial Crisis.” Typescript, UC Berkeley and Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco (August 2011).
Roubini, Nouriel. “The BW2 Regime: An Unstable Equilibrium Bound to Unravel.”
International Economics and Economic Policy 3 (December 2006): 303-332.
Solomon, Robert. “Creation and Evolution of the SDR.” In Michael Mussa, James M.
Boughton, and Peter Isard, eds., The Future of the SDR in Light of Changes in the
International Financial System (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1996).
Stone, Mark R., W. Christopher Walker, and Yosuke Yasui. “From Lombard Street to
Avenida Paulista: Foreign Exchange Liquidity Easing in Brazil in Response to the Global
Shock of 2008-09.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/259 (November 2009).
Triffin, Robert. Gold and the Dollar Crisis (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960).
Truman, Edwin M. “On What Terms Is the IMF Worth Funding?” Working Paper Series
WP 08-11, Peterson Institute for International Economics, December 2008.

46

Truman, Edwin M. “The IMF as an International Lender of Last Resort.” Real Time
Economic Issues Watch, Peterson Institute for International Economics, October 12,
2010. Available at: http://www.piie.com/realtime/?p=1767
Wolf, Martin. Fixing Global Finance (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2008).
Yeager, Leland B. International Monetary Relations: Theory, History, and Policy, 2nd
edition (New York: Harper & Row, 1976).
Zhou, Xiaochuan. “Reform the International Monetary System.” Typescript (March
2009). Available at:
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/publish/english/956/2009/20091229104425550619706/20091229104425550619706
_.html

47

Figure 1: Gold reserves and nongold reserves held by non-US
governments (billions of USD)
140.
120.
100.
80.
60.
40.
20.

World gold reserves (at $35 per oz.)
US gold reserves (at $35 per oz.)
Nongold reserves other than US
Source: IFS

45

72
19

70
19

68
19

66
19

64
19

62
19

60
19

58
19

56
19

54
19

52
19

50
19

19

48

0.

Figure 2: Value of world gold production and dollar gold price
Billions of dollars

Dollars per ounce

1.9

115.00

1.8

105.00

1.7

95.00

1.6

85.00

1.5

75.00

2

0

19
7

8

19
7

19
6

19
6

19
6

19
6

19
6

19
5

19
5

19
5

19
5

19
5

19
4

6

25.00

4

1

2

35.00

0

1.1

8

45.00

6

1.2

4

55.00

2

1.3

0

65.00

8

1.4

Sources: U.S. Geological Survey and Global Financial Data

Value of world gold production (at $35 per oz., left axis)

46

Dollar gold price (right axis)

Figure 3: Output shares of advanced and
emerging/developing economies (at PPP)
Percent

70
60
50
40
30
20

Advanced

Emerging and developing

47

2014

2012

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

0

1980

10

Figure 4: Global nongold reserves compared with gross
general government debt
Billions of USD

16,000.00
14,000.00
12,000.00
10,000.00
8,000.00
6,000.00
4,000.00
2,000.00

Source: IFS
US government debt

Eurozone government debt

48

World reserves

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

0.00

Figure 5: Gross external positions as a multiple of GDP,
1970-2007
14

10
8
6
4
2

Switzerland

United Kingdom

Euro Zone

49

United States

Japan

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

0
1970

(Assets + Liabilities)/GDP

12

China

Figure 6: Gross asset accumulation and current accounts of
emerging and developing countries

Percent of advanced
country GDP

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Source: WEO, GDP data and online table B18. Projections for 2010.

Reserve accumulation

Nonreserve gross foreign asset acquisitions

50

Current account balance

Figure 7: Global foreign exchange reserves
Percent of country
group GDP
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

Emerging and developing

51

Advanced

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

0

Figure 8: SDR holdings as a fraction of total international reserves:
Advanced countries, emerging/developing countries, and world
0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

SDR/total reserves (advanced)

SDR/total reserves (emerging/developing)

SDR/total reserves (world)

52

53

54

55

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Aggregate current account surpluses and
deficits as a fraction of world GDP

Figure 12: World current account surpluses and
deficits

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04
Source: IMF, WEO database, April 2011

Surplus

56
Deficit

