                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE ELECTORAL CONSEQUENCES OF LARGE FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS

                                         Alberto F. Alesina
                                          Dorian Carloni
                                         Giampaolo Lecce

                                       Working Paper 17655
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17655


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alberto F. Alesina, Dorian Carloni, and Giampaolo Lecce. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Electoral Consequences of Large Fiscal Adjustments
Alberto F. Alesina, Dorian Carloni, and Giampaolo Lecce
NBER Working Paper No. 17655
December 2011
JEL No. H2,H3,H5

                                            ABSTRACT

The conventional wisdom regarding the political consequences of large reductions of budget deficits
is that they are very costly for the governments which implement them: they are punished by voters
at the following elections. In the present paper, instead, we find no evidence that governments which
quickly reduce budget deficits are systematically voted out of office in a sample of 19 OECD countries
from 1975 to 2008. We also take into consideration issues of reverse causality, namely the possibility
that only "strong and popular" governments can implement fiscal adjustments and thus they are not
voted out of office "despite" having reduced the deficits. In the end we conclude that many governments
can reduce deficits avoiding an electoral defeat.


Alberto F. Alesina                                 Giampaolo Lecce
Department of Economics                            Bocconi University
Harvard University                                 glecce@phd.unibocconi.it
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Dorian Carloni
University of California, Berkeley
dcarloni@econ.berkeley.edu
         The Electoral Consequences of Large Fiscal
                        Adjustments
     Alberto Alesina                   Dorian Carloni                   Giampaolo Lecce
     Harvard and IGIER                 UC Berkeley                     Bocconi University
                          Preliminary Draft: November 2011

                                              Abstract
          The conventional wisdom regarding the political consequences of large reduc-
      tions of budget deficits is that they are very costly for the governments which
      implement them: they are punished by voters at the following elections. In the
      present paper, instead, we find no evidence that governments which quickly reduce
      budget deficits are systematically voted out of oﬃce in a sample of 19 OECD coun-
      tries from 1975 to 2008. We also take into consideration issues of reverse causality,
      namely the possibility that only "strong and popular" governments can implement
      fiscal adjustments and thus they are not voted out of oﬃce "despite" having re-
      duced the deficits. In the end we conclude that many governments can reduce
      deficits decisively avoiding an electoral defeat.


1     Introduction
The conventional wisdom regarding the political consequences of large reductions of
budget deficits (which we label "fiscal adjustments") is that they are the kiss of death
for the governments which implement them: they are punished by voters at the following
elections. In certain countries spending cuts are very unpopular, in others tax increases
are politically more costly but everywhere, the story goes, fiscal rigor is always unpopular.
    The empirical evidence on this point is much less clear cut than the conviction with
which this conventional wisdom is held. In the present paper, in fact, we find no evidence
that governments which reduce budget deficits even decisively are systematically voted
out of oﬃce. We also take into consideration as carefully as possible issues of reverse
causality, namely the possibility that only "strong and popular" governments can im-
plement fiscal adjustments and thus they are not voted out of oﬃce "despite" having
reduced the deficits. Even taking this possibility into account we still find no evidence
that fiscal adjustments, even decisive ones, systematically, on average, imply electoral
defeats.
    In the present paper our focus is especially in large fiscal adjustments, which are
currently at the center of attention in many OECD countries. As a motivation we begin
by examining the evidence on the ten largest multi-year fiscal adjustments in the last
30 years in OECD countries. We find no evidence that the turnover of governments in
those periods was significantly higher than the average of the entire sample. In fact it
was lower.1 We then explore more systematically all cases of large adjustments (defined
as a reduction of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP of cyclically adjusted deficits). Once
   1 Obviously there is some arbitrariness in how to define 10 "largest" adjustments, but the result on

their political consequences hold regardless of which (reasonable) definition is used.



                                                  1
again we find no evidence of a negative eﬀect on election prospects. Contrary to the
conventional wisdom, we find some evidence that fiscally loose government tend to lose
election more often than average, a result which is consistent with Brander and Drazen
(2008). Next, we present a battery of regressions which show that indeed these results
are quite robust and the data do not exhibit any correlation between deficit reduction
and electoral losses.
    But what about reverse causality? Perhaps weak governments, knowing their vulner-
ability, do not implement adjustments, but then, precisely because they are weak, they
loose at polls, and the reverse holds for strong governments. This would explain the
lack of correlation between fiscal adjustments and reelection. Unfortunately measuring
the "strength" of a government is not easy; often such strength or weakness depends on
personalities involved, leadership style etc. which are impossible for the econometrician
to observe and measure. For instance, in principle a coalition government may be weaker
and more unstable than a single party government, but certain coalitions may be espe-
cially cohesive and certain single party government may hide strong division within the
same party. The margin of the majority of the government in the legislature may be an
other indicator, but that too could be imperfect, due for instance, to divisions within
the government coalition even though the latter may have a large majority of seats. We
find no evidence of a diﬀerent behavior in terms of fiscal adjustments of coalition versus
single party governments. At the very least we can conclude that many governments
can tackle decisively budget deficits without electoral losses. Perhaps not all, but a good
portion can.2
    If it is the case that fiscal adjustments do not lead systematically to electoral defeats
why do they often seem so politically diﬃcult? We can think of two explanations. The
first one is simply risk aversion. Incumbent governments may be afraid of "rocking the
boat" and follow a cautious course of actions and postpone fiscal reforms. The second and
perhaps more plausible one is that the political game played around a fiscal adjustment
goes above and beyond a one man one vote elections. Alesina and Drazen (1991) present
a model in which organized groups with a strong influence on the polity manage to
postpone reforms, even when the latter are necessary and unavoidable, to try to switch
the costs on their opponents. The resulting wars of attrition delays fiscal adjustments.
Strikes, contributions from various lobbies, press campaigns are all means which can
enforce (or block) policies above and beyond voting at the polls. For example imagine
a public sector union that goes on strike to block reduction in government spending on
the public wage bill. They may create disruptions and may have consequences which
may be too costly to bear for a government. Not only, but public sector unions may
have connections with parts of the incumbent coalition and block fiscal adjustments.
Similar considerations may lead to postponements of pension reforms. In many countries
pensioners developed a strong political support even within workers’ unions. The latter
would then water down the adjustment to placate this particular lobby even though the
"median voter" might have been favorable to the tighter fiscal policy. To put it more
broadly, voting in elections is not the only way in which various lobbies and pressure
groups can influence the political process. Alesina, Ardagna and Trebbi (2006) present
a battery of tests on electoral reform in large sample of countries which are consistent
with the empirical implications of the war of attrition model.
    The paper closest to the present one in spirit is Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998).
These authors, using data up to the mid nineties, found inconclusive evidence on the ef-
fects of fiscal adjustments on reelections in OECD economies. Buti et al. (2010) find that
chances of reelection for the incumbent governments are, controlling for other factors,
   2 See Bonfiglioli and Gancia (2010) for a model based upon politicians’ competence in which certain

but not all governments implement fiscal reforms and those which do are reelected.



                                                  2
not significantly aﬀected by their record of pro-market reforms3 . A related literature is
the one on political budget cycles which asks the question of whether incumbent govern-
ments increase spending or cut taxes before elections in order to be rewarded at the polls,
an argument which implies that budget deficits are popular and budget cuts are not.4
Persson and Tabellini (2000) suggested that only in certain types of electoral systems
political budget cycles are present. However Brander and Drazen (2005) show in fact
that while political budget cycles are common in new democracies (like in Central and
Eastern Europe) they are not the norm in established one, where increases in deficits
tend to reduce the electoral success for the incumbents.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly describe our
data. Section 3 presents some suggestive qualitative evidence on the largest multi year
fiscal adjustments in the OECD countries in the last 30 years. Section 4 discusses more
formally the correlations between deficit reduction policies and electoral results. Section
5 addresses the question of potential reverse causality. In Section 6 we look at some case
studies to further illustrate the link between fiscal adjustment and re-election prospects.
The last section concludes.


2     Data
Our data sources are standard. For economic variables we use OECD Economic Outlook
Database no.84. For political-institutional variables we use the Database of Political
Institutions (DPI) 2009. In particular we focus on the period 1975-2008. The countries
are the members of the OECD which have been such for the entire period; the ones we
analysed in our work are 19: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom and United States.
    The precise definition of all our variables is extensively described in Appendix, but
for ease of exposition we also redefine them as we encounter them in the paper. Specif-
ically, all the variables corrected for the cycle are calculated using the cyclical adjusted
variables of OECD Economic Outlook Database, and variation of cyclical adjusted vari-
ables are calculated over the potential output of total economy. In particular we used
OECD reviewed and revised estimation methods. In order to provide a single measure
of potential output, the chosen measure is "one which represents the levels of real GDP,
and associated rates of growth, which are sustainable over the medium term at a stable
rate of inflation" (Giorno et al., 1995). Our results are virtually identical if instead by
dividing by potential GDP we divide by actual GDP. Fortunately the qualitative nature
of our results is unaﬀected by the definition used.


3     The 10 Largest Fiscal Adjustments
We begin with some suggestive evidence regarding the ten largest fiscal adjustments
in our sample. In Table 1 we report in order of cumulative size, the ten largest ones
identified as follows: the ten cases in which the cumulative cyclically adjusted deficit
reductions obtained by summing consecutive years of deficit reductions is the largest.
   3 In Buti et al. (2008) the empirical evidence also suggests that well-functioning and developed

financial markets positively aﬀect the reelection probability of reformist governments. It seems to suggest
that financial market reforms facilitate reforms in product and labour markets.
   Buti and van den Noord (2004a) and (2004b) also found the empirical evidence of political business
cycle in the early years of EMU. These results suggests that electoral manipulation of fiscal policy in
EU countries has not been curbed by EMU’s fiscal policy rules.
   4 See Rogoﬀ and Sibert (1988), Persson and Tabellini (2000) and Drazen (2004).




                                                    3
Obviously one could think of alternative definitions but our qualitative results do not
change. For instance we obtained very similar findings using a classification of the largest
multi year fiscal adjustments used by Alcidi and Gros (2010).
    Many of the episodes listed in our Table 1 have been made "famous" by a lively
literature which has investigated the economic characteristic and degree of success of
these episodes.5 In addition to the size of the adjustments in terms of deficit reduction
we also report measures of the composition of the adjustment arising from spending cuts
and tax increases over GDP. We calculate this variable by dividing the share of spending
cuts over the reductions of fiscally adjusted deficits (in shares of potential GDP). Note
that the spending share can be greater than 100 if taxes were actually cut during the
adjustment or can be negative if spending was increased. We focus on this variable since
the evidence shows that spending based fiscal adjustments have been more long lasting
and more successful in achieving fiscal balance with lower costs in terms of lost growth.6
With "termination" we imply that there was an election in the period of the adjustments
and/or in the two years following the end of it. We include the two years after the end of
the fiscal adjustment because the results of an election within two years after the end of
the period of deficit reduction could be aﬀected by the tight fiscal policy quite directly.
Beyond two years too much time may have elapsed to attribute reelection (or defeat)
mainly to the fiscal adjustment. In any event our results do not quantitatively change if
we include all terminations following the last year of the fiscal adjustments, even beyond
two years. The last column, labelled "change in ideology" indicates how many changes
in the political orientation occur during the fiscal adjustment and in the two years which
followed its end.
    Table 1 shows that government changes occurred in 7 cases out of 19 terminations,
thus they were about 37 percent of the total. But if we look at the five largest ad-
justments in cumulative size, the ratio decreases considerably, as changes in government
occurred only in 1 case out of 10. On the contrary, there were about 40 percent of
government changes over the total number of terminations from 1975 to 2008 for the
countries sampled in the table, indicating that periods of large fiscal adjustments were
not associated with sistematically higher government turnover.
    Secondly the table allows us to make some preliminary observations about the link
between cabinet change and the composition of fiscal adjustments. Considering the
percentage of the adjustment due to cut in expenditures, and comparing the five fiscal
adjustments for which the value was highest with the remaining adjustments, we find that
the cases in which the expenditure share of the adjustment was higher were associated
with less frequent change in government. In the table below, if we pool together data
for Ireland (1986-89), Canada (1993-97), Finland (1993-98), Belgium (1982-1987) an
Sweden (1994-2000), we get that government change occurred only in 20 percent of cases.
Instead, for the rest of the countries considered, government changed in 56 percent of
cases. This first evidence seems to suggest that tax-based adjustments make it more
diﬃcult for incumbent governments to be reappointed when they implement large fiscal
adjustments.
   5 See the original contribution by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990). The most recent paper in this line

which also summarizes the previous literature is Alesina and Ardagna (2010).
   6 A long list of papers on fiscal adjustments has reached this conclusion. The latest in this series

is Alesina and Ardagna (2010). This paper also includes a review of the previous literature. Using a
diﬀerent methodology IMF(2010) also shows that spending based adjustments are less costly than tax
based ones.




                                                  4
4     Deficit Reductions and Elections
4.1     Simple Statistics
We now turn to a more systematic analysis of deficit reduction policies in OECD coun-
tries. We define a year of "large fiscal adjustment" one in which the cyclically adjusted
deficit over potential GDP ratio fell by more than 1.5 per cent of GDP while a year of
"fiscal adjustment" is one in which the cyclically adjusted deficit over potential GDP ra-
tio falls by any amount. Thus, large fiscal adjustments are a subset of all the adjustments.
Fiscal expansions are defined identically to fiscal adjustments but with the opposite sign.
    With the definition of a "large fiscal adjustment", and given that the deficit is cycli-
cally adjusted, one tries to capture years in which fiscal policy was decisively contrac-
tionary with, most likely, active discretionary fiscal policies which were not business as
usual or the result of the cycle. When we use the cyclically adjusted definition of pri-
mary deficit (COCHDEF), we find 294 years (over 646 total) of fiscal adjustments and
60 years of "large" fiscal adjustments in our sample. We have more years of large fiscal
adjustments if we consider not potential but actual GDP at the denominators of the
ratios, but our results on the electoral consequences are completely unchanged.7
    In this section we examine the link between the timing of fiscal adjustments and the
timing of changes in government. In order to measure "changes of government" we use
two variables, one is all changes of a Prime Minister (ALLCH), the other one is change
of the Prime Minister and in the party composition of the government (IDEOCH).8
The first variable may overestimate "change", since a new Prime Minister with the same
party or coalition may simply be a routine personnel replacement in a stable and reelected
government. The variable IDEOCH may underestimate political turnover because even
without a change in the party composition of the government, a Prime Minister may
be changed because he/she may have become unpopular possibly as a result of a fiscal
tightening.
    Another data complication relates to the timing of government change. The issue
can be summarized as follows: if the government termination occurs in the first part of
year t, should we consider the fiscal variable at time t as before or after the termination?
If for example we were associating a change in government in the first part of year t
with a reduction in deficit over GDP in year t, we could erroneously conclude that the
change in government occured as a result of the fiscal adjustment, although the fiscal
adjustment could have been largely implemented in the second half of year t, after the
elections. Hence, we adopt the same rule used in Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998):
every termination that occurs between July 1 of year t and June 30 of year t+1 is
considered to fall in calendar year t and is thought as contemporaneous to the fiscal
outcomes of year t. Terminations that occured in the first part of each year are instead
considered as contemporaneous to the fiscal variables of the previous year.
    In Figures 1 and 2 we plot the frequency of ALLCH and IDEOCH in the election
year against cyclically adjusted deficit reductions of diﬀerent sizes and fiscal expansions
in the three years before the election, and we do not find evidence that fiscal adjustments
are associated with more frequent changes in government or prime minister. Figure 1
investigates the frequency of change in government and/or prime minister (ALLCH). The
left-hand set of bars in the figure indicates the frequency of change when the adjustment
takes place one year before the election. The first two bars from the left show the average
value of ALLCH when there is a fiscal adjustment and a fiscal expansion. There is a
   7 This explains why with this method of dividing by potential GDP we identify slightly fewer large

adjustments than in Alesina and Ardagna (2010).
   8 Excluding from the count of ALLCH the cases in which term limits were binding, like the second

term of an American President, leave our results unchanged.



                                                 5
slightly higher propensity for a government turnover after a fiscal expansion, even though
the diﬀerence is not statistically significant; the third and fourth bar show equivalent
statistics but divide fiscal adjustments by size. They seem to show that large adjustments
one year before the elections are associated with lower propensity to government changes.
The same picture emerges when we consider adjustment two years before the elections.
    In Figure 2 we consider only government changes, defined as changes in the political
orientation of the government (IDEOCH). Figure 2 provides comparable results to Figure
1, except for the fact that the dependent variable is now IDEOCH instead of ALLCH.
This figure does not show that incumbent governments are systematically voted out of
oﬃce when they implement deficit reductions. The results we get in Figure 2 are similar
to those we got in Figure 1, as they show that fiscal expansions (i.e. increases in deficits)
are on average associated with higher government change than fiscal adjustments.
    Figure 3 sheds some light on the relationship between the composition of the adjust-
ment and government turnover. We label large adjustments as expenditure based when
spending cuts are greater than the median spending cut of all large fiscal adjustments.
They are tax-based if the increase in tax revenues is greater than the median tax increase
of all large fiscal adjustments. Consistently with the preliminary evidence provided in
the first part of this paper, Figure 3 shows that if a large fiscal adjustment is expenditure-
based, it is less likely that there will be a government change than if the deficit reduction
is tax-based. This result holds both when we look at ALLCH and IDEOCH.

4.2        Regression Analysis
In this section we run several regressions which try to predict the likelihood or reap-
pointment of an incumbent government as a function of several political and economic
variables, including changes in the deficit, taxes and spending. The bottom line of these
regressions is that it is diﬃcult to find any economic variable (with the possible exception
of inflation) which is sistematically and robustly correlated with the probability of a gov-
ernment defeat in a election. This holds as well for fiscal variables: we find no evidence
that spending cuts, tax increases and deficit reduction policies make it more likely for
incumbents to loose.
    Our interpretation is that political change is the result of a complex political game
and it is hard to pin point stable correlations between economic variables and electoral
results.9 The important point of our purpose here is precisely that a fiscal adjustment
is only one of the many components of such political dynamics and it is not a "deal
breaker" so that no matter what else is happening it implies an electoral defeat. If that
were the case we should find a correlation between the occurence of fiscal adjustments
and electoral losses.
    We have tried many specifications of our probit regression in which the left hand side
variables are measures of government changes. We first adopted the same specification
by Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998) and then we explored many others. We first
report probit regressions with the variable measuring cabinet change (IDEOCH) as our
dependent variable. To study the impact of fiscal adjustments on cabinet change, and
to test for the robustness of our results, we use three diﬀerent measures: the change
in non-cyclically adjusted deficit (CHDEF), the change in cyclically adjusted deficit
(COCHDEF) and the average change in deficit during the tenure of the current cabinet
(TOTCHDEF). In our baseline specification, we also include macroeconomic variables
such as the change in real GDP (dGDP), the change in unemployment rate (dUNR) and
the inflation rate (INFL). We then use political variables to control for three diﬀerent
   9 For the case of the US in a series of papers Fair (1978,1982,1988) argued that the rate of growth of
the economy a few quarters before the election is a critical determinant of presidential elections. For a
discussion of this evidence see Alesina and Rosenthal (1995).


                                                   6
characteristics of the cabinet: the number of year the cabinet has been in power (DU-
RAT), whether it is composed of a coalition of parties (COAL) and whether it has the
majority in the parliament (MAJ).
    Table 2 presents the results of our baseline specification. It shows that the deficit
variables are not statistically significant irrespective of the measure we use, suggesting
that governments implementing fiscal tightening are on average not penalized at the
following election. INFL (the inflation rate) is statistically significant in all regressions.
It seems that voters are especially averse to inflation. Brander and Drazen (2008) find
a similar result for a diﬀerent (larger) set of countries and a diﬀerent (earlier) time
period. The coeﬃcients on the other macroeconomic variables are of the sign one would
expect, but they are not statistically significant in many specifications. They show that
an increase in the growth rate of real GDP reduces the probability of a government
change, whereas the unemployment rate has a really small coeﬃcient. The signs of the
coeﬃcients on political variables are also generally consistent with conventional wisdom,
although only DURAT is statistically significant. As we would expect, the probability
of government change increases with the lenght of its tenure.
    In Table 3 we extend this baseline specification by including variables in deviation
from the weighted average of G7 countries.10 Thus we use GDP growth, inflation rate
and unemployment rate in deviations from G7 average in every year. The motivation is
clear: we test whether voters punish government not for their performance per se but
with respect to its performance relative to the "world average". As before, we do not
find evidence of a statistically significant relation between the change in fiscal deficit and
government change in the direction predicted by the conventional wisdom. No coeﬃcients
on deficit variables are statistically significant, as in table 2. Once again this result is
fully consistent with those found by Brander and Drazen (2008). Also when we look
at macroeconomic and political variables, our results do not vary substantially from the
ones obtained in the previous specification.
    In Table 4 we use the same specifications as before but run the regressions only on
deficit reduction years. Regressions on this restricted sample allow us to check for the
robustness of the results we obtained while considering the full sample, and to assess if the
sample of fiscal adjustment years diﬀers significantly. The estimated coeﬃcients on the
variables measuring the change of public deficit are not substantially diﬀerent from those
obtained in the previous set of regressions. They are not statistically significant except
for CHREV, whose eﬀect on IDEOCH is positive, meaning that a positive change in the
size of the public revenue increases the probability of government change. Thus, even
when we restrict the analysis to deficit reduction years, there is no evidence that fiscal
tightening harms incumbent governments by reducing the probability of their reelection.
Coeﬃcients on macroeconomic and political variables do not diﬀer from the previous
set of regressions either, showing that in most regressions only the duration of tenure
(DURAT) has a statistically significant positive eﬀect on IDEOCH. As before, the results
are robust to the inclusion of variables measuring deviations of macroeconomic variables
from G7 countries’ weighted average values.
    In Table 5 we include the variables which control for the composition of the fiscal
adjustment. Also we check whether adjustments based on cuts in transfer-payments
or in government-wage consumption are associated with a higher probability of cabinet
changes. We focus on large adjustments (those such that deficit to GDP is cut by
more than 1.5 percentage points from t-1 to t) and add four variables to control for the
composition of the adjustment, namely PEXP, PTAX, PTRF and PCGW: the share
of adjustment on total expenditure, total revenues, transfers and government wages
respectively. We focus on transfers and wages because results by Alesina Perotti and
 1 0 Weights   for each country are calculated using real GDP.



                                                    7
Tavares (1998) suggested that these were the most successful adjustments in terms of a
long lasting solubilization of the debt/GDP ratio. They may also be the least popular,
at least according to the conventional wisdom.
    Although we get statistically insignificant coeﬃcients for all variables of fiscal com-
position, it is worth spending some more words on the sign of the coeﬃcients associated
with the variables. The sign of the coeﬃcient on PEXP, a dummy variable equal to one
if the adjustment is large and expenditure based, is negative, meaning that if an adjust-
ment is large and expenditure-based it is associated with a reduction in the probability
of a change of government. Similarly, if we look at PTAX, a dummy variable equal to
one if the adjustment is large and tax-based, we get a positive coeﬃcient, meaning that it
is more likely that there will be a government change if the deficit reduction is based on
an increase in taxes. We then analyze PTRF and PCGW, dummy variables associated
with large adjustments based on cuts in transfer payments and government-wage con-
sumption respectively. For both variables we get negative and statistically insignificant
coeﬃcients, which suggests that if the adjustment is based on cuts in these categories
of expenditure, it is less likely that the government will change. When we repeat the
analysis using cyclically adjusted deficit (COCHDEF) we obtain similar results11 .
    Finally, if we repeat the same analysis with ALLCH as the dependent variables, we
find very similar evidence for variables measuring the change in fiscal deficit. All these
results are available from the authors. While the coeﬃcients on macroeconomic and
political variables are left unchanged in most of the cases, there are small diﬀerences
in the coeﬃcients on fiscal deficit variables. When we run the same specification of
Table 2 on ALLCH, results are analogous as before. Similarly, when we run the same
regressions only on fiscal adjustments years (as we did in Table 4), we get that only
the coeﬃcient on TOTCHDEF is diﬀerent: although it is positive as before, it is not
statistically significant.
    Lastly, to check the robustness of our results, we run a battery of regressions using
logit model and logit fixed eﬀects model, in which we control for country fixed eﬀects
(Table 6). The estimations we get are not substantially diﬀerent from the ones we get in
our probit specification. In particular using the same specification of Table 2 and Table
3 the estimations obtained using a logit fixed eﬀects model are consistent with previous
results. The evidence suggest that DURAT is positive and statistically significant while
INFL is almost always positive but not statistically significant in all the specifications.
Once again, none of the deficit variables are statistically significant.


5     Reverse Causality
Thus far we uncovered no evidence suggesting that governments which engage in even
large fiscal adjustments are systematically voted out of oﬃce. A question which comes
to mind is one of a sort of "reverse causation." Perhaps those governments which are
"strong" are those which can safely engage in fiscal adjustments and they are then reap-
pointed "despite" having been fiscally responsible. Note that the question is not whether
or not "stronger" government implement more fiscal adjustments (an issue studied by
Alesina Ardagna and Trebbi (2006)) but whether stronger governments which imple-
ment fiscal adjustments are more likely to be reelected than weaker governments which
implement fiscal adjustments. In other words, a weaker government may have a harder
time breaking some impediment to implement reforms, but once it does it, the question
is whether it suﬀers more at the polls than a stronger government.
    The diﬃculty is how to define, ex ante, i.e. before reelection (or loss) what a "strong"
government is, in a way which is measurable by the econometricians. Our first measure of
 1 1 Those   estimates are not reported in the paper but they are available on request.


                                                     8
strength is whether or not the ruling government is formed by a coalition of parties. The
idea is that coalition governments are more likely to suﬀer from internal disagreements
(for decisions that include the nature and size of fiscal adjustments to be implemented)
and they may be more likely to fall. The evidence does indeed suggest that the average
duration of coalition governments is slightly shorter than single party government. In our
sample coalition governments last on average 4.12 years while single party governments
last 4.20 years. Besides, if we look at the frequency of government change, we find that
the probability of cabinet change is slightly higher (0.38) when a coalition government
is in power at election time than when a single party government in charge (0.34).
Results are consistent when we analyze the "strength" of a government in terms of the
share of votes they received at the election and not in terms of the composition of the
executive. Obviously the duration of a government is endogenous to policy choices,
therefore coalitions may choose certain policies which are less likely to be unpopular,
which is precisely the point debated here.
    Our second measure of government stability is a dummy variable equal to one if the
party of the executive has an absolute majority in the house(s) with lawmaking powers.
This measure seems reasonable since one would expect a government to last longer if it
has the majority in all houses. In fact we find that when this is the case (as measured by
the variable MAJ), the government lasts on average 4.41 years, whereas for the rest of the
observations the average duration is 4.17 years. However, diﬀerently from the evidence
presented for the coalition variable, we get that governments holding the majority in the
houses are more likely to change than the rest (45 percent of cases versus 34).
    We can then proceed and use the variables defined above to investigate the main issue
of this section: are more stable governments more likely to implement fiscal adjustments?
Do they do so because they are more likely to be reappointed “despite” they have been
fiscally responsible?
    Our results show that coalition governments implemented 164 fiscal adjustments,
corresponding to roughly 47 percent of total observations for which we had a coalition
government, whereas single party governments implemented 130 fiscal adjustments, i.e.
they did it in 51 percent of the years in which they were governing. If we only look at
"large" fiscal adjustments results are similar with previous ones. Coalition governments
implemented 34 large fiscal adjustments, corresponding to roughly 9.8 percent of total
observations for which we had a coalition government, whereas single party governments
implemented 26 fiscal adjustments, that is to say 10.3 percent of the years in which they
were governing. If we then look at the stability of the government as measured by the
majority in the houses, we find similar diﬀerences between governments with an absolute
majority and government without an absolute majority in the houses when we look at
large fiscal adjustments.The former implemented large adjustments in 10.2 percent of
cases, the latter in 10.1 percent of cases. When instead we look at all adjustments the
diﬀerence is not so clear cut. Governments with the majority implemented 62 fiscal
adjustments, which represent 48.8 percent of the years where a government with an
absolute majority was in charge. Government without the majority implemented 229
fiscal adjustments, about 49.2 percent of the total (the results are reported in Table 7).
So according to our, admittedly imperfect, measure of "strength" it seems that "strong"
governments implement fiscal adjustments only slightly more often than average.
    Moreover the evidence provided in figures 4 to 7 does not always suggest that more
stable governments implementing fiscal adjustments before the election were more likely
to be reappointed. For example figure 5 shows that if single party governments imple-
mented fiscal adjustments (in particular small ones) three years before the election they
were more likely not to be reelected than if coalition governments did so. Similarly,
governments with an absolute majority in the houses were associated with government



                                            9
change in 41 percent of cases if they implemented fiscal adjustments one year before the
election, compared to 30 percent in the rest of our sample (see figure 7).
    The idea that more stable governments are not more protected from government
change after they perfom a fiscal adjustment is also supported by the set of regressions
we show in Tables 8 and 9. We add interaction variables to the baseline specification
described above and try to capture the specific eﬀect on government change associated
with more stable governments implementing fiscal adjustments. Even in this specifi-
cation there is no statistically significant diﬀerence between coalition and single party
governments implementing fiscal adjustments on the prospect of being reelected. In col-
umn 4 of table 8, where we use a cyclically adjusted deficit variable, we do not find a
statistically significant diﬀerence between coalition and single party governments. Simi-
larly in column 6, when we construct a variable interacting TOTCHDEF and COAL, we
do not find any statistically significant eﬀect of this variable on the dependent variable
IDEOCH.
    The evidence that "stronger" governments are not necessarily more protected from
electoral turnover is also supported by our results in Table 9. In all specifications where
we include an interaction variable between the deficit variable and a dummy for the gov-
ernment having majority support in the parliament, we don’t get statistically significant
estimates for the coeﬃcients on the interaction variable.

5.1    Discussion
If it is the case that certain types of fiscal adjustments are not necessarily costly in
terms of lost output or lost votes, why are they often delayed and politicians reluctant
to implement them?
    There are two possible, related reasons. The first is that “vote-counting” is not the
only political factor at play. Certain constituencies may be able to “block” adjustments
to continue receiving rents from government spending because they have enough political
energy (time, organization, money). This is sometimes referred to as an issue of diﬀuse
benefits and concentrated costs. For example, in some cases strikes of public-sector em-
ployees may create serious disruptions. Pensioners’ lobbies may be able to persuade
politicians not to touch their pension systems even when future generations will suf-
fer the costs of delayed reforms. Lobbyists for certain protected sectors use campaign
contributions for continued protection.
    A second and related problem is what Alesina and Drazen (1990) modeled as a
“war of attrition” political game. Political conflicts over the allocation of costs of the
budget cuts or tax increases, for example, lead to a stalemate that requires time to
be resolved. Postponing an adjustment may be costly, but all sides hope to be able
to shield themselves from such costs, and the “war” continues until one side gives in.
Thus, more polarized political systems and fractionalized societies, where “deals” and
compromises are more diﬃcult to reach quickly, should have a harder time stabilizing.
Another implication is that a political consolidation of a stable and secure cohesive
majority may be a precondition for a fiscal consolidation. Finally, this model is consistent
with the “crisis hypothesis,” namely that the idea that a sharp deterioration of the
economic situation may lead to reforms. In this case, a fiscal consolidation occurs simply
because it becomes too costly to continue to postpone.




                                            10
6     Case Studies
There is great variety of politico- economic features in large fiscal adjustments. They are
the result of complex interactions between fiscal, macroeconomic, structural reforms and
political variables. In this section we again focus on episodes of large fiscal adjustments,
and try to isolate some "interesting" cases. We consider diﬀerent political environments
in order to guarantee the appropriate variety. First we look at Canada in the 1990s, as
it can be taken as an example of "strong" government implementing fiscal adjustments.
The Liberal Party’s share of votes in 1993 was really high, with more than 40 percent
of the electors voting for the party. The second case we look at is Finland between 1993
and 1998. This case is completely diﬀerent, given the proportional and very fragmented
political system, in which the government in charge is often a coalition. Thirdly, we focus
on Sweden between 1994 and 2000. The Sweden case has some macroeconomics analogies
with the Finnish one, as both Sweden and Finland went through a severe financial crisis
at the beginning of the 90s. They also present some diﬀerences. In Sweden, the Social
Democratic Party had a consensus that lasted longer than in Finland: it took oﬃce in
1994 and started the fiscal consolidation just right after the election, holding the majority
until the 2006 elections. Finally we consider the United Kingdom in the 1990s, which
gives us a good example of a situation in which fiscal adjustments were implemented but
the government wasn’t re-elected.
    The empirical evidence suggests that in the cases of re-elections, the government
suﬀers a small decrease in the share of votes in the election following the consolidation
program, but this does not prevent them from staying in charge (for example in Finland).
In some cases the voters seem to appreciate the consolidation as time goes by, and after
a small decrease in the share of votes, a bigger increase follows (as in Canada).

6.1    Canada 1993-1997: Expenditure-Based Adjustment with Gov-
       ernment Re-election
Canada experienced a severe economic downturn in the early 1990s which had a signifi-
cant impact on the country’s budget balance. In 1992 public spending rose well above
50 percent of GDP and the budget deficit increased from 4.6 percent of GDP in 1989
to 9.1 percent in 1992. As a consequence, the public debt-to-GDP ratio grew sharply
to above 100 percent of GDP. The worsening of the overall general government deficit
originated in the deficit of the provinces (Hauptmeier et al. 2006). Moreover other key el-
ements contributed such as the substantial competitive disadvantages that Canada faced
because of high labor costs, low productivity growth rates, and a pronounced exchange
rate appreciation that started in the mid-eighties.
    In reaction to these events, in 1993 the Canadian government started an ambitious
austerity program. The success was particularly based on three elements: low and
stable inflation, structural reforms, and substantial expenditure reductions. By 1997,
the budget had been balanced. More than 90 percent of the fiscal adjustment was due to
spending cuts. The main expenditure measures included "cuts in wages (in particular,
public employee compensation), unemployment benefits, defense spending, health care
services, agricultural and business subsidies, and transfers to provinces and households"
(Leigh et al. 2007). As a result, total and primary expenditures declined by around 3.5
percent of GDP within the first two years. In the following years the consolidation path
was continued and led to a total spending decrease by more than 11 percent of GDP
over seven years, compared to the peak it reached in 1992.
    On the revenue side some reforms lowered the tax burden and improved the fairness
of the tax system, reducing personal income taxes at the provincial level, increasing
corporate income tax rates, and broadening the base of both. Other measures included


                                             11
a wide use of privatizations and a reformation of transfer systems, which benefited both
the budget balance and the supply side of the economy. Some major reforms were also
introduced to increase labor market flexibility and to make the financial sector more
competitive and eﬃcient. For instance, the financial services sector policy was reviewed
and reformed in the late 1990s.
    Traditionally, politically Canada had a two-party system with the Conservative and
Liberal parties dominating the political scene.
    Beginning in the 1990s, Canadian national politics became more like of a multi-party
system, even though the Liberal and Conservative parties kept a relatively dominant
role. But in 1993 a total of five main political parties competed for electoral support,
and an erosion of the command enjoyed by the Liberal and Conservative parties. In 1993
the Liberal Party took oﬃce, running its election campaign explicitly on a platform of
addressing Canada’s fiscal issues (the so-called "Red book"). The party was able to win
a strong majority, one of the best results in Canada’s history, after being out of power
since 1984. In the 1993 elections, the party won 177 seats and achieved the third-best
performance in its history, and its best performance since 1949. The Liberal Party was
re-elected with a considerably lower majority in the following general election in 1997,
but nearly tied their 1993 result in the subsequent 2000 election. Chretien became the
only Canadian Prime Minister to win three consecutive majority governments.

6.2        Finland 1993-1998: Expenditure Based Adjustment with
           Government Re-election
During the 1980s Finland went through a financial liberalization process that led to a
lending boom. The boom was followed by a recession, partially due to the banking
crisis of 1991, and partially due to the deterioration of the terms of trade following
the fall of the Soviet Union, which accounted for 15 to 20 percent of Finland’s foreign
trade. Finland’s real GDP dropped by about 14 percent between 1990 and 1993. By
1994 unemployment had reached nearly 20 percent.12 . Government spending over GDP
reached a staggering 65 per cent and the deficit exceeded 7 percent. At the same time,
bailout costs for the banking sector further accelerated the increase in the public debt
ratio.
    The government reaction was to enact a substantial fiscal adjustment over 6 years,
between 1993 and 1998: the debt over GDP ratio went down of a cumulative 6.2 percent-
age points between 1993 and 1998. We estimate that about 78 percent of the adjustment
was due to expenditure cuts. According to Hauptmeier et al. (2006) there was a 5
percent of GDP reduction in total expenditures over the first 2 years of the fiscal ad-
justment and that expenditures were reduced by 15 percent to 49 percent of GDP over
seven years. Furthermore in the same period, the fiscal balance improved substantially
to achieve a 7 percent surplus by the end of the 1990s. The main expenditure mea-
sures included cuts in social benefits, particularly unemployment benefits, transfers to
municipalities, subsidies, wages, and capital spending. For instance, contractual pay in-
creases were frozen for 4 years starting from 1991, and those measures were accompanied
by moderate wage agreements in the public sector and reductions in public sector em-
ployment levels. The government also implemented broadly revenue-neutral tax reform
raising user fees in health and education, along with increases in payroll taxes and in
employee compensation for social security. Complementary reform measures also helped
the fiscal adjustment. For instance, ‘incomes policy agreements’ were implemented on a
biannual basis, contributing to wage stability and low levels of inflation. A devaluation
of the exchange rate in 1992 also helped improve the budget balance by benefitting the
 1 2 For   more details see Honkapohja and Koskela (1999)



                                                  12
tradable sector. Furthermore, inflation targeting at 2 percent contributed to the overall
stability and renewed growth of the economy in the following years.
    Finland can be classified as a case of expenditure-based fiscal adjustment with re-
election if we look at the 1999 elections. The result is not as clear-cut as it was for
Canada since there was a change in the Finnish government in the 1995 elections, after
the austerity program had already started. The Finnish political background in the 1990s
can be illustrated as follows. The Centre Party and the Social Democratic Party were
the two main political parties between 1993 and 1998, and both implemented austerity
policies during that period. In 1992, the Centre-Party government elected in 1991 started
a fiscal consolidation program based on a new medium-term framework. It lost the
following elections, in April 1995, when the SDP won with 28.3 percent of the votes and
immediately introduced an austerity package. In particular the new social-democratic
government was formed by a five-party "Rainbow Coalition" and Paavo Lippon en, the
SDP leader, was appointed Prime Minister. The SDP was re-elected in 1999, although
by a very narrow majority, having lost a significant share of the votes (5.4 percent)
relative to the previous election. According to election results, there was a strong political
competition among three parties between 1995 and 2003: the SDP, the National Coalition
Party, and the Centre Party, with the latter taking oﬃce again after the 2003 elections.
As in Canada, from electoral results we can see a decrease in votes for the leading political
party during the fiscal adjustment. Still, the SDP, which had the majority in 1992, again
had the relative majority in the 1999 elections.

6.3    Sweden 1994-2000: Expenditure-Based Adjustment with Gov-
       ernment Re-election
The boom of the 1980s in Sweden was followed by a recession, which was triggered
by the banking crisis of 1991, after the collapse of a real estate bubble. The public
expenditure ratio had increased to 73 percent of GDP in 1993 and public debt had
risen rapidly to over 70 percent of GDP. The budget deficit was at 11.2 percent of GDP
and the unemployment rate at 7.5 percent. In response to these events, the Swedish
government started a fiscal consolidation program, which, according to our estimates,
led to a cumulative fiscal adjustment of 8.4 percent over 7 years mainly because of
substantial cuts in expenditures. By the end of the year 2000 ther was a 3 per cent of
GDP surplus.
    Around 70 percent of the adjustment was based on cuts in expenditures. Central
features of the new budget process, implemented in January 1997, were also a budgetary
process with multi-year expenditure ceilings and a medium-term target for the govern-
ment’s net lending. An expenditure ceiling was imposed in 1996, which limited central
government expenditures and expenditures for the pension system outside the budget
(but did not include interest expenditures). The adjustment covered approximately two-
thirds of the total Swedish general government expenditures and substantially reduced
government transfers, such as pensions, early retirement benefits, housing subsidies, and
social and unemployment insurance. Moreover, cuts across on a broad range of spending
programs were implemented between 1994 and 2000. Some revenue measures were also
introduced, including increases in social security fees, full taxation of dividends and cap-
ital gains, and increases in personal income tax rates. Hauptmeier et al. (2006) report
that since mid-1995, "the government gradually implemented a pension reform and in-
troduced a funded pillar, besides pursuing a privatization program and a higher degree
of labour market liberalization".
    Sweden, as was the case for Canada and Finland, is a case of expenditure-based
fiscal adjustment with re-election. In the September 1994 general election the Social



                                             13
Democratic Party won most seats, although not an overall majority, and Ingvar Carlsson
returned to power at the head of a minority government after a center-right minority
government had won the previous elections in the early 1990s. In August of 1995 Carlsson
announced that he would step down as prime minister in March 1996, once his party had
chosen a replacement. In the meanwhile, a referendum was passed in November 1994
supporting Sweden’s application for entering the European Union (EU), and in January
1995 Sweden became a full EU member.
    Göran Persson, the former Sweden finance minister, replaced Carlsson as prime min-
ister in March 1996 and continued the austerity measures that started at the beginning
of the 1990s. Although the fiscal adjustment was quite significant as dicussed above
Persson’s Social Democrats finished ahead in the September 1998 general election, al-
though its share of votes decreased by 7 percent to 38 percent. The votes for the Social
Democratic Party were lost to the ex-communist Left Party, which doubled its vote to
12 percent between 1994 and 1998, and which supported the government conditional on
it raising welfare spending and holding a referendum to join the Euro. Between 1998 and
2002, the economy started growing again, which enabled tax cuts and led to the Social
Democratic victory in the following general elections in 2002. The Social Democrats held
oﬃce until 2006.

6.4    United Kingdom 1994-1999: Expenditure-Based Adjustment
       without Government Re-election
On September 16, 1992, the Prime Minister Major was forced to withdraw the pound
from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism because the British government could
not maintain the value of the currency at agreed-upon levels. In early 1993, ther
was positve growth driven by an increase in private consumption. Unemploymeny
fell over the following years, while inflation remained relatively low. At the same time
austerity measures were implemented, mostly through expenditure cuts. Using our data,
we estimate that the United Kingdom experienced a cumulative decline in the ratio of
deficit to GDP of 6.7 percentage points between 1994 and 1999, and that almost 60
percent of the fiscal adjustment was due to expenditure cuts. Expenditure measures
mainly consisted of sustantial cuts in government consumption, public employment and
transfers. They also implemented cuts in defense, transport and social benefits (by
setting tighter eligibility criteria). On the revenue side the austerity program included
increases in indirect taxes and some duties. However "The VAT was lowered on some
items for equity reasons, advanced corporation tax rebates were abolished, and there
was a small reduction in the corporate tax rate" (Leigh et al. 2007). Complementary
measures were also implemented, and they included establishing the independence of
the Bank of England, reforming the tax systems, in particular in the area of corporate
taxation, and social contributions especially in the low-wage sector. Moreover legislation
on corporate governance and competition was improved, and the utilities sector was
substantially reformed by changing regulations.
     In the election of 1997 the Conservative Party lost and the Labour Party took oﬃce.
It should be remembered tat after three consecutive victories, the Conservative Party
won again in 1992, but this time by a narrower margin: the Tory majority in 1992 was
reduced from over a hundred seats to below thirty. In addition the economic credibility
of the government was seriously undermined a few months after the election, when Major
was forced to withdraw the pound from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.




                                           14
7    Conclusion
In this paper we have examined in some details the evidence supporting the conventional
wisdom that fiscally "tight" governments loose popularity and elections and fiscally ex-
pansionary ones win. We found surprisingly little evidence supporting this conventional
wisdom given the strenght with which this view is held by politicians, commentators,
political scientists and economists. More precisely we found no evidence that even large
reductions of budget deficits are associated always ( or most of the times) with electoral
losses .
    The biggest counter argument is one of reverse causation, namely strong and popular
government can implement fiscal adjustment and be reelected "despite" such policies,
thus only these government do so. Our attempts to uncover these reverse causation does
not provide convincing evidence that our result are only driven by this eﬀect. Needless
to say it is diﬃcult to measure "strength" of a government, ex ante, and therefore our
test should be taken cautiously. But we believe that a cautious conclusion is warranted:
reasonably solid governments not on the verge of losing an election anyway can engage
in fiscal adjustments, even aggressive ones and survive the next election.
    Three case studies of sharp fiscal adjustments (Canada, Finland and Sweden) show
a decline in political support for the government, but a strong recovery later on. In the
case of the UK the political revieval did not occur and a very unpopular John Major
lost.




                                           15
8     Appendix
8.1    National Accounts Data
Fiscal and macroeconomic data are taken from the OECD Economic Outlook Database
no.84. In our analysis we focus on the period 1975-2008. Variables we use in our study
are defined as follows:

CHEXP : Change in public expenditures: percentage point change in the ratio of pri-
mary expenditures to GDP. Primary expenditures are computed as government current
disbursements less gross government interest payments.
CHREV : Change in public revenues: percentage point change in the ratio of public
revenues to GDP. Public revenues are computed as governement current receipts less
gross governemnt interest receipts.
CHDEF : Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public
deficit to GDP. Calculated as  less 
CHT RF : Change in transfers to households: percentage point change in the ratio of
transfers to households to GDP.
CHSU B : Change in subsidies: percentage point change in the ratio of subsidies to
GDP.
COCHEXP : Change in government expenditures ( ), corrected for the cy-
cle: percentage point change in the ratio of cyclically adjusted primary expenditures to
potential GDP.
COCHREV : Change in government revenues ( ), corrected for the cycle: per-
centage point change in the ratio of cyclically adjusted government revenues to potential
GDP.
COCHDEF : Change in the primary deficit ( ), corrected for the cycle: cal-
culated as  less  .
T OT CHDEF : Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point
change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the
current year. That is the average of  for the years from the last termination up
to the current year.
∆GDP : Rate of growth of real GDP, percent. Computed as the percentage change of
the variable "Gross domestic product, volume, at 2000 ppp".
∆T OT GDP : Average growth during tenure: average growth rate from the time when
a cabinet came to power, up to current year, percent.
∆GDP G7 : Growth of G7 countries: weighted average growth rate of the G7 countries,
percent. Weights for each country are calculated using real GDP.
∆GDP g7 : Growth relative to the G7 countries: calculated as ∆ less ∆ 7.
U N R : Unemployment rate, percent.
∆U N R : Growth of the unemployment rate, percent: [(     −1 ) − 1] ∗ 100.
∆T OT U N R : Average unemployment growth during tenure: average annual growth
rate of unemployment rate from beginning of cabinet’s tenure to current year, percent.
U N Rg7 : Unemployment rate relative to the G7 countries: unemployment rate less the
GDP-weighted average of the G7 unemployment rate, percentage points.
IN F L : Inflation: rate of change of the GDP deflator, percent. It is constucted using
the variable "Gross domestic product, deflator, market prices".
T OT IN F L : Average inflation during tenure: average rate of inflation from the begin-
ning of cabinet’s tenure to current year, percent.
IN F Lg7 : Inflation rate relative to the G7 countries: inflation rate less the GDP-
weighted average of the G7 inflation rate, percentage points.



                                           16
P EXP : Spending-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two
conditions hold:

  a. there is a large adjustment (  - 1.5);
  b.  is less than its median across all years in which a large adjustment occurs.

P T AX : Tax-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two condi-
tions hold:

  a. there is a large adjustment (  - 1.5);
  b.  is more than its median across all years in which a large adjustment
     occurs.

P T RF : Transfer-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two
conditions hold:

  a. there is a large adjustment (  - 1.5);
  b.   is less than its median across all years in which a large adjustment occurs.

P CGW : Government wage-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when the
following two conditions hold:

  a. there is a large adjustment (  1.5);
  b.  is less than its median across all years in which a large adjustment
     occurs.

N IN T RT g7 : Relative nominal interest rate: long term nominal interest rate (ten-
year treasury notes) of a given country less the GDP-weighted average of long nominal
interest rates in the G7 countries, percentage points.
RIN T RT : Real interest rate: ten-year interest rate minus the growth rate of the GDP
deflator, percent.
RIN T RT g7 : Relative real interest rate: ten-year real interest rate of a given country
less the GDP-weighted average of real interest rates in the G7 countries.

8.2    Cabinet data
For cabinet data we use the Database of Political Institutions (DPI) 2009. Again, we
cover the period 1975-2008. The cabinet variables we focus on are defined as follows:

T ERM : Government termination: dummy variable equal to 1 in any year in which
a government ends, regardless of the reason. A termination may or may not involve a
"change" in cabinet ideology or prime minister.
DU RAT : Duration: integer number of years that a cabinet has been in power, up to
the current year. A cabinet that falls during its first year in power is counted as 1. Every
time there is a government termination (  = 1),   is reset to 1 the year
after the termination.
SIN G : Single party: dummy variable equal to 1 if a single party cabinet is in power.
COAL : Coalition: dummy variable equal to 1 if a coalition cabinet (including ministers
from two or more parties) is in power.
M AJ : Majority: dummy variable equal to 1 if the cabinet has majority support in
parliament.

                                            17
IDEOCH : Change in ideology of cabinet: dummy variable equal to 1 if there is a
change in the ideology index between the current year and the next. It is constructed
by exploiting the change in the value of variable  (describing the ideology
of the chief executive’s party) in the DPI dataset.
ALLCH : Change of ideology or prime minister; dummy variable equal to 1 if either
 or    is equal to 1.


References
 [1] Alcidi, Cinzia and Daniel Gros (2010) “The European experience with large fiscal
     adjustments”, VoxEU.org, 28 April.
 [2] Alesina, Alberto and Ardagna Silvia (2010) “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes
     Versus Spending”, forthcoming in Tax Policy and The Economy.
 [3] Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna and Francesco Trebbi (2006) "Who Adjusts and
     When? On the Political Economy of Reforms," NBER Working Papers 12049
 [4] Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 81, 1170-1188.
 [5] Alesina, Alberto, Roberto Perotti and Josè A. Tavares (1998) “The Political Econ-
     omy of Fiscal Adjustments”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring.
 [6] Alesina, Alberto and Howard Rosenthal (1995) "Partisan Politics, Divided Govern-
     ment and the Economy",Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 [7] Bonfiglioli, Alessandra and Gino Gancia (2010) "Politicians, Uncertainty and Re-
     forms" unpublished
 [8] Brender, Adi and Allan Drazen (2005) "Political budget cycles in new versus es-
     tablished democracies", Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 52(7), pages
     1271-1295, October
 [9] Brender, Adi and Allan Drazen (2008) "How Do Budget Deficits and Economic
     Growth Aﬀect Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries",
     American Economic Review, 98(5): 2203-20
[10] Buti, Marco and Paul Van den Noord (2004a) “Fiscal Policy in EMU: Rules, Dis-
     cretion and Political Incentives”, Moneda y Crédito, No. 218 (2004), pp. 265-31
[11] Buti, Marco and Paul Van den Noord (2004b) “Fiscal Discretion and Elections in
     the Early Years of EMU”, Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol. 42, No. 4 (2004),
     pp. 737-756
[12] Buti, Marco, Alessandro Turrini, Paul Van den Noord and Pietro Biroli (2008) "De-
     fying the ’Juncker Curse’: Can Reformist Governments Be Re-elected?" , Empirica,
     Springer, vol. 36(1), pages 65-100, February.
[13] Buti, Marco, Alessandro Turrini, Paul Van den Noord and Pietro Biroli (2010)
     "Reforms and re-elections in OECD countries", Economic Policy, 25: 61—116
[14] Drazen, Allan (2000) "Political Economy in Macroeconomics" Princeton, NJ:
     Princeton University Press




                                          18
[15] Fair, Ray C. (1978) “The Eﬀect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review
     of Economics and Statistics 60, 159-72.
[16] Fair, Ray C. (1982) “The Eﬀect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1980
     Results,” Review of Economics and Statistics 64, 322-25.
[17] Fair,Ray C. (1988) “The Eﬀects of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1984
     Update,” Political Behavior 10, 168-79.
[18] Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (1990) "Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be
     Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries”, NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual, MIT Press:95-122.
[19] Giorno, Claude, Pete Richardson, Deborah Roseveare, and Paul van den Noord
     (1995), "Potential Output, Output Gaps, and Structural Budget Balances," OECD
     Economic Studies, No. 24, 167-209.
[20] Hauptmeier, Sebastian, Martin Heipertz and Ludger Schuknecht (2006), Expendi-
     ture reform in industrialised countries: a case study approach, Working Paper Series
     No 634, May 2006
[21] Honkapohja,Seppo and Erkki Koskela (1999), "The economic crisis of the 1990s in
     Finland," Economic Policy, vol. 14(29), pages 399-436, October.
[22] International Monetary Fund (2010), World Economic Outlook, Washington DC
     September
[23] Leigh,Daniel, Alexander Plekhanov and Manmohan S. Kumar (2007),"Fiscal Ad-
     justments: Determinants and Macroeconomic Consequences,"IMF Working Papers
     07/178, International Monetary Fund.
[24] Perotti, Roberto (2011), "The “Austerity Myth”:Gain Without Pain?"
[25] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000), "Political Economics: Explaining Eco-
     nomic Policy", MIT Press, Cambridge and London.
[26] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth and Anne Sibert (1988), “Elections and Macroeconomic Policy
     Cycles,” Review of Economic Studies 55, 1-16.




                                           19
Table 1 – 10 periods with largest cumulative fiscal adjustment (cyclically adjusted variables)

                                                CHANGE IN CHANGE IN CYCL.              CHANGE IN
                                                CYCL. ADJ.      ADJ.                   CYCL. ADJ.    CUMULATIVE       FISCAL     % OF FISCAL ADJ.
                                       NUMBER     DEFICIT  EXPENDITURES                REVENUES         FISCAL     ADJUSTMENT     DUE TO CUT IN                CHANGE IN
      COUNTRY              YEARS       OF YEARS (COCHDEF)    (COCHEXP)                 (COCHREV)     ADJUSTMENT     PER YEAR      EXPENDITURES      TERM       IDEOLOGY
DENMARK                 1983-86                  4         -2.43               -0.85          1.58         -9.74         -2.43              35.03          2           0
GREECE                  1990-94                  5         -1.88               -0.50          1.38         -9.39         -1.88              26.38          2           1
SWEDEN                  1994-2000                7         -1.20               -0.81          0.38         -8.38         -1.20              67.91          3           0
BELGIUM                 1982-87                  6         -1.26               -0.96          0.30         -7.57         -1.26              76.50          2           0
CANADA                  1993-97                  5         -1.36               -1.25          0.11         -6.80         -1.36              91.80          1           0
UNITED KINGDOM          1994-99                  6         -1.12               -0.66          0.47         -6.72         -1.12              58.45          1           1
FINLAND                 1993-98                  6         -1.04               -0.81          0.23         -6.23         -1.04              78.13          2           1
PORTUGAL                1982-84                  3         -1.89               -1.14          0.75         -5.67         -1.89              60.16          2           2
ITALY                   1990-93                  4         -1.24                0.13          1.36         -4.95         -1.24             -10.21          2           1
IRELAND                 1986-89                  4         -1.21               -1.54         -0.33         -4.82         -1.21             127.50          2           1


Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 1 – Frequency in cabinet changes and fiscal adjustments

      0.80


      0.70


      0.60


      0.50

                                                                                                       All adjustments
      0.40
                                                                                                       Fiscal expansions
                                                                                                       Small adjustments
      0.30
                                                                                                       Large adjustments

      0.20


      0.10


      0.00
                       1 year before                    2 years before                3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 2 - Frequency in changes of cabinet ideology and fiscal adjustments

        0.80


        0.70


        0.60


        0.50

                                                                                                       All adjustments
        0.40
                                                                                                       Fiscal expansions
                                                                                                       Small adjustments
        0.30
                                                                                                       Large adjustments

        0.20


        0.10


        0.00
                          1 year before                      2 years before           3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 3 - Frequency in changes of cabinet ideology and cabinet changes given expenditure/tax based adjustments

        0.25



        0.20



        0.15
                                                                                                            All adjustments
                                                                                                            Large adjustments
                                                                                                            Exp based adjustments
        0.10
                                                                                                            Tax based adjustments



        0.05



        0.00
                                    All changes                                       Changes in ideology



Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Table 2 - Probit coefficients (full sample)

                                                     (1)                            (2)                           (3)                            (4)                              (5)
VARIABLES                                          IDEOCH                         IDEOCH                        IDEOCH                         IDEOCH                           IDEOCH

        1
CHDEF                                               -0.0627
                                                    (0.052)
            2
COCHDEF                                                                           0.0039
                                                                                  (0.056)
                3
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                        -0.0100
                                                                                                                (0.067)
        4
CHEXP                                                                                                                                          -0.0344
                                                                                                                                               (0.063)
        5
CHREV                                                                                                                                                                         0.0551
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.061)
DGDP                                                -0.0471                       -0.0439                      -0.1039**                       -0.0499                       -0.0320
                                                     (0.042)                       (0.044)                       (0.048)                        (0.044)                       (0.042)
DUNR                                                 0.0009                       -0.0030                       -0.0066                        -0.0007                       -0.0005
                                                     (0.005)                       (0.005)                       (0.006)                        (0.005)                       (0.005)
INFL                                               0.0266**                      0.0342**                      0.0309**                       0.0301**                      0.0265**
                                                     (0.013)                       (0.014)                       (0.013)                        (0.013)                       (0.013)
DURAT                                              0.2265***                     0.2273***                     0.2295***                      0.2246***                     0.2256***
                                                     (0.050)                       (0.052)                       (0.051)                        (0.050)                       (0.050)
COAL                                                 0.0547                        0.0493                        0.0450                         0.0626                        0.0644
                                                     (0.150)                       (0.154)                       (0.152)                        (0.150)                       (0.150)
MAJ                                                  0.0039                       -0.0154                       -0.0467                        -0.0083                        0.0084
                                                     (0.178)                       (0.182)                       (0.179)                        (0.178)                       (0.178)
Constant                                          -1.7700***                    -1.8006***                    -1.6166***                     -1.7657***                    -1.8195***
                                                     (0.230)                       (0.242)                       (0.237)                        (0.234)                       (0.230)

Log-likelihood
Observations                                          613                           591                            613                           614                             613
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
3. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
4. Change in public expenditures: percentage point change in the ratio of primary expenditures to GDP.
5. Change in public revenues: percentage point change in the ratio of public revenues to GDP.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 3 - Probit coefficients (full sample), with additional controls

                                             (1)                                  (2)                                   (3)                                   (4)                  (5)
VARIABLES                                  IDEOCH                               IDEOCH                                IDEOCH                                IDEOCH               IDEOCH
       1
CHDEF                                      -0.0663
                                           (0.053)
             2
COCHDEF                                                                          0.0125
                                                                                 (0.058)
                 3
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                              -0.0210
                                                                                                                      (0.070)
       4
CHEXP                                                                                                                                                       -0.0325
                                                                                                                                                            (0.068)
         5
CHREV                                                                                                                                                                              0.0619
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.062)
DGDP                                       -0.0857                              -0.0688                              -0.1545**                              -0.0820               -0.0603
                                            (0.060)                              (0.062)                               (0.061)                               (0.064)               (0.059)
DUNR                                        0.0010                              -0.0026                               -0.0075                               -0.0007                0.0000
                                            (0.005)                              (0.006)                               (0.006)                               (0.005)               (0.005)
INFL                                       0.0308*                             0.0425**                               0.0302*                              0.0344**              0.0332**
                                            (0.017)                              (0.017)                               (0.017)                               (0.017)               (0.017)
DURAT                                     0.2241***                            0.2259***                             0.2236***                             0.2221***             0.2231***
                                            (0.050)                              (0.052)                               (0.051)                               (0.050)               (0.050)
COAL                                        0.0688                               0.0666                                0.0648                                0.0787                0.0789
                                            (0.152)                              (0.156)                               (0.154)                               (0.152)               (0.152)
MAJ                                         0.0001                              -0.0282                               -0.0428                               -0.0125                0.0017
                                            (0.179)                              (0.183)                               (0.180)                               (0.179)               (0.179)
DGDPg7                                      0.0520                               0.0369                                0.0640                                0.0439                0.0420
                                            (0.055)                              (0.058)                               (0.049)                               (0.055)               (0.054)
UNRg7                                       0.0128                               0.0199                                0.0131                                0.0144                0.0151
                                            (0.022)                              (0.023)                               (0.022)                               (0.022)               (0.022)
INFLg7                                     -0.0056                              -0.0141                                0.0107                               -0.0052               -0.0138
                                            (0.031)                              (0.032)                               (0.032)                               (0.032)               (0.031)
Constant                                 -1.6840***                           -1.7501***                            -1.5306***                            -1.7003***            -1.7466***
                                            (0.260)                              (0.271)                               (0.266)                               (0.265)               (0.257)

Log-likelihood
Observations                                 613                                   591                                  613                                   614                  613
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
3. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
4. Change in public expenditures: percentage point change in the ratio of primary expenditures to GDP.
5. Change in public revenues: percentage point change in the ratio of public revenues to GDP.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 4 - Probit coefficients (using only observations with CHDEF<0)

                                                     (1)                            (2)                           (3)                            (4)                              (5)
VARIABLES                                          IDEOCH                         IDEOCH                        IDEOCH                         IDEOCH                           IDEOCH
        1
CHDEF                                               -0.1454
                                                    (0.108)
            2
COCHDEF                                                                           -0.0570
                                                                                  (0.105)
                3
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                         0.0281
                                                                                                                 (0.130)
        4
CHEXP                                                                                                                                          0.0608
                                                                                                                                               (0.101)
        5
CHREV                                                                                                                                                                        0.2104*
                                                                                                                                                                             (0.109)
DGDP                                                -0.0249                       -0.0515                       -0.0701                        -0.0077                        0.0166
                                                    (0.060)                       (0.066)                       (0.068)                        (0.063)                       (0.063)
DUNR                                                 0.0098                       -0.0035                        0.0070                         0.0078                        0.0061
                                                    (0.009)                       (0.011)                       (0.009)                        (0.009)                       (0.009)
INFL                                                 0.0232                       0.0331*                        0.0273                         0.0295                        0.0191
                                                    (0.019)                       (0.020)                       (0.019)                        (0.018)                       (0.019)
DURAT                                              0.1666**                      0.1550**                        0.1182                       0.1624**                      0.1691**
                                                    (0.072)                       (0.077)                       (0.079)                        (0.072)                       (0.073)
COAL                                                 0.1158                        0.0903                        0.1036                         0.1374                        0.1236
                                                    (0.214)                       (0.217)                       (0.216)                        (0.213)                       (0.214)
MAJ                                                 -0.0443                       -0.0557                       -0.0944                        -0.0554                       -0.0003
                                                    (0.268)                       (0.270)                       (0.268)                        (0.266)                       (0.267)
Constant                                          -1.8521***                    -1.6941***                    -1.4695***                     -1.7634***                    -1.9791***
                                                    (0.351)                       (0.389)                       (0.378)                        (0.341)                       (0.364)

Log-likelihood
Observations                                          325                           316                            325                           325                             325
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
3. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
4. Change in public expenditures: percentage point change in the ratio of primary expenditures to GDP.
5. Change in public revenues: percentage point change in the ratio of public revenues to GDP.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 5 - Probit coefficients (full sample, non-cyclically adjusted variables)

                                                (1)                                (2)                                (3)                                (4)
VARIABLES                                     IDEOCH                             IDEOCH                             IDEOCH                             IDEOCH

           1
CHDEF                                         -0.0907                            -0.0444                            -0.0812                            -0.0697
                                               (0.057)                            (0.060)                            (0.056)                            (0.059)
DGDP                                          -0.0450                            -0.0438                            -0.0463                            -0.0478
                                               (0.042)                            (0.042)                            (0.042)                            (0.042)
DUNR                                           0.0016                             0.0007                             0.0014                             0.0010
                                               (0.005)                            (0.005)                            (0.005)                            (0.005)
INFL                                          0.0251*                            0.0255*                            0.0252*                           0.0266**
                                               (0.013)                            (0.013)                            (0.013)                            (0.013)
DURAT                                        0.2256***                          0.2277***                          0.2254***                          0.2270***
                                               (0.050)                            (0.050)                            (0.050)                            (0.050)
COAL                                           0.0530                             0.0479                             0.0532                             0.0557
                                               (0.151)                            (0.151)                            (0.150)                            (0.150)
MAJ                                           -0.0041                             0.0033                             0.0002                             0.0035
                                               (0.178)                            (0.178)                            (0.178)                            (0.178)
       2
PEXP                                          -0.4227
                                               (0.340)
       3
PTAX                                                                              0.1798
                                                                                  (0.292)
       4
PTRF                                                                                                                -0.3040
                                                                                                                    (0.347)
           5
PCGW                                                                                                                                                   -0.0753
                                                                                                                                                       (0.297)
Constant                                    -1.7427***                         -1.7839***                         -1.7468***                         -1.7655***
                                              (0.232)                            (0.231)                            (0.232)                            (0.231)

Log-likelihood
Observations                                     613                                613                                613                                613
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Spending-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two conditions hold: (a) there is a large adjustment (CHDEF < - 1.5); (b) CHEXP is less than its median across all years in which a large adjustment occurs.
3. Tax-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two conditions hold: (a) there is a large adjustment (CHDEF < - 1.5); (b) CHREV is more than its median across all years in which a large adjustment occurs.
4. Transfer-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when following two conditions hold: (a) there is a large adjustment (CHDEF < - 1.5); (b) CHTRF is less than its median across all years in which a large adjustment occurs.
5. Government wage-based adjustment: dummy variable equal to 1 when the following two conditions hold: (a) there is a large adjustment (CHDEF < 1.5); (b) CHCGW is less than its median across all years in which a large
adjustment occurs.
Table 6 (same variables as table 3) - Logit fixed effects model coefficients (full sample)

                                                    (1)                             (2)                             (3)                             (4)                            (5)
VARIABLES                                         IDEOCH                          IDEOCH                          IDEOCH                          IDEOCH                         IDEOCH
       1
CHDEF                                             -0.1260
                                                  (0.100)
             2
COCHDEF                                                                           -0.0084
                                                                                  (0.109)
                 3
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                          -0.1304
                                                                                                                  (0.135)
       4
CHEXP                                                                                                                                             -0.0997
                                                                                                                                                  (0.137)
         5
CHREV                                                                                                                                                                             0.1047
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.119)
DGDP                                             -0.1638                         -0.1224                        -0.3396***                        -0.1728                        -0.1159
                                                  (0.114)                         (0.116)                          (0.125)                         (0.124)                        (0.112)
DUNR                                              0.0034                         -0.0022                          -0.0095                         -0.0004                         0.0016
                                                  (0.010)                         (0.010)                          (0.012)                         (0.009)                        (0.010)
INFL                                              0.0113                          0.0407                          -0.0034                          0.0168                         0.0284
                                                  (0.047)                         (0.046)                          (0.048)                         (0.048)                        (0.045)
DURAT                                           0.5246***                       0.5401***                        0.5410***                       0.5244***                      0.5221***
                                                  (0.101)                         (0.106)                          (0.105)                         (0.101)                        (0.101)
COAL                                              0.0497                          0.1209                          -0.0311                          0.0320                         0.0269
                                                  (0.406)                         (0.415)                          (0.410)                         (0.406)                        (0.407)
MAJ                                              -0.3609                         -0.3537                          -0.4716                         -0.3877                        -0.3539
                                                  (0.433)                         (0.435)                          (0.435)                         (0.434)                        (0.434)
DGDPg7                                            0.0716                          0.0681                           0.0909                          0.0589                         0.0630
                                                  (0.104)                         (0.110)                          (0.091)                         (0.103)                        (0.103)
UNRg7                                             0.0252                          0.0784                           0.0067                          0.0237                         0.0435
                                                  (0.059)                         (0.063)                          (0.059)                         (0.061)                        (0.058)
INFLg7                                            0.0484                          0.0368                           0.0917                          0.0535                         0.0212
                                                  (0.072)                         (0.074)                          (0.076)                         (0.077)                        (0.072)
Log-likelihood
Observations                                        580                             558                             580                              581                          580
Number of countries                                 18                              18                              18                               18                           18
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
3. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
4. Change in public expenditures: percentage point change in the ratio of primary expenditures to GDP.
5. Change in public revenues: percentage point change in the ratio of public revenues to GDP.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 7 – Fiscal adjustments using different definitions of executive

                              N° OF OBSERVATIONS           N° OF FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS         N° OF LARGE FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS
                                  (1975-2008)                      (1975-2008)                        (1975-2008)                                    AVERAGE COCHDEF
                                      (a)                              (b)                                 (c)               % (b)/(a)   % (c)/(a)      (1975-2008)
NO ABSOLUTE MAJORITY                               465                                229                               47      49.2%       10.1%             -0.00794
ABSOLUTE MAJORITY                                  127                                 62                               13      48.8%       10.2%            0.1465567
SINGLE PARTY                                       253                                130                               26      51.4%       10.3%            0.0291018
COALITION OF PARTIES                               347                                164                               34      47.3%        9.8%            0.0296184


Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 4 – Frequency in cabinet changes and fiscal adjustments (Single party/Coalition)

                                                    FREQUENCY IN CABINET CHANGES AND FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS



            0.80
                                Single party governments                              Coalition governments
            0.70

            0.60

            0.50                                                                                                                All adjustments
                                                                                                                                Expansionary
            0.40
                                                                                                                                Small adjustments
            0.30                                                                                                                Large adjustments

            0.20

            0.10

            0.00
                     1 year before    2 years before       3 years before   1 year before     2 years before   3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 5 - Frequency in changes of cabinet ideology and fiscal adjustments (Single party/Coalition)

                                           FREQUENCY IN CHANGES OF CABINET IDEOLOGY AND FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS




           0.80
                     Single party governments                                         Coalition governments
           0.70

           0.60

           0.50                                                                                                                 All adjustments
                                                                                                                                Expansionary
           0.40
                                                                                                                                Small adjustments
           0.30                                                                                                                 Large adjustments

           0.20

           0.10

           0.00
                    1 year before      2 years before   3 years before    1 year before       2 years before   3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 6 – Frequency in cabinet changes and fiscal adjustments ( Majority/No Majority)

                                                   FREQUENCY IN CABINET CHANGES AND FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS


                     No majority governments                               Majority governments
            0.90

            0.80

            0.70

            0.60
                                                                                                                               All adjustments
            0.50
                                                                                                                               Expansionary
            0.40                                                                                                               Small adjustments
                                                                                                                               Large adjustments
            0.30

            0.20

            0.10

            0.00
                     1 year before     2 years before   3 years before     1 year before     2 years before   3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Figure 7 - Frequency in changes of cabinet ideology and fiscal adjustments ( Majority/No Majority)

                                          FREQUENCY IN CHANGES OF CABINET IDEOLOGY AND FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS



                     No majority governments                                     Majority governments
           0.80

           0.70

           0.60

           0.50                                                                                                              All adjustments
                                                                                                                             Expansionary
           0.40
                                                                                                                             Small adjustments

           0.30                                                                                                              Large adjustments


           0.20

           0.10

           0.00
                    1 year before     2 years before   3 years before    1 year before     2 years before   3 years before




Source: Authors’ calculations on OECD Economic Outlook Database no.84 and DPI 2009.
Table 8 - Probit coefficients (Coalition interaction term)
                                          (1)                                (2)                          (3)                 (4)                 (5)                     (6)
VARIABLES                               IDEOCH                             IDEOCH                       IDEOCH              IDEOCH              IDEOCH                  IDEOCH
        1
CHDEF                                   -0.0627                            -0.0817
                                        (0.052)                            (0.077)
                    2
CHDEF*COAL                                                                  0.0311
                                                                           (0.093)
            3
COCHDEF                                                                                                  0.0039             -0.0321
                                                                                                         (0.056)            (0.083)
                        4
COCHDEF*COAL                                                                                                                 0.0652
                                                                                                                            (0.110)
                5
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                                                        -0.0100                 -0.0284
                                                                                                                                                (0.067)                  (0.094)
                            6
TOTCHDEF*COAL                                                                                                                                                            0.0321
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.116)
DGDP                                    -0.0471                            -0.0470                      -0.0439             -0.0426            -0.1039**               -0.1032**
                                         (0.042)                            (0.042)                      (0.044)             (0.044)             (0.048)                 (0.048)
DUNR                                     0.0009                             0.0010                      -0.0030             -0.0028              -0.0066                -0.0066
                                         (0.005)                            (0.005)                      (0.005)             (0.005)             (0.006)                 (0.006)
INFL                                   0.0266**                           0.0269**                     0.0342**            0.0347**             0.0309**               0.0313**
                                         (0.013)                            (0.013)                      (0.014)             (0.014)             (0.013)                 (0.013)
DURAT                                  0.2265***                          0.2286***                    0.2273***           0.2299***          0.2295***                0.2314***
                                         (0.050)                            (0.050)                      (0.052)             (0.052)             (0.051)                 (0.051)
COAL                                     0.0547                             0.0562                       0.0493              0.0483              0.0450                  0.0450
                                         (0.150)                            (0.150)                      (0.154)             (0.154)             (0.152)                 (0.152)
MAJ                                      0.0039                             0.0059                      -0.0154             -0.0107              -0.0467                -0.0477
                                         (0.178)                            (0.178)                      (0.182)             (0.182)             (0.179)                 (0.179)
Constant                              -1.7700***                         -1.7789***                   -1.8006***          -1.8141***          -1.6166***              -1.6266***
                                         (0.230)                            (0.232)                      (0.242)             (0.244)             (0.237)                 (0.240)
Log-likelihood
Observations                              613                                613                           591                591                 613                     613
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Interaction variable interacting CHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for coalition governments.
3. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
4. Interaction variable interacting COCHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for coalition governments.
5. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
6. Interaction variable interacting TOTCHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for coalition governments.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 9 - Probit coefficients (Majority interaction term)
                                     (1)                                 (2)                         (3)                (4)                 (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                          IDEOCH                              IDEOCH                      IDEOCH             IDEOCH              IDEOCH               IDEOCH
        1
CHDEF                              -0.0627                             -0.0400
                                   (0.052)                             (0.057)
                    2
CHDEF*MAJ                                                              -0.1122
                                                                       (0.121)
            3
COCHDEF                                                                                            0.0039              0.0469
                                                                                                   (0.056)             (0.065)
                        4
COCHDEF*MAJ                                                                                                            -0.1696
                                                                                                                       (0.129)
                5
TOTCHDEF                                                                                                                                  -0.0100               0.0414
                                                                                                                                          (0.067)               (0.075)
                            6
TOTCHDEF*MAJ                                                                                                                                                   -0.2348
                                                                                                                                                                (0.156)
DGDP                               -0.0471                             -0.0453                     -0.0439             -0.0413           -0.1039**            -0.0971**
                                    (0.042)                             (0.042)                    (0.044)             (0.044)             (0.048)              (0.048)
DUNR                                0.0009                              0.0005                     -0.0030             -0.0033             -0.0066             -0.0075
                                    (0.005)                             (0.005)                    (0.005)             (0.005)             (0.006)              (0.006)
INFL                              0.0266**                            0.0273**                    0.0342**            0.0346**            0.0309**            0.0321**
                                    (0.013)                             (0.013)                    (0.014)             (0.014)             (0.013)              (0.013)
DURAT                             0.2265***                           0.2310***                  0.2273***           0.2328***          0.2295***             0.2355***
                                    (0.050)                             (0.050)                    (0.052)             (0.052)             (0.051)              (0.051)
COAL                                0.0547                              0.0550                     0.0493              0.0446              0.0450               0.0580
                                    (0.150)                             (0.150)                    (0.154)             (0.154)             (0.152)              (0.153)
MAJ                                 0.0039                              0.0101                     -0.0154             -0.0050             -0.0467             -0.0400
                                    (0.178)                             (0.178)                    (0.182)             (0.182)             (0.179)              (0.181)
Constant                         -1.7700***                          -1.7879***                  -1.8006***          -1.8216***         -1.6166***           -1.6638***
                                    (0.230)                             (0.232)                    (0.242)             (0.244)             (0.237)              (0.240)
Log-likelihood
 Observations                        613                                 613                         591                 591                 613                 613
Source: see data Appendix at the end of the paper.
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
1. Change in public deficit: percentage point change in the ratio of public deficit to GDP.
2. Interaction variable interacting CHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for governments with majority support in parliament.
3. Change in the primary deficit (CHDEF), corrected for the cycle.
4. Interaction variable interacting COCHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for governments with majority support in parliament.
5. Average change in deficit during tenure: average percentage point change in the deficit over the years that the current cabinet has been in power, up to the current year.
6. Interaction variable interacting TOTCHDEF and a dummy variable controlling for governments with majority support in parliament.
When TOTCHDEF is used, given variables are replaced by dTOTGDP, dTOTUNR and TOTINFL. The coefficients on DGDP , DUNR and INFL are the coefficients on these variables.
Table 10: Vote Shares and Seats by Election in Canada 1993-2000


                                     1993                     1997                       2000
                                                                                                         Change in
                                                                                                                      Change in share
                                                                                                        share 1997-
                           Percentage               Percentage                                                          2000-1997
                                                                              Percentage                   1993
                            Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats                      Seats
                                                                             Share of Votes
                             Votes                    Votes


Liberal Party of Canada       41.3          177        38.5          155          40.8          172        -2.8             2.3
Bloc Québécois                13.5           54        10.7           44          10.7           38        -2.8             0
Reform Party of Canada        18.7           52        19.4           60          25.5           66         0.7             6.1
New Democratic Party          6.9            9         11             21          8.5            13         4.1            -2.5
Progressive Conservative      16             2         18.8           20          12.2           12         2.8            -6.6
Party of Canada
Others                        3.6            1         1.6            1           2.3            0          -2              0.7

Source: Elections Canada
Table 11: Vote Shares and Seats by Election in Finland 1995-2003


                                        1995                     1999                     2003
                                                                                                         Change in share Change in share
                              Percentage               Percentage               Percentage                 1999-1995       2003-1999
                               Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats
                                Votes                    Votes                    Votes
Social Democratic Party of       28.3           63        22.9           51        24.5           53          -5.4             1.6
Finland
Centre Party                     19.8           44        22.4           48        24.7           55          2.6              2.3
National Coalition Party         17.9           39        21             46        18.6           40          3.1              -2.4
Left Alliance                    11.2           22        10.9           20        9.9            19          -0.3             -1
Swedish People's Party           5.1            11        5.1            11        4.6            8            0               -0.5
Green League                     6.5            9         7.3            11         8             14          0.8              0.7
Christian League of Finland       3             7         4.2            10        5.3            7           1.2              1.1
Progressive Finnish Party        2.8            2          1             0          -              -           -                -
Finnish Rural Party              1.3            1          -             0          -              -           -                -
Others                           4.1            2         5.2            3         4.4            4           1.1              -0.8

Source: Statistics Finland
Table 12: Vote Shares and Seats by Election in Sweden 1994-2002

                                            1994                     1998                     2002
                                                                                                             Change in share Change in share
                                  Percentage               Percentage               Percentage                 1998-1994       2002-1998
                                   Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats
                                    Votes                    Votes                    Votes


Moderate Party                       22.4           80        22.9           82        15.3           55          0.5              -7.6
Centre Party                         7.7            27        5.1            18        6.2            22          -2.6             1.1
Liberal Party                        7.2            26        4.7            17        13.4           48          -2.5             8.7
Christian Democratic Party           4.1            15        11.7           42        9.1            33          7.6              -2.6
Green Party                           5             18        4.5            16        4.6            17          -0.5             0.1
Social Democratic Party              45.3          161        36.4          131        39.9          144          -8.9             3.5
Left Party                           6.2            22        12             43        8.4            30          5.8              -3.6
Others                               2.3             -        2.6             -        3.1             -          0.3              0.5

Source: SCB - Statistics Sweden
Table 13: Vote Shares and Seats by Election in the UK 1992-1997

                                  1992                     1997
                                                                          Change in share
                        Percentage               Percentage                 1997-1993
                         Share of        Seats    Share of        Seats
                          Votes                    Votes


Labour                     34.4          274        43.2          418           8.8
Conservative               41.9          343        30.7          165          -11.2
Liberal Democratic         17.8           18        16.8           46           -1
Others                      5.9           24        9.3            30           3.4

Source: UK Parliament
