                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE IMPACT OF TAX
                        REFORM ON HOUSEHOLDS




                           Joel Slemrod




                      Working Paper No. 1765




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




This paper has been prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston's Conference on the Economic Consequences of Tax
Simplification, which was held in Bald Reak, New Hampshire on
October 2-4, 1985. Helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
paper were received from David Bradford, Dan Frisch, Don Fullerton,
Harvey Galper, Pat Hendershott, Chuck Hulten, and Eric Toder. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #176 5
                                                     Novenber 1985



                    The Impact of Tax Peform on Households



                                  BSTRCT



     This paper analyzes the Reagan Administratioris tax reform proposal

in terms of its three stated objectives—-fairness,
                                                      simplicity, and

economic growth-—and considers its likely effect on labor supply,

saving and investment, and housing. The paper also attempts to place

the tax reform debate in the context of modern public finance theory,

in order to provide some rigorous framework for discussion of the

important issues.




                                                   Joel Slemrod
                                                   Departnent of Economics
                                                   University of Minnesota
                                                   1151 Manageirent/Economics Bldg.
                                                   Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                     -.1 —




I.   Introduction

     l.A. Objectives and Organization of the Paper

     In the past year tax reform has leapt from the obscurity of public finance

textbooks and journals onto the front page of every newspaper in the United

States. The lightning rod of public attention has been the proposal for major

tax reform advanced by the Reagan Administration in May, 1985, which followed

by six months the release of a set of reform proposals by the Treasury Depart-

ment. The principal focus of the public debate has been a taxonomy of which

individuals and corporations would pay higher taxes under the proposed plan,

who would pay lower taxes, and how large the changes in tax liability would be.

     The goal of this paper is to shift the focus of the debate from the taxonomy

of tax reform to the economics of tax reform, and in particular to its likely

impact on households. Because tax reform is of interest only because of its

ultimate effect on households, this topic is not really limiting. In order to

bound the topic at hand, primary attention will be paid to the proposed changes

in individual income taxation not considered elsewhere in this volume and to

certain critical areas of impact—-labor supply, saving and investment, and

housing. The Administration's proposal, which will likely be the starting

point for legislative action, will be the principal subject, although some as-

pects of the earlier Treasury proposal will be considered, both because it

represents a more radical approach to tax reform and because many of the al-

ternative approaches suggested there may eventually find their way into the

policy debate. Due to limitations on space, other proposals for fundamental

tax reform will not be considered.

     The organizing principle of this paper is drawn from the objectives pre-

sented in the title of the Treasury's tax reform study: Tax Reform for Fairness,

Simplicity, and Economic Growth, and retained in modified order in the Administra-
                                     —2-


tion's proposal. Following a brief discussion of revenue neutrality, Sections II,

III, and IV assess the Administration's tax proposal in the context of its three

stated objectives. Section V briefly discusses the effect of tax reforir on tax

evasion, and Section VI offers some concluding comments.

     The design of a tax system must inevitably trade off the achievement of

the goals of fairness, simplicity, and economic growth. Because value judg-

ments enter any assessment of fairness and because success in meeting any of

the goals is difficult to quantify precisely, economics cannot be expected to

offer an exact solution to how these tradeoffs should be resolved. An impor-

tant objective of this paper is to shed light on what tradeoffs are involved in

the adoption of a fundamental tax reform such as that proposed by the Reagan

Administration. Another major goal is to place the tax reform debate in the

context of modern public finance theory, in order to provide some rigorous

framework for a discussion of the important issues.

     LB. Revenue Neutrality

     The Administration's tax plan is designed to be revenue neutral during the

5 years after its projected introduction, from 1986 to 1990.1 There is, how-

ever, reason to doubt whether the plan is revenue neutral in the longer run. The

analysis accompanying the plan invites such doubt by projecting the steady-state

revenue implications to be a 7 percent decrease in individual income tax reven-

ues and a 9 percent increase in corporation income tax revenues. Based on the

1990 current law revenue yields of the two taxes, these changes amount to a

$26.2 billion annual shortfall, or 4.2 percent of total income tax revenue.2

     The long-term revenue shortfall in the face of approximate short-term

revenue neutrality is largely due to the expiration of the excess depreciation



1
  The Administration's short-run revenue estimates show a $12 billion shortfall
over the period 1986 to 1990, or less than 1 percent of estimated revenues. The
Joint Comittee on Taxation has estimated a $25 billion shortfall over this period.
2
  Note, though, that the estimates do not consider the potential revenue gain from
improved economic performance or from improved compliance with the tax system.
                                      -3-


recapture rule in 1989, the delayed revenue loss of the depreciation allowances,

which are significantly more back-loaded than current law, and the modified ac-

counting rules for production costs, which force deductible expenses to be capi-

talized rather than expensed, and thus gain revenue in the early years of the

transition and lose revenue later.3

     This long-term revenue shortfall is important for much of the analysis

that follows in this paper. Estimates of the investment incentive effects, in

particular, rely on forward-looking calculations of the effective tax rate, and

thus are not affected by a temporary, essentially lump-sum, tax such as the

excess depreciation recapture rule. Thus, the efficiency implications of the

proposed tax system tend to look better than they must inevitably be in the long

run if taxes were to be raised to make up the 4.2 percent revenue shortfall.

If the revenue shortfall is not made up with increased taxes, then an analysis

of the tax plan must deal with the consequences of increased deficits in the

years after 1990.


:ii. Fairness

     II.A. Vertical Equity

     Economic theory has not provided policy-makers imich guidance about the pro-

per distribution of the burden of taxes among income groups. The modern theory

of optimal income tax progressivity has sharpened our understanding that deci-

sions about progressivity must trade off the social value of a more equal distri-



  Offsetting these provisions are other aspects of the plan whose revenue pickup
accelerates. An example is the revenue increase from the repeal of the tax exemp-
tion of private-purpose municipal bonds, which is grandfathered to apply only to
bonds issued after January 1, 1986. In this case the revenue gain is roughly pro-
portional to the stock (as opposed to the flow of new issues) of private-purpose
tax-exempt bonds which would have been issued after 1986. This revenue gain thus
increases sharply with time.
                                      -4-


bution of welfare and the disincentive effects of high marginal tax rates.4 The

resolution of this tradeoff must ultimately rest on a value judgment about which

economists have no comparative advantage. Economic analysis can, though, be valu-

able in assessing the nature of the tradeoff involved in any particular policy

and in assessing the true incidence of a tax system.

      The Administration's proposal was designed so that the 7 percent reduction in

total individual income tax revenues would be "distributionally neutral", by which

is meant that the percentage reduction in tax liability would be spread approxi-

mately uniformly across income classes. In fact, the percentage reduction in tax

burden is U-shaped by economic income class. Mainly because of the increase in

the threshold income below which no tax is due arid the expansion of the earned in-

come credit, the percentage tax reduction for families with less than $20,000 in

economic income is 18.3%, significantly more than the average decline of 7%•5 In

addition, the percentage reduction for taxpayers with family economic income over

$200,000 amounts to 10.7%. Of course the tax reduction in absolute dollar terms

is much greater than average for higher-income taxpayers.

      Even if these figures were accepted as a reasonable measure of the vertical

distribution of the tax burden, they of course would not show that the proposed

tax system is (vertically) equitable. Rather, they would show that the proposed

system is about as equitable as the current system, no more and no less. Even

this assessment, though, is subject to several qualifications.6



    See Slemrod (1983) for a review of the recent literature on optimal income tax
progressivi ty.

  If, though, the tax reduction is measured as a proportion of total federal taxes
including the social security tax, the percentage reduction for low-income fam-
ilies is not exceptionally high.
6
  Regardless of the qualifications that follow, the Treasury should be comended
for analyzing the distribution of tax burdens on the basis of a constructed mea-
sure of family economic income, as opposed to a more accessible but less meaning-
ful measure such as the adjusted gross income concept reported on tax returns.
                                      —5-


      First of all, these measures make no attempt to trace the ultimate incidence

of the taxes paid by corporations. Because the drop in individual income tax

revenues is offset by a large increase in corporation tax revenues, the distribu-

tional pattern of the whole income tax burden depends critically on one's assump-

tions about the incidence of the corporation income tax.! This remains an unre-

solved issue, although in the context of a general equilibrium model with a fixed

capital stock there is substantial agreement that the tax burden is spread among

capital owners in general. If this is true, then the progressivity of the tax

proposal is greater than the analysis indicates, since capital income is more

concentrated among the wealthy than is labor income. Once capital accumulation

is introduced in a dynamic model, the possibility arises that taxes on capital

income are in the long run borne by workers due to their adverse effect on capi-

tal accumulation and the steady-state capital-labor ratio.8 In this case the

Treasury's analysis may not be too misleading. This controversial issue is

simply sidestepped in the official analysis by ignoring the burden of all cor-

poration income taxes and assuming the ultimate burden of all individual income

taxes falls on the taxpayer who is liable for the tax payments.

     The issue of the ultimate incidence of taxation is important not only for

questions of labor versus capital income taxation but for several other pro-

visions of the proposal. Consider as an example the proposed limitation of the



  See Pectinan (1985) for a calculation of the overall incidence of the tax sys-
tem using various assumptions about the ultimate distribution of the burden of
the corporation income tax.
8
  The possibility that the increased corporation income taxes will be passed on
to workers is less likely under the Administration's plan than under the Treasury's
plan, since in the former a substantial fraction (61%) of the increased revenues
in the first 4 years of the plan come from the recapture tax on past accelerated
depreciation. This is essentially a capital levy which does not affect the in-
centive to invest in new capital goods, excepting cash-flow repercussions. As
mentioned above, this leaves open the question of how the long-run revenue short-
fall will be made up.
                                     -6-


tax—exempt status of employer-provided health insurance.   If the induced reduc-

tion in demand causes a decline in the price of medical services, the tax in-

crease is less than fully borne by the consumers of medical services and partly

passed on to the suppliers of medical services.9 Similarly, an increase in the

effective tax rate on investment in real estate will be partially reflected in

an increased rental price of housing relative to other prices)0 Changes in the

tax system are also likely to affect the pattern of pre-tax rates of return earn-

ed by different kinds of assets. For example, the expected rate of return on

tax-exempt securities is lower than that on taxable securities. The rate of re-

turn differential can be thought of as an implicit tax borne by owners of tax-

exempt securities. Reduced marginal tax rates are likely to cause this differ-

ential to shrink, thus lowering the implicit tax on owners of tax-exempt bonds.

In an important sense, some of the tax reduction is spread from the owners of

taxable bonds, whose before-tax relative rate of return likely falls, to the own-

ers of tax-exempt securities. Neither this change in implicit taxes nor the in-

duced changes in relative prices discussed above are considered in the analysis

of the distribution of tax burdens presented by the Administration.

     The message of the preceding discussion is that a precise assessment of the



  Such a reduction in demand was much more likely under the Treasury's proposal,
which would have eliminated the tax preference for health insurance at the mar-
gin. The Administration's proposal features a small inframarginal tax.
10
   The ultimate incidence of eliminating the deductibility of state and local
taxes is another important issue, and is addressed in another paper in this
conference.

   Note that the Administration's proposal features not only a reduction of
marginal tax rates but also several other provisions which affect the supply
and demand for tax-exempt bonds, especially the elimination of private-purpose
issues. Thus, the net effect of the proposal on the rate of return differen-
tial is more problematic than indicated in the text.
                                      —7-


 distributional impact of a major tax reform is a complex matter)2 A list of

 important caveats to the Administration's claim of approximate distributional

neutrality can be offered although, in the absence of a more complete analysis,

no strong argument can be made to dispute this claim.

     II.B. Horizontal Equiy

     The principle of horizontal equity states that taxpayers who are equally

well-off in the absence of taxation should remain equally well-off when taxes

are imposed. Many of the special features of the present income tax have been

justified in the name of horizontal equity. For example, the deductibility of

extraordinary medical expenses has been defended on the ground that income over-

states one's true utility in the presence of large involuntary medical expenses.

Many other features of the law have been criticized as being the source of hori-

zontal inequity, such as the tax exemption of fringe benefits and the deducti-

bility of charitable contributions.

     Not all instances of preferential tax treatment result in horizontal in-

equity, however. If a tax-preferred activity is available to everyone and

valued equally by all, then the long-run effect of preferential tax treatment

is only to induce resources to move into the activity. For example, a subsidy

to the purchase of television sets would not be horizontally inequitable if all

equally well—off people had identical tastes for television.

     Many examples of preferential tax treatment are sources of persistent hori-

zontal inequity because they apply to activities which are not valued equally by

all equally well-off taxpayers or are not available on an equal basis to all


12
   In fact, there are even more conceptual problems. Assessing the distribution
of tax burdens by examining the pattern of average tax rates by income class in a
given year can be misleading. After all, our ultimate interest should be the ef-
fect of taxation on the lifetime well-being of households. A snapshot of one year's
tax burden distribution will misrepresent the lifetime distribution of tax burdens
if, as is likely, there is a life cycle to income and tax payments.
                                        -8-


taxpayers. For example, the deduction for charitable contributions favors those

who derive satisfaction from charitable gifts, and the tax advantages accorded to

housing favor those who prefer housing services over other forms of consumption.

     Several provisions of the Administration's proposal are designed to elimin-

ate sources of apparent horizontal inequity. The taxation of a limited amount of

employer-provided health insurance and the repeal of the $5,000 exclusion for

employer-provided death benefits is defended as correcting the current inequity

toward individuals who are not covered by employer plans and who must therefore

pay for health care with after-tax dollars.13 Repealing the deductibility of

state and local taxes eliminates the tax benefits that accrue only to itemizers

residing in areas with high taxes, which presumably finance services valued by

the residents)4 There are many other examples. Note also that any horizontal

inequities which remain would also be of smaller magnitude if the level and dis-

persion of marginal tax rates were reduced.

     The Administration proposal has serious repercussions for the relative tax

burden on families of different size and number of earners. The personal exemp-

tion allowance is nearly doubled to $2,000, the two-earner credit is eliminated,

full IRA    eligibility   is extended to non-working spouses, and the child—care credit

is changed to a deduction. The net impact of these changes is a shift in the tax

burden away from "traditional" families (i.e., large, one-earner families).

Whether this is a move toward or away from horizontal equity depends on, among

other things, whether children are viewed as an involuntary expense like extra-

ordinary health care expenditures (in which case a large exemption for children



   Some of the horizontal inequity would be eliminated if the wages of indivi-
13
duals not covered by ployer plans are higher than otherwise due to the tax dis-
advantage. Because the value of the exemption depends on the marginal tax rate,
any given wage increase cannot equalize after-tax returns for workers in all tax
brackets.
14
   The advantage of deductibility may, to some extent, be offset by higher land
prices in high-tax areas.
                                    -.9-



is desirable) or as a voluntary choice about how to spend one's income (in which

case no exemption allowance is called for).

     II.C. Transitional Equity

     One unavoidable side effect of tax reform is that it alters the return to

long-term comitments made on the basis of the former tax law. Consequently,

assets that lose preferential tax treatment will likely experience capital loss-

es, while assets with a reduced tax burden will likely experience capital gains.

Individuals who have made long-term comitments, such as career or locational

choices, on the basis of previous law may be capriciously rewarded or penalized.

     In many cases, these gains and losses cannot be justified as recovery of tax

benefits unfairly received or as compensation for excess taxes unfairly paid.

Once the current law has been in place for several years, the benefits of prefer-

ential tax treatment may be reflected in the price of the asset or activity. For

example, preferential tax treatment of real estate undoubtedly generated capital

gains for landowners when the provisions were enacted. Subsequent purchasers of

land and real estate have had to pay a higher price that reflected the tax advan-

tages, and therefore are unlikely to have earned an extraordinary after-tax rate

of return on their investment)5 Revoking the tax preferences would cause a

capital loss to all owners of real estate, whether or not the current owners re-

ceived a capital gain when the provisions were enacted.

     The Administration's tax plan is certainly not inriune from this "transitional

equity" problem of windfall gains and losses. Real estate and housing would likely

fall in value, as would shares in financial institutions, while shares of service

and high-tech firms would probably increase in value. The return to high-income

itemizers of locating in high-tax states will fall if sub-federal tax deductibility


15
   This is another example of how preferential tax treatment may not result in hori-
zontal inequity.   It presumes that all equally well-off people have equal access to
real estate investments.
                                     -10-



is eliminated.

      The Administration's proposal attempts to reduce transitional inequities

by gradually phasing in several provisions. This allows time for adjustment to

the new rules and reduces the present value of induced gains and losses. For

example, the tightening of the interest deduction limitation would be phased in

over a 10-year period, so that 10 percent of newly included interest would be

subject to the limitation in the 1986 tax year, 20 percent in the 1987 tax year,

etc.; in addition, the new limit of $5,000 would be applied beginning in 1988.

In many cases the changes are "grandfathered", i.e. applied only to new commitments.

      The proposed excess depreciation recapture rule can be thought of as an at-

tempt to limit the transitional inequity of moving to a lower rate system. Under

accelerated depreciation, expenses taken early in the productive life of assets

were deductible against a high tax rate. In the absence of such a recapture rule,

a capital gain would result since the income would be taxed at a lower rate, one

that is below the rate that was expected when the investment was made.16


III. Simplicity

      By almost any standard the present income tax system is quite complex and

absorbs a large amount of resources to operate. The Office of Management and

Budget has determined that the 260 different federal tax forms comprise 78 percent

of all federal reporting requirements.17 Slemrod and Sorum (1984) have estimated

that the total resource cost of taxpayers' time and monetary expenditure on com-

plying with federal and state individual income tax amounted in the tax year


16
   Note that the recapture rule does not apply to other analogous windfall gains
that would result from the Administration's plan, such as the taxation of retire-
ment benefits at a lower rate than expected and the taxation at lower tax rates of
the income from oil and gas investments that were expensed under the higher tax
rates of current law. It is also not clear that it accurately achieves its stated
purpose. See Stretch and Sunley (1985) and Aaron (1985).
17
     These figures are cited in Hall and Rabushka (1985), p. 30.
                                    —11—


1982 to between $17 and $27 billion. This comprised approximately 2 billion

hours of taxpayers' time (or about twenty hours per taxpayer spread over a tax

year) and more than $3 billion of expenditure on professional assistance. The

total cost of administering the income tax system should also include a large

fraction of the IRS budget ($6.0 billion in fiscal year 1985) and the cost borne

by third parties (e.g., employers operating the tax withholding system, financial

institutions filing transactions reports, etc.). The total resource cost of in-

come tax collection could now easily be in the $30 to $40 billion range.

     The Administration's proposal addresses the problem of complexity directly by

eliminating scores of special provisions and reducing some structural sources of

complexity, and addresses it indirectly by reducing marginal tax rates. However,

some of the proposal's provisions would add to the complexity of the tax system.

In what follows we assess the likely net effect of the Administration's proposal

on the system's complexity.

     First of all, the collapsi,ig of 14 tax brackets (15, for single filers) to

three, although promoted by the Administration as a key element of simplifica-

tion, is actually an insignificant change in the complexity of the system. Once

taxable income is computed, finding tax liability from the tax tables is a tri-

vial operation and would not be simplified by having fewer brackets. This change,

though, may improve the perceived simplicity of the system.

     Marginal tax rates may affect the resource cost of collecting taxes because

they affect the incentive of taxpayers to invest in finding ways to reduce their

taxable income. After all, the return to reducing taxable income by a dollar is

exactly the marginal tax rate.8 Thus, a general reduction in marginal tax rates

should cause a substitution away from the use of taxpayer's own time and expendi-

ture in the tax return filing process. However, preliminary empirical research


18
   This applies to legal tax "avoidanc&' as well as illegal tax "evasion." The
latter is discussed in Section V of this paper.
                                       -12-


reported in Slemrod (1984) suggests that there would be only small resource cost

savings from moving toward a lower structure of tax rates)9

     By eliminating the deduction for state and local taxes, it is estimated

that the fraction of taxpayers that itemize their deductions would decline from

37% to 33%20 This decline would reduce a large part of the record-keeping bur-

den for about 4 million taxpayers.21

     Several provisions of the Administration's proposal are designed to reduce

recordkeeping requirements directly. In this category lie the repeal of the

political contribution credit, Presidential campaign checkoff, adoption expense

deduction, and two-earner deduction.22 Employee business expenses and other mis-

cellaneous deductions are to be sumed and allowed as an adjustment to income

only to the extent that they exceed 1 percent of a taxpayer's adjusted gross in-

come. Other simplifying reforms include the repeal of income averaging and the

several provisions designed to reduce the incentive to invest in tax shelters.



19
   This conclusion, though, rests on the assumption that taxpayers' sources of
income remain unchanged when the rate structure changes. This assumption could
result in an underestimate of the cost saving from a lower rate structure if
the new system discourages involvement in relatively high compliance cost activi-
ties such as self-employment or investment in real estate.
20 Because the Treasury's proposal also limited the deduction for charitable
contributions and indexed deductible interest payments, the fraction of itemi-
zers was estimated to decline under that plan to 22%. Note, however, that the
interest indexing provisions in the Treasury's proposal, by encouraging house-
holds to fully mortgage their principal residences, would have had the effect
of increasing the fraction of itemizing households toward the fraction of home-
owning households, or 65%. See the discussion of this effect in Section IV,
footnote 47.
21
   Because expenditures for tax assistance are a deductible expense, reducing
the fraction of itemizers will also increase the net cost of a dollar of pro-
fessional tax assistance for former itemizers. This is another reason why the
reduced itemization reduces the resource cost of compliance.
22
   According to the IRS, the Administration's proposal would reduce the number
of lines in the 1040 tax return from 65 to 55.
                                      -13-


       Several provisions in the Treasury proposal would serve to complicate the

tax filing process. The attempt to expand the taxation of fringe benefits re-

ceived by employees will inevitably lead to additional calculations and problems

of appropriate valuation. The inclusion in taxable income of all unemployment

compensation and cash payments for disability is another complicating provision,

as is the expansion of the alternative minimum tax.23

       Both the Administration's and the Treasury's proposal are accompanied by   a

suggestion that the Internal Revenue Service consider initiation of a return-

free system, under which the IRS would calculate the tax liability of eligible

taxpayers who elect this option, using information that it already receives from

third parties under current law. The IRS estimates that this program could
                                                                 24
eventually be extended to more than 50 percent of all taxpayers.

       The resource cost saving from instituting this program depends on two

factors. The first is what fraction of eligible taxpayers would voluntarily

cede their responsibility for tax assessment to the IRS. The IRS estimates

that, for the program to be worthwhile, at least half of all taxpayers (or near-

ly all of those eligible) would have to participate.25 There is no direct

evidence about what fraction of taxpayers would actually participate in such a

program, although the recent adverse publicity accorded to the IRS raises doubts


23
   The Treasury's plan called for the indexing of capital income for inflation,
 which would have required additional calculations of all recipients and payers
of interest (except as relating to home mortgage interest payments) and of tax-
payers who realized capital gains and losses.
24
   Under the Treasury's proposal, the return-free system could have applied to
as many as 66 percent of all taxpayers.
25
     This figure was obtained from a personal comunication with IRS staff.
                                    -14-


about the willingness of taxpayers to trust the IRS with their tax affairs.26

The second factor is the relative efficiency of self-assessment versus IRS compu-

tation of taxes. If they are equally efficient, then this plan would merely re-

allocate resource costs from the private to the public sector, but not reduce

them. To the extent that the IRS can more effectively collate the sources of in-

come and exemption amounts, then resource savings could result.


IV. Economic Growth and Resource Allocation

     This section has two purposes. The first is to review the role of taxation

in promoting the efficient use of resources and economic growth, and to assess

the Administration's tax plan in this light. The second purpose is to analyze

the effect of tax reform on certain areas of particular interest: saving and

investment, labor supply, and housing.

     IV.A. Neutrality and Growth

     Although economic growth as a goal of tax reform occupies a prominent posi-

tion in the title of both the Administration's and the Treasury's tax proposals,

in the body of the accompanying analyses it tends to take a back seat to another

goal, that of economic neutrality.27 Neutrality refers to one of the principles

of an ideal tax system defined by Musgrave and Musgrave (1976) as "minimizing



26 If the IRS statement of tax liability was binding even in the case of their
understating true tax liability, then one might expect taxpayers to elect the
return-free option in the hope that the IRS errs in their favor. However, as
the system is envisioned, the taxpayer would still be responsible for checking
the statement of tax liability and reporting any errors to the IRS. It may,
though, be worthwhile for a taxpayer to elect the return-free option in order
to discern which, if any, sources of income might be unknown to the IRS.
27
   This is especially true of the Treasury's proposal. For example, the over-
view volume of the Treasury's report lists thirteen goals of tax reform. Econo-
mic neutrality is placed first, while economic growth is discussed third from
last, just before "trade-offs".
                                    -15-


interference with economic decisions in otherwise efficient markets." The idea

is that, in the absence of taxes, the market allocates resources efficiently.

Taxes inevitably cause inefficient resource allocation,28 but a neutral tax system

is one which minimizes the extent of this tax-induced inefficient resource allo-

cation. Three dimensions of neutral tax treatment are relevant: neutrality

among goods at any given time; neutrality among factors of production; and

neutrality among consumption of goods in the present versus consumption in the

future.

     As of about 1960, the prevailing wisdom among tax economists was that the

ideal tax system was a comprehensive income tax. This tax was considered to

be neutral because it did not distort relative prices (except as between lei-

sure and other goods), and was felt to be consistent with the principle or

horizontal equity. Unfortunately, the modern theory of optimal taxation upset

the comfortable notion that the most efficient tax system is necessarily one

that alters the relative prices of goods as little as possible. Optimal tax

theory first addressed a one-period world. Ignoring intertemporal considerations,

the theory demonstrated that comprehensive income taxation is efficient only for

a restricted class of preferences.29 More generally, it is efficient to differ-

entially tax goods and sources of income.

     The practical significance of static optimal tax theory has proven to be

limited. Its critical weakness, as Deaton (1984) and others have convincingly

argued, is that econometric investigation is unlikely ever to be decisive in



28
   Taxes such as poll taxes (called lump-sum taxes because they do not depend
on any economic decision) are not distortionary, but are rarely used because
they violate other principles of an ideal tax, especially equity.
29
   In the presence of a nonlinear income tax schedule, uniform taxation is op-
timal only if no good is a relative complement to leisure compared to any other
good. See Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976).
                                      -16-


specifying the characteristics of an optimal tax structure. In the absence of

such evidence, uniform taxation of goods remains the standard for judging neu-

trality, although its theoretical underpinning is problematic.3°

      The same theory of optimal taxation has been somewhat kinder to the notion

of uniform factor taxation as a standard of neutrality. Diamond and Mirrlees

(1971) demonstrated that under very general conditions production efficiency

(i.e., uniform relative factor prices faced by all producers) is desirable as

long as all commodities and pure profits can be taxed. Thus, any policy which

imposes different effective tax rates on the same factor when used in different

sectors is a source of inefficiency to the economy. Furthermore, differential

taxation of different kinds of capital goods is, under general conditions, a

source of inefficiency.
       What of economic growth, and its desirability? First of all, it is impor-

tant to keep in mind that, in the long run, the rate of economic growth is de-

termined by the rate of technological progress and growth of the labor supply.

Tax policy that increases the rate of saving and investment may increase the

growth rate for several years as the economy moves toward a higher capital-output

ratio, but the impact on the growth rate will eventually disappear as the new

steady state is approached. A more appropriate issue is the desirability

of increasing saving and investment, with the goal of attaining a higher capital-

output ratio.31 Optimal taxation theory can be usefully applied in an intertem-

poral context by simply labelling consumption in different periods as separate

goods. From this perspective, income taxation is not neutral because taxation of

capital income essentially increases the price of consumption undertaken in the



 30 Preferential tax treatment can be justified on efficiency grounds if there are
 positive externalities associated with an activity.
 31 This statement is not meant to discount the importance of the appropriate tax
 policy toward research and development. The Administration's tax plan, though,
 contains no major changes in this area.
                                     —17-



future. Furthermore, uniform taxation of goods corresponds to the case of a

consumption tax or zero taxation of capital income. The condition under which

this tax structure is optimal is identical to the one discussed above, that

neither present nor future consumption be a relative complement to leisure. No

convincing evidence has yet been found to either support or reject this char-

acterization of preferences, so that the proper tax treatment of capital income

has not been established even in the context of simple models of the economy.32

     Several recent studies have attempted to measure the welfare cost of tax-

induced resource misallocation in the United States, and the gain from specific

policies designed to reduce this misallocation. Ballard, Shoven, and Whalley

(1985) calculated, using 1973 data, that the annual value of the efficiency

cost is in the range of 13 to 22 percent of revenues raised, or from 4.0 to

6.7 percent of GNP. Because the Administration's proposals do not, of course,

completely eliminate this welfare cost, these figures are usefully considered

as an upper bound on the potential gain from improving the efficiency of the

tax system. Gravelle's (1985) analysis of the Administration's proposal, though,

concluded that the capital income taxation provisions alone would, by reducing

both the differential tax treatment of different assets and of capital used in

different sectors, improve the efficiency of resource allocation enough to in-

crease GNP by 1.1 percent. Gordon and Slemrod (1983) estimated that the elim-

ination of local property tax deductibility could, by greatly reducing the sub-

sidy to municipal expenditures, cause efficiency gains of as much as 0.9 per-

cent of GNP.

     All of these quantitative results depend critically on certain modelling


32
   An inefficiently low capital stock may also arise in models with overlapping
generations and no bequests. In this case, one objective of tax policy may be
to induce capital formation. This may imply preferential taxation of capital in-
come. See King (1980) for a discussion of these issues.
                                    -18-


choices which remain controversial among economists.33 However, they are illus-

trative of the magnitude of the possible efficiency gains from reform of the

tax system. Improved resource allocation does not have a natural constituency,

but it is a source of improved national well-being nevertheless. As important

as ensuring that the size of the pie grows or that it is distributed fairly is

ensuring that the ingredients are present in the right proportions.

     Efficient resource allocation is a valuable perspective for the topics that

follow--the impact of tax reform on saving and investment, labor supply, and

housing. Although still a controversial position, a large and growing fraction

of economists argue that U.S. saving, investment, and capital stock are too low,

and that the tax system should be changed to increase them. Aggregate labor

supply is clearly too low compared to its level under a first-best (lump-sum)

tax system, but whether it is too low compared to its optimal second-best level

is a complicated issue, depending on unknown characteristics of preferences and

entwined with resolution of optimal tax progressivity. Due to preferential tax

treatment, the share of capital allocated to housing is above its efficient level.

     IV.B. Saving and Investment

     Several aspects of the Administration's proposal would affect the incen-

tive to save and invest in U.S. productive assets. In a closed economy, the

combination of these impacts determines the change in the flow of saving and

investment (which must be equal) and the change in the level of interest

rates. In a world with international capital flows, the impact onnational



   For example, both the Gravelle study and the Gordon and Slemrod study assume
unitary elasticities of demand for final goods and inputs. If actual elastici-
ties are lower (higher), then the calculated efficiency gains are overestimated
(underestimated).
                                    -19-


saving and domestic investment can differ. This section discusses the proposal's

impact on incentives to save and invest, the net effect of these changed incen-

tives, and briefly discusses how the presence of internationally mobile capital

affects these conclusions.

    Two aspects of the Administration's proposal have potentially important im-

plications for the incentive to save because they may affect the marginal after-

tax rate of return to saving. They are the expansion of Individual Retirement

Accounts (IRAs) and the reduction in marginal tax rates.34

     Under the Administration's proposal, married couples with total cornpensa-

tion of $4,000 or more would be entitled to an annual $4,000 IRA contribution

regardless of how much of the total compensation was generated by either spouse.35

Under current law, a couple with one working spouse is limited to a $2,250 con-

tribution per year. To what extent this provision will stimulate saving depends

on the rate-of-return responsiveness of saving and on whether the expansion of

IRAs will in fact increase the rate of return at the margin of new saving.

     Because households can reduce their current tax liability without any in-

crease in saving by transferring previously accumulated assets into the IRA,

any IRA scheme may not be an incentive to new saving. This problem applies

particularly to the initial years after implementation of an IRA plan, when

there is a large amount of accumulated wealth to transfer into IRAs. The pro-

posed expansion of the limit on annual contributions for one-earner families

will hasten the transition period that elapses before the program can become

effective at the margin for these families.

     Note, however, that because households can borrow (with deductible interest)

and place the borrowed funds in their IRA, it is possible that no new saving



   The indexation of interest payments and receipts, proposed in the Treasury's
plan, would also have had major implications for saving and investment.

   The Treasury's proposal expanded the limit to $2,500 per spouse.
                                    -20-


occurs due to IRA accounts. Feldstein and Feenberg (1983) discount the import-

ance of this possibility, claiming that few households have the opportunity to

borrow without collateral and noting that IRA funds cannot legally be accepted

as collateral. However, borrowing against home equity could provide funds for

the IRA and prolong the transition period.   In any event, the limitation on the

deductibility of interest payments in the Administration's proposal would re-

duce the attractiveness of borrowing in order to invest in an IRA account.

     Even in the long run and ignoring the possibility of borrowing, an IRA pro-

gram with a cap on annual allowable contributions will not be effective at the

margin for households whose desired annual saving exceeds the cap. By increasing

the limit from $2,250 to $4,000 for married couples with one earner, the proposal

would potentially expand the population for whom the IRA is effective at the mar-

gin in the long run. However, based on a study of 1972 tax return and financial

data, Feldstein and Feenberg concluded that an IRA plan less generous than cur-

rent law (and much less generous than the Administration's proposal) would apply

at the margin for most savers.36 This finding implies that the proposal to fur-

ther expand the IRA limit would probably not be effective at increasing the mar-

ginal rate of return to saving for more than a small fraction of households.

     The lowered marginal tax rates of the Administration's proposal will tend

to increase the after-tax rate of return to saving for given pre-tax rates of

return. This is offset to some degree by the increased effective state and

local income tax rates for itemizers who lose tax deductibility, and by the elimi-

nation of some tax-preferred methods of saving, such as private-purpose municipal

bonds. The precise relationship between reduction in marginal tax rates and the

corresponding increase in the marginal after-tax return to saving is complicated



36
   They also concluded that such a plan would quickly exhaust the available assets
of most taxpayers, making the transition period very short.
                                    -21-


because the income from many forms of saving is already effectively tax-exempt

or tax-preferred.

     Determining the magnitude of the aggregate saving response to higher rates

of return is also problematic. As is well-known, econometric estimates of this

response vary widely. Much applied work has utilized Boskin's (1978) estimate

of an interest elasticity of saving equal to 0.4, although the methodology under-

lying this estimate remains highly controversial. Continuing in the tradition

of using Boskin's estimate as a benchmark for quantitatively assessing saving

responses, the reduction in marginal rates itself could be expected to increase

saving by less than 2 percent, holding the interest rate constant.

     Assessing the impact of the proposal on corporate investment demand is

another difficult task. On the one hand, the analysis accompanying the Admini-

stration's proposal estimates that the corporate-level effective tax rate on

equity-financed investment would fall from 35 to 26 percent if all its provisions

were enacted. (This decline reflects an increase in the effective tax rate on

investment in equipment and a reduction in the effective tax rate on investment

in structures and inventories.) On the other hand, the revenue projections show

increases in corporation tax revenues of about 25 percent over the period 1986

to 1990.

     Some reconciliation of these two apparently contradictory statements is

possible. Nearly $60 billion in revenue is raised between 1986 and 1989 by the

excess depreciation recapture rule, which does not affect the incentive to make



   The average federal marginal tax rate (weighted by wages and salaries) falls
from 23.6 to 19.1. Adjusting for the loss of sub-federal tax deductibility
yields about a 4.4 percent increase in the after-tax rate of return, which implies
a 1.76 percent increase in saving for an interest elasticity of 0.4. This calcu-
lation assumes that the after-tax rate of return on a taxable saving instrument
bears the same relationship to the actual marginal after-tax return to saving as
it did over the period of Boskin's study.
                                    -22-

new investments. Furthermore, the change to a more   back-loaded system of capital
cost recovery allowances accelerates revenue that will later be lost as larger

depreciation allowances in the later years of capital goods' productive life-

times are taken.

     Nevertheless, the Administration has estimated that, when "fully effective",

the corporation income tax would raise nine percent more revenue than under cur-

rent law. How this is compatible with a sharp decline in the corporate-level

effective tax rate on new investment is a more difficult question to answer.

Part of the answer is that the effective tax rate calculations do not consider

some revenue-raising provisions that do not apply generally to investment, but

do apply at the margin of some new investment. For example, the revised account-

ing rules for multiperiod construction will increase effective tax rates for

certain investment activities, but are not considered in the effective tax rate

calculations. Another part of the answer is that the effective tax rate on

debt-financed investment is not reduced by the plan. Finally, the estimates of

steady-state corporation tax revenues may have erred on the high side, a con-

clusion suggested by the finding of the Congressional Budget Office (1985) that

the corporate tax proposals will lose rather than gain revenue in the long run.

     My tentative conclusion is that the tax incentive to corporate invest-

ment probably increases slightly, but not substantially.38 This conclusion also

applies to noncorporate, nonresidential investment. Furthermore, the taxation

of noncorporate residential capital income almost certainly increases, as is

discussed in more detail in Section IV.D. of this paper. Overall, the taxation

of investment is probably not altered much in either direction, although there

is a shift in the relative burden of taxation from nonresidential capital to

residential capital, and from corporate structures and inventories to equipment.


38
   Fullerton (1985) also concludes that the overall effective rate of taxation
on corporate capital would not be affected significantly by the Administration's
tax plan.
                                       —23-


        The upshot of slightly increased incentives to save and not much change

in the incentives to invest would be, in a world closed to international capital

flows, slightly lower interest rates and a slightly higher rate of saving and

investment. With internationally mobile capital, any increased saving would be

spread among investment opportunities throughout the world, and neither interest

rates nor aggregate domestic investment would be affected significantly.

        IV.C.   Labor Supply

        The most striking fact about the Administration's tax reform plan for assess-

ing its impact on labor supply is the apparent large reduction in marginal tax

rates. The average statutory marginal tax rate would be reduced for all income

classes, with the largest reductions for families with incomes over $30,000.

The overall average of marginal tax rates would decline by 19 percent, from 23.6

percent to 19.1 percent.39 A straightforward back-of-the envelope calculation

of the likely labor supply response to the decline in marginal tax rates is a

useful starting point. Assuming no aggregate income effect, compensated labor

supply elasticities of 0.2 for males and 1,2 for fnales,4° and a two-thirds

share of total labor income going to males, one obtains a predicted increase in

labor supply of 3.1 percent.41

        This calculation is, though, fraught with pitfalls because the aggregate

labor supply response depends critically on by what means the level of statutory



     The average marginal tax rate calculations are weighted by wage and salary
Income.
40
   These labor supply elasticities are taken from Stuart's (1984) study of the
welfare cost of the tax system, and are based on his survey of the literature.
Hausman (e.g., 1981) has argued for a higher compensated labor supply elastic-
i ty.

41
   A 19 percent decline in marginal tax rates, from 23.6 to 19.1, is equivalent
to a 5.9 percent increase in the after-tax wage rate. With a two-thirds share
of labor income going to males, the aggregate compensated labor supply elasticity
is 0.53. Applying an elasticity of 0.53 to the 5.9 percent increase in wages
yields 3.1 percent.
                                    -24-


marginal tax rates is reduced. Three different sources are relevant: a reduc-

tion in the total taxation of labor income, a broadening of the tax base, and

a less progressive tax system.

     A large fraction of the reduction in marginal tax rates is made possible

by the 7 percent reduction in individual income tax revenues, which is offset

in the short run by an increase in corporation income tax revenues.42 A shift

from labor income taxation to capital income taxation tends to stimulate labor

supply only in the context of a static model. In a multi-period model, such a

shift does not unambiguously increase labor supply because although it increases

an individual's real after-tax wage in terms of present consumption goods, it

decreases the real after-tax wage in terms of future consumption goods. The

labor supply response depends on individuals' preferences.

     Some of the reduction in marginal tax rates is made possible by broadening

the tax base. However, in the case of base broadening, a decline in the statu-

tory marginal tax rate is not sufficient information for claiming that there will

be a substitution effect away from leisure toward work. Because base broadening

eliminates the preferential tax treatment of certain activities, the real wage in

terms of some goods will decline, even though the real wage in terms of most goods

will rise. Consider a taxpayer presently in the 50 percent bracket who under the

Administration's plan will be in the 35 percent bracket; suppose the wage rate is

$10. Currently, one hour of work buys $5 of food or recreation; under the Admini-

stration's plan one hour of work will buy $6.50 of these goods. Conversely,

while under current law one hour of work could provide $10 worth of municipal

services financed by deductible property taxes, under the Administration's plan

one additional hour of work may provide only $6.50 more of these goods because


42
   Note that if, as discussed in Section I.B., the increase in corporate tax re-
venues is only a temporary phenomenon, then the proposal is not revenue neutral
in the long run.
                                            -25-



the deductibility is eliminated.43 In this case, even the direction of the

substitution effect is not unambiguous, and depends or, the shape of indivi-

duals' preference functions.

     More directly, eliminating the deductibility of state and local income taxes

reduces the combined federal, state, and local marginal tax rate on labor income

for itemizers by less than the decline in the federal marginal tax rate. The

increase in the effective impact of sub-federal income taxes tends to offset

the federal rate reduction that the increased revenue gained from eliminating
    —
ueuUcLIui   i i..y
                              t. .1
                     a iOws. umi     t... .L
                                  iariy, erie
                                                              .L L J...
                                                   iiuiflo.iuri vi urie iwu-earlitr Lreui wuuiu

tend to offset the reduction in statutory marginal tax rates for those who cur-

rently make use of it. Note that this provision applies to the lower-earning

spouse, whose labor supply behavior is widely believed to be more sensitive to

wages than primary earners.

     One possible way to reduce the average level of marginal tax rates while

not reducing the revenue yield is to reduce the progressivity of the tax sys-

tem.44 Hausman (e.g., 1981) has argued, on the basis of his econometric analysis

of labor supply behavior, that moving to a completely flat-rate income tax would,

at the cost of diminished progressivity, substantially increase aggregate labor

supply as well as reduce the resource misallocation costs of the tax system.45

Hausman's estimate is not, however, a reliable guide to the likely effect of the

Administration's proposal on labor supply because, by design, the plan does not



   Under the Treasury's plan, this argument also applied to employer-provided
health insurance and charitable contributions, depending on the circumstances
involved.

   On the relationship between progressivity and labor supply, see Sandmo (1983).

   The estimated increase in labor supply is 10.7 percent, based on Table 7 of
Hausrnan (1981) and information contained in the text, Hausman's analysis has
been challenged by Hecknian (1983) and Browning (1985).
significantly alter the progressivity of the tax system.46

     In conclusion, the reduction in statutory marginal tax rates would be ex-

pected, ceteris paribus, to increase the desired supply of labor by as much as

3 percent. The true after-tax real wage rate would not, though, rise by as

much as a simple extrapolation from marginal tax rates would indicate. This

would mitigate, though probably not eliminate, the increased incentive to supply

labor. In this case, the perception that after-tax wages have increased may

be as important as the reality that the true return to working has not changed

quite as much.

     IV.D. Housing

     Under current law, the return to owner-occupied housing is untaxed at the

federal level and the return to investing in rental housing is preferentially

taxed. In broad outline, the Administration's tax proposal leaves unchanged

the federal taxation of owner-occupied housing but, by eliminating property tax

deductibility, may increase its overall rate of taxation. It also increases     -




the rate of taxation on rental housing. This section discusses these changes
in more detail and attempts to trace out their implications for housing markets.

     The Administration's proposal impacts owner—occupied housing through three

principal avenues: the elimination of the deductibility of local property taxes,

the restriction of interest deductibility for borrowing other than on mortgages

for principal residences, and the changes in the rate of taxation on competing



46
   Although see Section II.A. for a discussion of the difficulties of assessing
the distributional impact of the plan.
                                    -27-


uses of capital.47

     Holding the interest rate constant, the decline in individual marginal tax

rates increases the user cost of owner-occupied housing. To the extent that

housing is financed by borrowing, it increases the after-tax cost of borrowing for

itemizing households only.48 To the extent that housing is equity-financed, the

decline in tax rates increases user cost if it increases the after-tax rate of

return on alternative investments. For high-bracket taxpayers who primarily in-

vest in tax-exempt assets this connection is indirect, occurring only if the rate

of return on tax-exempt assets rises in order to remain competitive with fully-

taxed assets. As Section IV.C discusses, the Administration's tax reform plan

is not likely to induce a large change in the general level of interest rates,

though perhaps a slight decline could be expected.

     The effect on housing demand of eliminating property tax deductibility

depends on the essential nature of the property tax. If it is viewed as a dis-

torting tax on capital, then eliminating the deductibility increases the effective



   In the Treasury's proposal, a fourth aspect was critical--the indexation of
interest payments and receipts. Under the indexation scheme, interest receipts
and payments (other than for mortgages on principal residences and up to $5,000
of other net interest expenses) would have been adjusted downward to approximate
the portion that represented real income or expense. The exemption of mortgage
interest from indexing would have provided a strong incentive for all itemizing
homeowners to be mortgaged up to the value of their principal residence. The
portion of the loan that formerly represented equity in the house could be in-
vested in a taxable security with similar characteristics tothe mortgage loan.
The individual's portfolio then would essentially be unchanged, but the indivi-
dual would earn an arbitrage profit since all mortgage interest would be deduc-
tible but only the real portion of the interest receipts would be taxable; the
proceeds from the bond would pay the interest on the home equity loan. Because
owning a house would be required to support this arbitrage, the net result of
this provision would be to reduce the user cost of owner-occupied housing to
itemizing households to an extent determined by the rate of inflation, the nomi-
nal interest rate, and the taxpayer's marginal tax rate.

   The fraction of households that itemize (now at an all-time high of 37 per-
cent) is significantly below the fraction of households that are owner-occupiers
(about 65 percent).
                                    -28-


taxation of housing and consequently the user cost of housing for itemizers.

If, following Tiebout (1956) and Hamilton (1976), the property tax is simply

the price for municipally-provided services, then eliminating deductibility will

in the long run have no effect on the demand for housing. The net price of

municipal services to itemizing homeowners will increase, leading households to

seek out comunities which offer lower levels of services, but no smaller aver-

age house values.

     There is a limitation on deductible interest expenses under current law,

but mortgage interest is exempt from the limit. The Administration's proposal

subjects mortgage interest secured by a non-principal residence to this limit,

though an exemption worth at least $5,000 is provided and the new rules are

phased in gradually over a ten-year period. This provision will increase the

cost of second homes unless desired debt can be shifted onto the principal re-

sidence or debt finance is not required.

     Several provisions of the Administration's propos-al would affect the pro-

fitability of investment in real estate, and would thereby influence the supply

and equilibrium price of rental housing. The most important of these are Ci) the

replacement of the ACRS depreciation schedule with a stretched-out, though in-

dexed, depreciation schedule; (ii) the substitution of full taxation of real

capital gains (with no loss limitation) for depreciable assets in place of the

long-term capital gains exclusion; (iii) irruediate taxation of pledged receiv-

ables, which eliminates the deferral of taxation on installment sales; (iv) the

extension of the "at-risk" limitations on deductible losses to real estate; (v)

repeal of the special investment tax credit for rehabilitation of certain old

or historic buildings; (vi) the expanded limitation on interest deductions, pro-

posed to include interest on mortgages for non-principal residences and the

taxpayer's share of the interest expense of limited partnerships and most Sub-
                                     -29-


 chapter S corporations; (vii) the elimination of tax-exempt industrial develop-

ment bond financing for multifamily housing and (viii) repeal of the special five-

year amortization of expenditures to rehabilitate low-income housing.49

     Most recent analyses have concluded that the net effect of the provisions

that directly affect real estate plus the reduction in marginal tax rates would

be to substantially reduce the after-tax rate of return of a typical real estate

investment, holding constant the rental rates and the value of real estate. Downs

(1985), in an extensive discussion of this issue, estimated that in order to main-

tain the same real after-tax return, rental rates would have to rise by between

5 and 10 percent.

     This result may seem somewhat surprising in view of the fact that most econo-

mists have concluded that the current tax system favors investment in equipment

compared to investment in structures. In this case, a policy which moves in the

direction of uniform taxation of all types of investment would be expected to favor

real estate compared to other types of investment. Some reconciliation of these

two apparently incompatible views is possible. The standard analysis refers to

the corporate-level effective rate of taxation of an equity-financed investment.

The recent studies of tax reform's impact on real estate focus on a highly-

leveraged invesment made by a top-bracket individual (often held through some

kind of partnership) where the current preferential treatment of capital gains

can be exploited by sale of the asset well before its productive life has ended

and many of the other special tax provisions that apply to real estate are utili-

zed. The tax consequences of General Motors erecting a building to house its

assembly lines are quite different than a limited partnership putting up a



49Two important aspects of the Treasury's proposal that were deleted from the
Administration's proposal are the indexation of interest and the taxation of
limited partnerships with more than 35 partners as corporations.
                                    -30-


multi-family apartment building. The first conclusion is that, disregarding

leverage, the Administration's proposal increases the taxation of real estate

relative to investment in corporate structures and inventories, and arguably

increases it relative to investment in equipment.

    A second key aspect of these analyses is that the real estate invesrnent is

assumed to be highly leveraged. This implies that any change in the underlying

return becomes greatly magnified in the return to the leveraged investment.

Furthermore, a decline in the tax rate against which interest deductions are

taken, holding constant the effective tax rate on an equity investment, can great-

ly reduce the after-tax return to a leveraged investment. Since the decline in

tax rates applies to borrowing for any purpose, it is not clear why this implies

a relative disadvantage to real estate. The role of leverage is explored in

what follows.

     Consider the problem first in a stylized economy where there is no risk,

all wealth owners have identical marginal tax rates, and all real income is

correctly measured for tax purposes and fully taxed. In this world there is no

advantage to leverage, as the after-tax rate of return is the same for all in-

vestments and for all investors. In this economy a reduction in the common

marginal tax rate will not change the relative attractiveness of the available

assets. Next assume that, due to accelerated depreciation and preferential

tax treatment of capital gains, the effective tax rate on equity in real estate

is lower than the statutory rate. In equilibrium enough capital is attracted

to real estate so that its after-tax rate of return is equal to the return to

investments in other sectors.   In this case a decline in the statutory marginal

tax rate reduces the relative tax advantage of real estate, and will cause a

flight away from real estate. An increase in the effective tax rate on equity-

financed real estate, holding statutory rates constant, will have a similar
                                  -31-


effect. In a progressive income tax system, high-bracket individuals will

find it in their interest to hold leveraged positions in tax-preferred assets.

Low-bracket individuals and tax-exempt entities will find it in their interest

to lend to the high-bracket individuals. The presence of inside debt causes

a revenue loss to the government, because the average tax rate against which

interest deductions are taken exceeds the average tax rate applicable to in-

terest receipts. In this world, an across-the-board decrease in marginal

tax rates disfavors the preferentially taxed asset as above, and also reduces

the arbitrage-related loss of revenue due to the flattening of rate differ-

entials. In equilibrium, though, this private loss will be reflected in a

general reduction in after-tax rates of return.

     According to this analysis, the Administration's proposal disadvantages

real estate both by reducing its preferential tax status and by lowering and

compressing the marginal rate structure. The fall in marginal rates negatively

impacts real estate because it reduces the magnitude of any tax advantage real

estate maintains and not because real estate, as an especially highly lever-

aged investment, is hurt relatively more by a reduction in the tax rate against

which interest can be deducted.

     Introducing risk into these stylized models complicates the analysis con-

siderably. A risky asset will, in equilibrium, earn a higher after-tax ex-

pected rate of return than a riskiess investment. By borrowing at the risk-

less after-tax rate of interest and buying the higher—yielding risky asset,

an individual can increase his portfolio's expected rate of return, but only

at the cost of increasing its riskiness. An accurate analysis of tax reform

must carefully specify not only how expected rates of return are changed,

but also how the riskiness of alternative investments is affected. The

Administration's proposal reduces the riskiness of real estate investments
                                   -32-


by indexing depreciation allowances and by allowing unlimited deduction of

all real capital losses. These features may to some degree offset the factors

discussed above.

     The role of leverage in understanding the effects of tax policy also

can look different in a model with risk. In the riskiess model, borrowing is

not limited and is not tied to any particular collateral assets. However, if

there are real bankruptcy costs, the ability to borrow (or the interest rate

on the borrowing) may depend inversely on the riskiness and bankruptcy costs

attendant to the borrower's assets.       ifl a progressive tax system, highbracket

individuals who gain from being highly leveraged will then prefer less risky,

tax-preferred investments. That is relevant to real estate because it is

often argued that, due to better secondary markets, it is subject to lower

bankruptcy costs--it is easier to find a new owner for an apartment building

than for a factory. Then real estate assets can be more easily (or cheaply)

lev-eraged than other assets. If   this   argument is correct, a general reduc-

tion in marginal tax rates does disfavor real estate precisely because it

reduces its relative advantage due to leverage.

     It should be obvious from this discussion that the net impact of the

Administration's tax proposals on housing is difficult to quantify in a pre-

cise way. The broad implications are, though, fairly clear: both owner-

occupied and rental housing are relatively less favored under the Adniinistra-

tion's plan. The short-run implication of this is a decline in the market

value of housing. Over time resources will shift away from housing, forcing

the level of rents up. How much real rents will increase in the long run

depends on the substitutability of housing services and other goods and on

the substitutability of real estate and alternative assets. If, for example,

there is relatively little of the first type of substitutability, then rents
                                     -33-


will tend to rise until the relative attractiveness of real estate invest-

rnent is restored to its former position. Note, though, that this is an in-

crease in the relative price of housing services and, for a given level of

prices, implies a fall in the price of other goods. This change in relative

prices has distributional implications only to the extent that different in-

come groups spend different shares of income on housing. Low-income house-

holds will be worse off to the extent, and only to the extent, that they

spend relatively high shares of income on housing services.

      The impact on the rate of horneownership is likely to be small because

the price of housing services will rise regardless of tenure.50'51 If rents

are sticky in the short run, there may be a shift toward renting. This shift

will not persist as rents rise to restore the profitability of real estate

investment.


V.   Tax Evasion

      A recent study by the Internal Revenue Service (1983) estimated that in
1981 the individual income tax revenue foregone due to noncompliance with the

tax law amounted to $68.5 billion, or 24 percent        of individual income tax

50
     Hendershott (1985)   draws a similar conclusion.
51
   One provision that makes debt-financed homeownership less attractive for
itemizers is the elimination of state and local tax deductibility, the largest
itemized deduction. This will increase the number of taxpayers for whom
the sum of non-housing related deductions is below the standard deduction,
and therefore for whom some of the mortgage interest deduction does not re-
sult in a dollar-for-dollar reduction in taxable income. This would not
affect the demand for housing at the margin (except for those households
who are no longer itemizers), but would increase the relative price of
owning versus renting housing. On this issue see Hendershott and Slemrod
(1983).
                                   -34-


receipts in that year.52 It further estimated that evasion had been growing

at an annual real rate of 4.3 percent since 1973. Assuming the same real

rate of growth between 1981 and 1985 yields an estimated tax gap in 1985 of

$96 billion.

     The prevalence of tax evasion has adverse implications for both the

fairness and efficiency of the tax system. It contributes to unfairness be-

cause it favors individuals who are willing to gamble against detection and

stretch the tax law to their advantage and whose line of work facilitates

understatement of true taxable income. Individuals who are unwilling or un-

able to successfully underpay their tax liability suffer because higher tax

rates are necessary to make up the lost revenues due to evasion and to finance

the enforcement of the tax laws. Tax evasion contributes to inefficiency

because it utilizes resources for the research, planning, and camouflaging

of tax evasion schemes and requires resources for the enforcement of the tax

laws. It may   also   cause inefficiency by drawing resources into those activi-

ties which facilitate evasion, such as self-employment or assets that pro-

duce capital gains.

     Two aspects of the Administration's proposal would potentially mitigate

the problem of tax evasion--the reduction in marginal rates and the paring

of special credits, deduction, and adjustments to income. Reducing marginal

tax rates reduces the expected return to understating taxable income, and thus

ceteris paribus diminishes the incentive to engage in tax evasion. However,

as Yitzhaki (1974) has pointed out, if (as is usually the case in the U.S.)

the penalty for tax evasion is determined as a fraction of the understate-

ment, then lower tax rates proportionately reduce both the payoff to



52
   This estimate does not include tax revenue lost due to failure to pay tax
liabilities reported on filed returns nor does it include the tax liability
due to income earned from illegal activities.
                                  -35-


undetected understatement and the penalty incurred for detected evasion. In

this case, there is no substitution effect toward less evasion from lower

marginal tax rates.   If, however, the probability of detection depends posi-

tively on the amount of income underreported, then lower marginal taxes will

generally lead to a substitution effect reducing evasion.

     In a pioneering empirical effort, Clotfelter (1983) estimated the re-

sponsiveness of tax evasion to marginal tax rates. Using data from the IRS'

Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program (TCMP) survey, which consists of ex-

tensive audits of a random sample of the taxpaying population, Clotfelter

estimated that the elasticity of underreported income with respect to mar-

ginal tax rates ranged from 0.5 to 3.0, depending on the specification chosen.

     Using this range of estimated responsiveness, a 10 percent across-the-

board reduction in federal income tax rates was simulated to reduce the amount

of underreported income by between 9 and 26 percent. The Administration's tax

p-lan features an average reduction in marginal tax rates of 19 percent (al-

though it is not uniformly distributed); it also, by eliminating sub-federal

tax deductibility, reduces overall marginal tax rates less than otherwise.

Using 15 percent as the decline in the average overall marginal tax rate leads

to a predicted drop of between 13 1/2 and 39 percent in underreported income,

which u1d raise an estimated $13 to $37 billion in additional revenue in

l985. Empirical research into both the magnitude and determinants of tax

evasion is, however, still in its infancy. Even a range of estimates as wide

as these results should be treated as tentative and preliminary.



   This calculation is based on several assumptions, specifically that (i) in-
dividuals' underlying attitudes have not changed substantially since 1969; (ii)
the ratio of aggregate tax understatement to tax paid is equal to the ratio of
income understatement to income reported and (iii) that Clotfelter's sinjlation
results for a 10% across-the-board cut in rates can be linearly extrapolated to
apply to a larger cut in rates.
                                     -36-


     The elimination of several special credits, deductions, and adjustments

to Income will more firmly base tax liability on activities that are subject

to information returns provided by third parties, such as wage and salary

payments, interest and dividend receipts, and other miscellaneous income.

This will facilitate the monitoring of reported tax liabilities.

     Finally, there is another potentially important link between tax reform

and tax evasion. There is considerable evidence that taxpayers who perceive

the tax system to be unfair are more likely to be evaders.54 If fundamental

tax reform can contribute to an increased general perception of fairness, it

may directly reduce noncompliance.


VI. Conclusions

     The tax reform proposal offered by the Reagan Administration is not as

radical or intellectually satisfying as other plans that have been suggested,

including that of its own Treasury Department. Nor does it quite live up to

its accompanying public relations campaign, which has hailed it as the Second

American Revolution and promised substantial tax reductions for the great

majority of Americans. Its less-than-radical nature is not entirely surpris-

ing, considering that it must eventually pass through a political system which

has apparently placed one important constraint on the reform package--that no

Income group or politically important constituency suffer inordinately in the

short run. This constraint rules out many plans which feature more radical

changes In progressivity, base broadening, or change in the tax base concept

Itself.

     Nevertheless, the tax plan offered by the Administration u1d induce a



   See Mason and Calvin (1984) for a brief discussion, and an opposing view,
of this literature.
                                    -37-


clear improvement over the current system. It would induce a more efficient

use of the nation's resources and thus improve economic performance, eliminate

several sources of inequity, and potentially stem the rapidly growing problem

of tax evasion.   It falls short of its stated objectives by not substantially

reducing the system's complexity or increasing the overall incentives to save

and invest. As with any tax change, it would generate transitional inequities

and could also increase the uncertainty that accompanies the expectation of

further future changes in the tax system.

     But what about households, the presumed object of this study? The fore-

going analysis of tax reform in terms of macroeconomic aggregates and lofty ob-

jectives can obscure the implications of tax reform for individuals and families.

The average household would notice little change in the tax filing process--

perhaps a few less lines to skip over. More people will be aware of their fed-

eral marginal tax rate. Tax liability would decline on average, with the in-

dividual situation depending largely on the size of family, number of wage earn-

ers, and state of residence. The price of certain goods, such as leisure (i.e.,

working), charitable contributions, housing, and municipal services (for itemi-

zers), will change and some households would adjust their behavior in response.

The benefits of improved resource allocation would show up gradually in the form

of increased wages and generally improved economic conditions.

     Much of the above also applies to high-income individuals, who tend to have

complicated returns with varying sources of non-wage income. Capital gains and

losses on their portfolios would be an additional factor in how they fare under

tax reform. Investment decisions would have to be re-evaluated because of the

changes in the relative tax treatment of assets and because of the decline in

the return to reducing taxable income.

     The macroeconomic impact of tax reform results from the response of house-
                                    -38-



holds (and firms) to the changed incentives of a new tax system.     If the incen-

tives encourage the efficient use of resources, one benefit of tax reform is

improved economic performance. This potential benefit does not show up in the

local newspaper's calculations of how tax liability will change, but deserves

to be an important element of the continuing debate on tax reform.
                                      -39-.



                                 References


Aaron, Henry, "Some Further Thoughts on Recapture of Excess Depreciation."
     Mimeo, July 1985.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph Stiglitz, "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct
     versus Indirect Taxation." Journal of Public Economics 6 (July-August 1976),
     pp. 55-75.

Ballard, Charles, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "The Welfare Cost of Dis-
     tortions in the United States Tax System: A General Equilibrium Approach."
     American Economic Review 75 (March 1985), pp. 128-138.

Boskin, Michael, "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest." Journal of
     Political Economy 86 (April 1978, Part 2), pp. S3-S27.

Browning, Edgar, "A Critical Appraisal of Hausman's Welfare Cost Estimates."
     Mimeo, 1985.

Clotfelter, Charles, "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of Individual
     Returns." Review of Economics and Statistics 65 (August 1983),
     pp. 363-373.

Congressional Budget Office, "Analysis of the Long-Term Revenue Impacts of the
     President's Tax Reform Plan." June 1985.

Deaton, Angus, "Econometric Issues for Tax Design in Developing Countries."
     Mimeo, January 1984.

Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production, I:
     Production and II: Tax Rules." American Economic Review 61 (March and
     June 1971), pp. 8-27 and 261-278.

Downs, Anthony, "Impacts of the President's Proposed Tax Reforms Upon Real
     Estate." Mimeo, June 21, 1985.

Feldstein, Martin and Daniel R. Feenberg, "Alternative Tax Rules and Personal
     Saving Incentives: Microeconomic Data and Behavioral Simulation." In
     Martin Feldstejn (ed.) Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy
     Analysis (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1983).

Fullerton, Don, "The Indexation of Interest, Depreciation, and Capital Gains:
     A Model of Investment Incentives." NBER Working Paper No. 1655, June
    1985.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod, "A General Equilibrium Simulation Study of Sub-
     sidies to Municipal Expenditures." Journal of Finance 38 (May 1983),
     pp. 585-594.

Gravelle, Jane, "Effects of Business Tax Provisions in the Administration's
     Proposals: Updated Tables." Congressional Research Service Report No.
     85—783E, June 6, 1985.
                                     -40-


Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka, The Flat Tax (Stanford, Ca.: Hoover
     Institution Press, 1985).

Hamilton, Bruce, "Capitalization of Intrajurisdictional Differences in Local
     Tax Prices.' American Economic Review 66 (December 1976), pp. 743-753.

Hausman, Jerry, "Labor Supply." In Henry Aaron and Joseph Pechman (eds.)
     How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
     Institution, 1981).

Heckman, James, "Coment on Hausrnan." In Martin Feldstein (ed.) Behavioral
     Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis (Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press, 1983).

Hendershott, Patric, "Tax Reform, Interest Rates, and Capital Allocation."
     Mimeo, July 1985.

Hendershott, Patrc and Joel Slemrod, "Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for
     ner-Occupied Housing." American Real Estate and Urban Economics
     Association Journal 10 (Winter 1983), pp. 375-393.

King, Mervyn, "Savings and Taxation." In G.A. Hughes and G.M. Heal (eds.),
     Public Policy and the Tax System (London: Allen and Unwin, 1980).

Mason, Robert and Lyle D. Calvin, "Public Confidence and Admitted Tax Evasion."
     National Tax Journal 37 (December 1984), pp. 489-496.

Musgrave, Richard A. and Peggy B. Musgrave, Public Finance in Theory and
     Practice (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976).

Pechman, Joseph, Who Paid the Taxes, 1966-85? (Washington, D.C.: Brookings
     Institution, 1985).

Sandmo, Agnar, "Progressive Taxation, Redistribution, and Labor Supply."
     Scandinavian Journal of Economics 85 (July 1983), pp. 311-323.

Skinner, Jonathan and Joel Slemrod, "An Economic Perspective on Tax Evasion."
     National Tax Journal 38 (September 1985), forthcoming.

Slemrod, Joel, "Do We Know How Progressive the Income Tax System Should Be?"
     National Tax Journal 36 (September 1983), pp. 361-370.

Slemrod, Joel, "The Return to Tax Simplification: An Econometric Analysis."
     Mimeo, August 1984.

Slemrod, Joel and Nikki Sorum, "The Compliance Cost of the U.S. Individual
     Income Tax System." National Tax Journal 37 (December 1984), pp. 461-474.

Stretch, C. Clinton and Emil Sunley, "Recapture of Excess Depreciation: What
     Are the Issues?'  Tax Notes, June 24, 1985.

Stuart, Charles, "Welfare Costs Per Dollar of Additional Tax Revenue in the
     United States." American Economic Review 74 (June 1984), pp. 352-362.
                                         —41-


Tiebout, Charles, "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures." Journal of Political
     Economy 64 (October 1956), pp. 416-424.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Tax Reform for Fairness,    Simplicity, and
     Economic Growth. Volumes 1 arid , November

U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Income Tax Compliance Research: Estimates for
     1973-1981. July 1983.

U.S. President, The   President's   Tax Proposals to the Conress for Fairness,
     Growth, and

Yitzhaki, Shiomo, "A Note on 'Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis'."
     Journal of Public Economics 3 (May 1974), pp. 201-202.
