NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRANTS, WELFARE REFORM, AND THE U.S. SAFETY NET
Marianne Bitler
Hilary W. Hoynes
Working Paper 17667
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17667

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

This research received funding from the Russell Sage Foundation. Part of this research was completed
while Bitler was visiting the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank. All views presented in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marianne Bitler and Hilary W. Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Immigrants, Welfare Reform, and the U.S. Safety Net
Marianne Bitler and Hilary W. Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 17667
December 2011
JEL No. I3,I38
ABSTRACT
Beginning with the 1996 federal welfare reform law many of the central safety net programs in the
U.S. eliminated eligibility for legal immigrants, who had been previously eligible on the same terms
as citizens. These dramatic cutbacks affected eligibility not only for cash welfare assistance for families
with children, but also for food stamps, Medicaid, SCHIP, and SSI. In this paper, we comprehensively
examine the status of the U.S. safety net for immigrants and their family members. We document the
policy changes that affected immigrant eligibility for these programs and use the CPS for 1995-2010
to analyze trends in program participation, income, and poverty among immigrants (and natives). We
pay particular attention to the recent period and examine how immigrants and their children are faring
in the “Great Recession” with an eye toward revealing how these policy changes have affected the
success of the safety net in protecting this population.

Marianne Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu
Hilary W. Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

I. Introduction
Beginning with the 1996 federal welfare reform law‐the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act or PRWORA‐many of the central safety net programs in the U.S.
eliminated eligibility for legal immigrants, who had been previously eligible on the same terms as
citizens. These dramatic cutbacks affected eligibility not only for cash welfare assistance (Aid to Families
with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or TANF) for families with children,
but also for food stamps (now Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) or SNAP, Medicaid, State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), and Supplemental Security Income (SSI). Subsequent
federal legislation passed over the next decade reinstated immigrant eligibility for some, but not all, of
these programs leading to a confusing patchwork of eligibility rules varying by immigrant status, arrival
year, and program.
A central tenet of welfare reform was the devolution of responsibility to states for designing
their TANF programs. But a component of this that was not widely discussed in the context of welfare
reform is that the 1996 law also gave states the responsibility to set eligibility rules for many safety net
programs for legal immigrants, policy previously solely in the federal realm. In the wake of welfare
reform, as we discuss below, many states took advantage of this new power and restored access to the
safety net for immigrants that had been cut out in the federal welfare reform law. Now 15 years after
welfare reform, states are legislating immigration policies in wide ranging areas including law
enforcement, identification/driver’s licenses, and hiring practices/employment (for example see
National Conference of State Legislatures 2011). Thus, with hindsight it is clear that the 1996 welfare
reform ushered in a new period of active state immigration policy and “immigration policy federalism.”
The focus in the welfare reform legislation on scaling back the safety net for immigrants was, in
some part, a response to concerns that generous public benefits lead to in‐migration to the U.S. and
interstate flows of immigrants responding to “welfare magnets” (e.g., Borjas 1999) although the
1

empirical evidence does not uniformly support this theory (e.g., Zavodny 1999, Kaushal 2005, Van Hook
and Bean 2009). Further, the scaling back of immigrant access to the safety net was also a response to
concerns about higher participation among immigrants compared than natives (Borjas 1995) although
other studies find lower participation rates (Capps, Fix, and Henderson 2009). Higher rates of
participation by immigrants are in part explained by immigrants’ lower incomes, and are concentrated
among the elderly (Borjas and Hilton, 1996; Hu, 1998) and refugee populations (Fix and Passel 1994).
Notably, noncitizen use of Supplemental Security Income (cash welfare for the aged and disabled) rose
by 80 percent between 1990 and 1995 (Social Security Administration 2010). 1
In this paper, we comprehensively examine the status of the U.S. safety net for immigrants and
their family members. In doing so, we examine the central means tested programs for families with
children including TANF, SNAP, SSI, Medicaid, SCHIP, and the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) as well as
Unemployment Insurance (UI). We begin by documenting the policy changes that affected immigrant
eligibility for these programs. We then use the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current
Population Survey for survey years 1995‐2010 along with administrative data (where available) to
analyze trends in program participation, income and poverty among immigrants (and natives). We pay
particular attention to the recent period and examine how immigrants and their children are faring in
the “Great Recession” with an eye toward revealing how these policy changes have affected the success
of the safety net in protecting this population. While we analyze data pre‐ and post‐ welfare reform, our
analysis is descriptive and we cannot necessarily claim to identify the causal impacts of reform.
Ours is not the first study to examine the impacts of welfare reform on immigrants. Many
studies document a decline in immigrant use of the safety net following passage of PRWORA2. This
reflects the direct effect of limiting eligibility to groups of previously covered immigrants. However,

1

This discussion of the political context for the immigrant policy changes is based on Haskins (2009).
For a recent and comprehensive review of the literature on welfare reform and immigration see Fix, Capps, and
Kaushal (2009).

2

2

some results indicate that the relative decline in immigrant participation is in part due to a differential
response to the strong labor market of the late 1990s due to immigrant’s being located in different
states and having lower skill levels, compared to natives (Lofstrom and Bean 2002, Haider et al. 2004).
In addition, many papers argue that there has been a “chilling effect” (Fix and Passell 1999) of the policy
change, leading to reductions in program participation for groups and programs even where there was
no change in program eligibility. A growing literature examine impacts of these policy changes on
outcomes including naturalization (Van Hook 2003), employment (Kaestner and Kaushal 2005, Lofstrom
and Bean 2002), food insecurity (Borjas 2004), health insurance (Borjas 2003, Kaushal and Kaestner
2005), birth outcomes (Joyce et al 2001), poverty status (Borjas, 2011), and location (Kaushal 2005).
Given this existing literature, our study makes three contributions. First, we update the
descriptive evidence on program participation among immigrants and natives using data through 2009.
Second, we explore how the composition of income differs between lower‐income immigrants and
natives before and after welfare reform. Finally, we examine trends in poverty and extreme poverty
with a focus on the differences in the recent Great Recession.
Our analysis yields several interesting and important findings for families with children. First, we
show that immigrants generally participate in the safety net at lower rates than natives once we restrict
ourselves to comparisons within the set of lower‐income families.3 This is true for almost all programs
we consider and is true both before and after welfare reform. Second, the national trends in safety net
participation are broadly consistent with the finding of reduced immigrant access to the safety net post
welfare reform. Similarly, our results show that immigrants rely more on earnings as a source of income
(than do natives) and the degree of reliance has increased post‐welfare reform. Finally, using variation
in state labor market conditions, we find that child poverty rates for immigrant‐headed households have

3

Since immigrant families are less advantaged than the native born, and most safety net programs condition on
being low income, a comparison of participation rates in the full population is not “apples” to “apples.” We discuss
this further blow.

3

risen with unemployment in the Great Recession at rates far exceeding the rise for children in native‐
headed households. That is, a given increase in unemployment causes a larger increase in poverty for
children in immigrant headed than native headed households. In addition, the safety net has acted to
dampen the effect of the Great and 2001 recessions for children of the native born but not for children
of immigrants.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. In section II we describe the safety net pre‐ and post‐
welfare reform for immigrants and natives. In section III we describe our data, sample, and the
definitions used in our analysis. We present the results for program participation in section IV and
income and poverty in section V. We conclude in section VI.

II. U.S. Safety Net Programs, Immigrants and Policy Changes
A. Overview of the Safety Net
In this paper, we focus on the means‐tested safety net for families with children. Our definition
of “safety net” programs encompasses programs that insure against short‐term or long‐term negative
shocks to income. By “means tested” programs, we mean those that are limited to households, families,
and individuals with low income (and sometimes low assets). Using this definition, Table 1 presents an
overview of the central safety net programs for families with children, split by cash versus non‐cash
transfers. The two primary programs for low income families include cash welfare (previously called Aid
to Families with Dependent Children or AFDC, and now called Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
or TANF) and food assistance through the Food Stamp Program (now called the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program or SNAP). Food Stamps is by far the larger program of the two (especially post
welfare reform): in 2009, 15 million families (or single individuals) received food stamps at a cost of $50
billion (2009 $) compared to fewer than 2 million families receiving cash welfare at a cost of $9 billion.
Food stamps are also available more universally, with all types of families being eligible. The Earned

4

Income Tax Credit provides tax based aid for low income working families with children and in 2008, the
most recent year for which data are available, 25 million families received the EITC at a cost of $51
billion (2008 $).4 Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is another cash “welfare” program, which primarily
serves poor elderly and disabled adults, but also is received by disabled children in poor families. Finally,
although not means tested, unemployment compensation is obviously a critical element of the safety
net and the central income replacement program in recessions. The program differs from the programs
above because it is a social insurance program, determined by work history, and not conditioned on
current income. In 2009, on average, about 6 million persons per week received some form of
unemployment compensation at a cost of nearly 131 billion dollars (2009 $).
The average monthly payment per recipient family in 2009 is $397 for cash welfare (TANF) and
$276 for food stamps. Earned Income Tax Credit payments in 2008 averaged $2,046 per year, or $171
per month. In the final column in the table, we report results from a recent Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities study (Sherman 2009) on the number of children that these programs lifted out of poverty (in
2005). The EITC leads, having lifted 2.6 million children out of poverty, followed by food stamps at 2.2
million, and then by SSI and TANF which each removed about 1 million children from poverty.
Beyond these cash or near cash programs, important in‐kind programs are also part of the
safety net for low income families. Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)
provide health insurance to low income children (both) and families (Medicaid). In 2007, Medicaid
served 27.5 million children at a cost of 53.7 billion dollars (2009 $).5 The National School Lunch
Program provides free and reduced price meals for nearly 20 million children under 185% of the Federal
Poverty Level every day at the cost of 7.5 billion dollars, and subsidizes hot lunches for another 11
million paying students. The School Breakfast program provides around 9 million students each day
4

There is also a small EITC for childless individuals.
SCHIP was created in 1997 to provide insurance coverage for low‐ to moderate‐income children, that is, those in
families with incomes just above states’ Medicaid eligibility threshold. Some states have SCHIPs that are
expansions of their Medicaid programs for children, and others have stand‐alone programs.

5

5

meals for a cost of about 2.5 billion dollars. Although not in the table, we consider other in‐kind safety
net benefits such as public housing/rental vouchers and low income energy assistance program
(LIHEAP).6 The CBPP study cited above does not provide estimates of the number of children lifted from
poverty by these in‐kind programs. However, the recent Census Bureau study on the new supplemental
poverty measure (details discussed below) does calculate the reduction in the new supplemental
measure from including many of these in‐kind programs in resources. Here, the EITC causes the largest
reduction in the supplemental poverty measure, bringing the 2010 child poverty rate from 22.4% to
18.2%. SNAP also leads to a relatively large reduction from 21.2% to 18.2%. Smaller reductions occur for
housing subsidies, the school lunch program, and LIHEAP (Short 2011).
B. Eligibility Rules and Benefits
Before outlining the changes in immigrant eligibility post‐welfare reform, we review the
eligibility and benefit rules for the main safety net programs. Cash welfare for low income families
started with AFDC, a program created by the Social Security Act of 1935. The program was jointly funded
by the state and federal governments (with a higher federal matching rate for expenditures made by
lower income states). States had the authority to set benefit levels, while federal rules dictated most of
the remaining eligibility and benefit rules. A family was eligible if they satisfied income and asset tests
and assistance was primarily limited to single women with children. The benefits were structured in a
manner typical for income support programs: if a family had no income, they received the maximum
benefit or “guarantee.” As their earnings (or allowable income) increased, their benefit was reduced by
the benefit reduction rate, leading to an implicit tax rate on earned income. Historically, this rate has
varied between 67% and 100%, providing strong disincentives for work (Moffitt 1983). Due to high
benefit reduction rates and relatively low maximum benefits, AFDC transferred income to families
6

Another element of the safety net is Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
which provides food packages and nutritional counseling to income‐eligible pregnant and post‐partum women and
children up to age 5. Some states also provide general assistance to low‐income individuals or have state‐specific
supplements to the EITC or SSI.

6

substantially below the poverty line. For example, prior to welfare reform under AFDC, the median state
provided benefits to families with income up to 68 percent of poverty and the median state’s benefit
level for a family of three was about 36% of the 1996 poverty guideline (U.S. House of Representatives
1996).
Welfare reform began in the early 1990s, when many states were granted waivers to modify
their AFDC programs from existing federal rules. About half of the states implemented some sort of
welfare waiver between 1992 and 1995. This was followed by federal welfare reform with passage of
the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act (PRWORA) in 1996, replacing AFDC with TANF.
The key elements of state waivers and TANF legislation include: work requirements, lifetime time limits
on the duration of welfare receipt, financial sanctions for failing to adhere to work requirements or
other rules, and enhanced earnings disregards. These changes were designed to facilitate the transition
from welfare to work and to reduce dependence on cash welfare. States have considerable discretion in
setting TANF policies, but by federal law, programs must include work requirements and lifetime time
limits of 5 years or less.7
Food Stamps or SNAP is also a means‐tested program (whereby eligible families and individuals
must satisfy income and asset tests) and benefits are also assigned using maximum benefits and tax
rates on earned income. The similarities with AFDC/TANF end there. First, food stamps is a federal
program with all funding (except for 50 percent of administrative costs) provided by the federal
government. Second, unlike virtually all cash programs in the U.S., food stamp eligibility is not limited to
certain targeted groups such as families with children, aged, and the disabled.8 Third, the benefit
reduction rate is relatively low (30%) and the income eligibility threshold is relatively high (130 percent

7

For more information about reform, including the considerable variation across states in the timing and specifics
of policy changes, see Bitler and Hoynes (2010) and Grogger and Karoly (2005).
8
Post PWRORA, the only general limitation on eligibility is for able bodied adults without dependents, who were
limited in how many months of food stamps they could get in a given time period. These restrictions for some
adults have been lifted in many states during the Great Recession.

7

of the poverty guideline). The lower benefit reduction rate means that the food stamp program serves
not only the nonworking poor (those receiving cash welfare) but also the working poor. Using benefits
dispersed on debit cards (which replaced paper vouchers) recipients are allowed to use their benefits to
buy a wide array of food items (although not prepared foods) yet the behavioral response of food
expenditures to food stamps is similar to the response to cash (Fraker et al., 1992; Ohls et al., 1992;
Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009). Post‐welfare reform, food stamps is the key safety net program in
the U.S., and the only one that is both “universal” (based almost exclusively on economic need) and that
has a fully funded entitlement. Caseloads and benefits adjust automatically with increased eligibility for
the program (recessions) and costs are uncapped.
The EITC is a federal tax credit for low income working families; more than half the states have
supplemental EITC credits. The EITC is primarily available to families with children although there is a
small credit for childless tax filers. The credit is a function of earnings and number of children and, due
to a relative low phase‐out rate of about 20 percent, extends relatively high in the income distribution.
For example, in 2011 the maximum credit is $3,094 ($5,112) and eligibility extends to earnings of
$36,052 ($40,964) for families with one child (two or more children).
The other safety net programs (public housing and vouchers/rent subsidies, free and reduced
price school lunch and breakfast, SSI, Medicaid, WIC and LIHEAP) are income and (in some cases) asset
tested and targeted. For example, SSI is only available to disabled adults and children while school lunch
and breakfasts are available only for school aged children.
C. Immigrants and the Safety Net
Prior to welfare reform, there was a “bright line” that distinguished between legal immigrants
and unauthorized residents in determining eligibility for safety net programs. Legal immigrants (lawful
permanent residents or LPRs) were eligible for most safety net programs on the same terms as citizens
while unauthorized immigrants were not. Those in the country legally, but temporarily, such as residents

8

on student visas were also generally ineligible for these programs. There were exceptions: unauthorized
immigrants maintained eligibility for free and reduced price School Lunch and Breakfast, WIC,
emergency Medicaid, and state funded emergency programs. In addition, refugees and asylum seekers
also sometimes faced different rules than others. For the tax‐based safety net, EITC recipients are
required to have valid social security numbers; so again LPRs are eligible while unauthorized immigrants
are not.9
The landscape for authorized immigrant eligibility for the safety net changed dramatically with
passage of PRWORA and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA). New
bright lines separated eligibility for LPRs versus naturalized citizens and for LPRs in the country prior to
PRWORA (known as pre‐enactment immigrants) versus those entering the country after PRWORA (post‐
enactment immigrants). Further, these new rules affected not only eligibility for TANF (the main subject
of the PRWORA legislation) but also eligibility for SSI, food stamps, Medicaid, and when it was
introduced in 1997, the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP).
The PRWORA and IIRIRA policy changes are summarized in Table 2. For each of the main safety
net programs, we document eligibility for pre‐ and post‐enactment immigrants, and within those groups
for “qualified” immigrants (consisting of LPRs, refugees, asylum seekers, and certain battered spouses
and children) and for “exempted” immigrants among the qualified that faced (in some cases) more
lenient eligibility requirements (refugee and asylum seekers, those with 40 quarters of work in the U.S.,
and military). Not included in the table are “unqualified” immigrants (all other immigrants including
unauthorized immigrants and those with permission to remain in the United States but without legal
permanent resident status) who before and after welfare reform are ineligible for the programs in Table
2.

9

Unauthorized immigrants can file and pay taxes using an individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). They
are not, however, eligible to receive the EITC.

9

As noted above, prior to welfare reform citizens and LPRs were treated identically in terms of
eligibility for these safety net programs; thus in the first column of Table 2 all groups are identified as
eligible. Following welfare reform, as shown in column 2 of Table 2, federal law extended eligibility for
TANF and Medicaid to pre‐enactment immigrants while post‐enactment immigrants were barred from
receiving benefits in those programs until they had been in the U.S. five years.10 The eligibility changes
were even more severe for food stamps and SSI—for those programs qualified non‐exempt pre‐ and
post‐enactment immigrants (LPRs) were barred from receiving benefits until they had accumulated 10
years of work history.11
Eligibility was unchanged for school lunch and breakfast, where access is dictated by court
decision for school based programs (Wasem 2010) and the EITC. Notably, U.S. born children of
immigrants, who constitute the great majority of children in immigrant‐headed families, are citizens and
remain eligible for all programs.
In addition to these new rules, PRWORA essentially devolved responsibilities governing
immigrants’ rights for public benefits to the states. As a result, states gained the authority to deny
benefits to qualified immigrants. This is indicated in the table by noting that the “state option to bar” is
permissible. States also gained the authority to grant eligibility to immigrants who were made ineligible
by the federal welfare reform law. Interestingly, PRWORA and IIRIRA seemed to have set in motion a
movement whereby states are increasingly involved in immigration policies, a realm historically
governed by federal policies. As of 2011, states are not only passing laws concerning immigrant access
to public benefits, but also passing laws regarding hiring and access to employment, driver’s licenses,
higher education, and so on.

10

As documented in the table, refugees and asylum seekers and those in the military face different rules. Given
they are a relatively small share of total qualified immigrants, we do not discuss these rules in the text.
11
The 1996 IIRIRA also changed rules for those who sponsor legal immigrants arriving or becoming LPRs, requiring
that sponsors’ income be treated as available to the immigrants when assessing eligibility for needs‐based
assistance costs.

10

In the decade following welfare reform, subsequent law reinstated eligibility for some groups
and some programs. These law changes are also documented in Table 2. For example, the 1997
Balanced Budget Act reinstated benefits for pre‐enactment immigrants for SSI. A 1998 agriculture bill
restored food stamp eligibility to pre‐enactment LPR children, disabled persons, the blind, and the
elderly. Later, the 2002 Farm Bill restored food stamp eligibility to all LPR children and disabled persons,
regardless of their time resident in U.S. It also restored food stamp eligibility to LPR adults in the country
for five or more years. In 2009, the SCHIP reauthorization bill lifted the 5‐year bar on participation for
post‐enactment immigrants for Medicaid and SCHIP for children and pregnant women.
The PRWORA legislation only affects federal funding for safety net programs. Consequently, in
the face of the withdrawal of federal support for some LPRs, many states chose to maintain coverage for
legal immigrants with state‐funded replacement coverage (known as “fill in” programs). Additionally,
with the new authority given to them by PRWORA, some states further reduced eligibility for pre‐
enactment immigrants (who were still eligible under the federal law). We document these state policies
for TANF, Medicaid, SCHIP, SSI and Food Stamps in Appendix Tables 1‐5. In those tables, an “X” indicates
that a state, in a given year, provides benefits for the specified immigrant group (e.g., pre‐enactment,
post‐enactment). Here we simply document these program changes and conduct a descriptive
assessment of immigrants pre‐ and post‐ welfare reform. We leave to future work the analysis of the
role played by the policies enacted by the states.12
With all these changes, affecting various groups and programs differently, it would not be
surprising if there was (and is) considerable confusion about immigrant eligibility for safety net
programs. Many studies have documented so‐called “chilling effects”—that is, a reduction in utilization
for programs in the absence of a change in eligibility (see Fix, Capps and Kaushal 2009 for a review).

12

A growing literature uses this state‐year policy variation in access to the safety net to estimate the impact of
reforms on safety net participation (Borjas 2003, Kaushal and Kaestner 2005, Royer 2005, Watson 2010, Borjas
2011), food insecurity (Borjas 2004, Ratcliffe et al. 2011), and location choice (Kaushal 2005).

11

III. Data, Sample, and Definitions
Our analysis uses data from the 1995 to 2010 Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the
Current Population Survey (CPS), administered to most households in March. The ASEC is an annual
survey that collects labor market, income, and program participation information for the previous
calendar year, as well as demographic information from the time of the survey. The sample size is
approximately 150,000 persons or 57,000 households per year. Our sample uses the 1995 through 2010
CPS surveys, corresponding to 1994‐2009 calendar year outcomes. We are unable to utilize a longer
pre‐ welfare period because the CPS begins reporting information on immigrant status only in the 1994
survey year. However, because of problems with the weights for immigrants and data on country of
origin in the 1994 survey year, we begin our analysis with the 1995 CPS survey year.13 For all analyses in
the paper, we limit the sample to include only those households with children under age 18.
We use the CPS to construct two groups: natives (which we define as those born in the U.S.,
Puerto Rico or outlying areas, or born outside the U.S. but with at least one parent being an American
citizen) and immigrants (which we define as any foreign‐born individual). Our immigrant group
therefore consists of naturalized citizens, LPRs, refugees, temporary legal or illegal foreign‐born
residents, and unauthorized immigrants. We choose to pool these groups because of changes in
naturalization (Van Hook 2003) and the inflow of unauthorized immigrants during this period. We also

13

Our decision to exclude 1994 survey year CPS data comes from communication with various immigration
scholars. Schmidley and Robinson (1998) discuss some of these issues, noting that there are potential issues with
comparability for 1994 and 1995. Various papers include the 1995 data (e.g., Borjas 2004) although sometimes
with special adjusted weights created by Jeffrey Passel. In general, it is desirable to include 1995 data as it
increases our pre‐PRWORA sample (income is measured for the 1994 year). Findings are generally robust to
omitting the 1995 survey year (1994 calendar year) measures.

12

use information on “When did you come to the U.S. to stay” to assign individuals to pre‐ and post‐
enactment groups and whether they are subject to the five‐year bar.14
We assign all outcomes including safety net program participation and poverty at the household
level. Household characteristics, including household immigration status, are assigned using the values
of the head of household. We also provide analyses of children using their own immigrant status along
with the immigrant status of the head of household. That allows us to distinguish between citizen
children of an immigrant head and noncitizen children of an immigrant head.15
The safety net programs we measure in the CPS include ADFC/TANF, food stamps, Medicaid,
SCHIP (after it became law), SSI, school lunch, LIHEAP, and housing benefits (public housing and section
8 rental subsidies). SCHIP allowed states to offer Medicaid coverage to a higher income group of
children or provide a separate program for these children. In our analysis, we pool Medicaid with SCHIP
when they are asked about separately. In addition, the CPS provides imputed data for the cash value of
some programs (public housing, Medicaid and Medicare) and for taxes owed and tax credits (e.g., the
EITC or child tax credits) that households could obtain, based on their family structure. Official poverty
status in the U.S. is determined by comparing total pre‐tax family cash income to poverty thresholds,
which vary by family size, number of children, and presence of elderly persons. In 2009, the poverty
threshold for a family of four (two adults, two children) was roughly $22,000. We use household income
to assign poverty status, comparing income to the appropriate household poverty threshold. To address

14

Those born outside the US are asked when they came to the U.S. to stay. Responses pool the most recent year
with the most recent 2‐3 years (and the first three months of the current year). Before this, 2 year periods of
arrival are pooled. Consequently, we can consistently defined a variable that is 1 if the immigrant arrived at least 4
years and 4 months ago and at most 6 years and 3 months ago for even years, and at least 5 years and 4 months
and at most 7 years and 3 months for odd years. Because this question asks when you came to the US to stay,
research suggests this may not correspond to either the first or last U.S. trip (Redstone and Massey 2004). For
individuals born in Puerto Rico or other territories or born abroad of U.S. parents, we set this variable to be 0. We
can identify for most years whether individuals came to the U.S. before August 1996 or after. We cannot do so
consistently for 1997, and therefore do not define it for survey year 1997.
15
We choose to analyze households because use of some of the safety net programs (food stamps, school lunch,
LIHEAP, public housing, and section 8 rental subsidies) are reported only at the household level. This approach also
takes into account income or resource sharing that may occur in households containing multiple families.

13

some of the many criticisms of the official poverty measure (for example, Citro and Michael, 1995), we
also use an alternative poverty measure where income is measured post‐tax and post‐transfer, using the
imputed values for taxes and transfers described above.16
In our results, below, we compare outcomes for households headed by natives and immigrants
pre‐ and post‐welfare reform. We do not make any claim that this identifies the causal impact of welfare
reform and instead provides important descriptive evidence on immigrant well‐being compared to
natives. To illustrate the challenge to causal identification, Table 3 provides means for demographics,
employment, and income for households with children headed by natives (column 1) and immigrants
(column 2) from the ASEC for calendar year 2009. The table shows that immigrants are significantly
more disadvantaged than are natives, with lower education levels, lower earnings, less health insurance
coverage, and lower income as well as larger household sizes. At the same time, immigrant household
heads are more likely to be married. To try to avoid having our comparisons confuse these differences
with policy effects, whenever possible we limit our sample to households with income below 200
percent of poverty.17 The characteristics for immigrant and native headed households in this lower
income sample are provided in columns 3 and 4, showing somewhat more similarity between the groups
in many characteristics. Even in the lower income sample, immigrants are less educated and have larger
households than natives, but they have higher earnings and household income and are more likely to be
married and have more male household members than native households under 200% of poverty. The
16

In November 2011, Census released a report introducing the new Supplemental Poverty Measure (Short 2011).
The plan is to maintain the official poverty measure but to also release estimates of the SPM each year. Our
“alternative income measure” comes from working definitions adopted by Census in 1999. It is quite similar to the
income concept used in the SPM in that it is net of federal taxes and adds valuation for many in‐kind benefits. In
particular, we define alternative income by adding to money income the cash value of food stamps, school lunch,
and housing subsidies and then subtract payroll taxes, and net federal and state taxes (including the EITC). Our
approach is similar to some of the experimental poverty measures tabulated annually at the US Census Bureau as
in Dalaker (2005). In addition, however, the SPM alters the thresholds used to define poverty by incorporating
various expenses and allowing for geographic differences. The overall impact is to increase poverty slightly, from
15.3 to 16.0 among all persons in 2010. Unfortunately, at this time it is not possible to create a consistent series for
the SPM over our period of interest.
17
Here we use official poverty because alternative poverty includes many programs for which immigrants are not
eligible in some or all years.

14

shares of immigrants and natives below poverty show that the incomes of immigrants and natives are
quite similar once we condition on being in this lower income sample. Interestingly, the means at the
bottom of the table show that almost 90 percent of immigrant headed households contain a native born
child. In contrast, few native headed households contain foreign born persons.

IV. Results: The Safety Net
We begin with our sample of all children using the 1995‐2010 CPS. Program participation is
measured at the household level and refers to the prior calendar year, thus the data cover calendar
years 1994‐2009. We begin by stratifying children using the immigration status of the head of
household, splitting the sample into households headed by natives (born a citizen) and immigrants
(foreign born). Figure 1a presents the fraction of children with any household safety net participation
(this measure includes cash welfare [AFDC/TANF, general assistance], food stamps, Medicaid or SCHIP,
SSI, public housing, subsidized housing, school lunch, or energy assistance). Shaded regions on the graph
are periods of labor market contractions18 and we mark federal welfare reform in 1996 using a vertical
line. The figure shows higher use of the safety net overall for immigrants compared to natives. Both
groups show a reduction in safety net use post welfare reform and are trending similarly. Figure 1b
presents two key elements of the cash or near cash safety net, cash welfare (in blue) and food stamp
benefits (in red). Prior to welfare reform, immigrants (dashed line) participated at higher levels
compared to natives (solid line) but the gap narrows such that by the end of the 1990s immigrants and
natives have quite similar participation rates.
As a descriptive summary measure of the impact of welfare reform on Figures 1a and 1b, we
provide the mean difference‐in‐difference estimate of program participation for immigrants versus

18

We use the approach in Bitler and Hoynes (2010) to construct annual periods of contraction using the official
monthly NBER recession dating combined with examination of the national peaks and troughs in the
unemployment rate. See data appendix for details.

15

natives, using 1994‐1995 as the pre‐welfare reform period and 2008‐2009 as the post‐welfare reform
period. These calculations show that food stamp participation declined by 3.9 percentage points for
immigrants relative to natives (p‐value 0.01) and public assistance participation declined by a
(statistically insignificant) 2.4 percentage points relative to natives. The broader measure of “any safety
net participation” did not change for immigrants relative to natives post‐reform.
As shown in Table 3, immigrants have on average lower incomes than natives. Thus the
differences across groups in Figure 1 may reflect in part different levels of disadvantage. Figure 2
presents program participation for children living in households under 200 percent of poverty. There are
six panels in Figure 2, one for any safety net participation and the remainder for individual program
participation in the following programs: cash welfare, food stamps, Medicaid/SCHIP19, school lunch, and
SSI. The graphs are similar to Figure 1 except now we split the child sample into three groups: child
living with a native household head,20 native child living with an immigrant head, and immigrant child
living with an immigrant head. This allows us to explore outcomes for native children in mixed‐status
households whose eligibility for these programs did not change over this period.
Several findings are apparent from these graphs. First, immigrants generally participate in the
safety net at lower rates than do natives. This is true for the entire time period for cash welfare (panel
b), food stamps (panel c) and SSI (panel f), and is true both before and after welfare reform. Children
who are themselves immigrants are less likely to participate in Medicaid/SCHIP across the entire time
period as well, and native children of immigrant parents about as likely as children of native parents to
participate. The main exception is the school lunch program (panel e) where immigrants have
consistently participated at higher rates than natives. Overall, our measure of “any safety net
participation” (panel a) is higher for immigrants compared to natives, driven primarily by this higher

19

SCHIP legislation is passed in 1997 and the CPS begins measuring participation in 2000. For all years, we combine
Medicaid and SCHIP.
20
Almost all children living with native household heads are themselves natives.

16

participation in the school lunch program. Immigrant children in immigrant head households
consistently participate in each of the individual programs or in the “any safety net” measure at the
lowest levels among the three groups.
Second, these national trends in safety net participation are broadly consistent with the finding
of reduced immigrant access to the safety net post welfare reform. To explore this more concretely, we
present the difference‐in‐difference estimates of the change in safety net participation for immigrants
versus natives in 2008‐2009 compared to 1994‐1995. These simply take the change in participation for
immigrants and subtract the change in participation for natives; and we show this estimate for each
panel. The results show that post‐reform immigrant food stamp participation has declined by 5.7
percentage points relative to natives (p‐value 0.002) and immigrant SSI participation has declined by 1.6
percentage points relative to natives (p‐value 0.01). School lunch participation also declined by 1.2
percentage points for immigrants relative to natives, but the differences are not statistically significant.
Medicaid/SCHIP provides the main exception to this pattern, with an increase of 4.2 percentage points
for immigrants relative to natives (p‐value 0.05). Interestingly, for participation in Medicaid/SCHIP,
children in native‐headed households and native children in mixed‐status households have almost
identical levels and trends in participation, which may reflect SCHIP’s outreach efforts aimed at
immigrant families (Aizer 2003, 2007).
Overall, given the greater severity of the restrictions on access to food stamps and SSI
(compared to TANF and Medicaid/SCHIP), we would expect to see larger (relative) declines for
immigrants post‐welfare for use of those programs. Similarly, we would expect the smallest changes in
participation for school lunch, given that welfare reform did not affect eligibility for this program. The
results, described above, are broadly consistent these predictions.
Of course, it is possible that other factors that may be changing over this period that may impact
the native versus immigrant comparisons. Thus, we are cautious about drawing strong conclusions from

17

this analysis of the results in Figures 1 and 2. As an illustration of the general issues at play here, Figure 3
presents the trends in the percent distribution of children in households with income less than 200% of
official poverty for our three immigration‐status groups. Overtime, native children in immigrant‐headed
households are a growing share of the sample (share increasing from 13.9 percent in 1995 to 23.5
percent in 2010) and children in native‐headed households are declining (share is 80.5 percent in 1995
compared to 71.5 percent in 2010). The share of children under 200% of poverty who are immigrant
children in immigrant‐headed households also declined from 5.6 percent to 5.0 percent.
Recall that the post‐welfare reform immigrant eligibility rules differentiate between pre‐ and
post‐enactment immigrants and between those who have been in the U.S. for at least 5 years and those
in the U.S. less than 5 years.21 Recent immigrants are least likely to be eligible post‐reform, while longer
term residents are more likely to be eligible, but still not necessarily at the levels they were pre‐PWORA.
Given this, in Table 4 we explore further the impact of the policy changes by examining safety net
participation separately for immigrants arriving within the past 5 years to immigrants arriving more than
5 years ago. In particular, we identify participation for five groups. In our pre‐reform years (1994 and
1995), we calculate safety net participation for recent immigrants (head arrived 5 or fewer years ago)
and other immigrants (head arrived six or more years ago). In our post reform years (2008‐2009), we
break down the 6 or more year group into those with heads that arrived pre‐enactment and those that
arrived post‐enactment.22 At the bottom of the table we present two pre‐ versus post‐reform
differences, in each case comparing individuals in different years‐in‐U.S. group (five or fewer years, six

21

We focus here more on entry within the last 5 years or further back because we have so few pre‐PRWORA
observations due to the limited years that the CPS includes immigrant status.
22
Unfortunately, given the data restrictions discussed above in footnote 14, we cannot do this comparison across
our time period systematically. First, for some key post‐reform years, it is impossible to uniquely classify individuals
as pre‐ and post‐enactment (e.g., 1997 observations cannot cleanly be assigned as pre‐ or post‐1996 arrival).
Second, the policies are changing frequently across states and over time in a way that complicates a simple
differences‐in‐differences analysis. Since policies at the state and federal level change considerably in the period
post‐PWRORA but before 2002, it is hard to assign these observations to a consistent treatment or control group.
By 2008‐2009, however, policies have settled out for the federal government and across states, and it is clear what
policies apply across immigrant statuses.

18

or more) that arrived pre‐enactment to a group arriving post‐enactment. The data are largely consistent
with these expectations: Recently arrived immigrants have larger reductions in use of public assistance
and food stamps and substantially smaller increases in use of Medicaid/SCHIP than do less‐recently
arrived immigrants. For example, receipt of public assistance (receipt of food stamps) declined by 21.4
(6.4) percentage points for children in households headed by immigrants who arrived 5 or fewer years
ago compared to 14.9 (3.7) percentage points for children in households headed by immigrants that
arrived 6 or more years ago. School lunch and SSI show the opposite pattern in relative changes in use,
with larger decreases for those arriving longer ago. Again, Medicaid looks quite different.
In addition to tabulating the CPS data, we use the available administrative data to further
explore trends in program participation. In Figure 4, we present the percent of SSI participants that are
noncitizens for 1980 through 2009. We plot this separately for all recipients, aged recipients, and
disabled/blind recipients. We are focused on households with children. That said, SSI is not a very
heavily used safety net program in our population of interest. This is clear in Figure 3(f) which shows SSI
participation rates never rise above 10 percent and are mostly below 5 percent of children in immigrant
households. Given the small share of elderly persons in our sample of households with children (Table
3), the SSI disabled caseload is the most relevant for our purposes. Having said this, Figure 4 shows a
dramatic decline in noncitizen SSI participation following federal welfare reform, with little recovery
through 2009. Potentially more relevant is the AFDC/TANF “child‐ only” caseload. The child‐only
caseload consists of administrative cases without an adult participant; the largest group of which being
cases where the child is a citizen but the parent is not a citizen (Blank 2001, U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services 2008). As such, child‐only caseloads may be a useful proxy for program
participation among native children in mixed‐status households. Figure 5 presents the administrative
data on the child‐only caseload per 1,000 persons for fiscal years 1995 through 2008. There is a sharp
and dramatic decline in the child‐only caseload following welfare reform. This steadily and slowly

19

increases, but never returns to its pre‐reform level. Wasem (2010) reports trends in the noncitizen
fraction of food stamp participation based on Food Stamp Quality Control data. That data show a similar
pattern, a sharp decline in the noncitizen share in 1997 with little recovery since then. Overall 7.1
percent of the food stamp caseload consisted of noncitizens in 1989; this fell to 3.8 percent in 2009.

V. Results: Income and Poverty
Having established the basic facts on program participation, we move on to analyze immigrant
well‐being pre‐ and post‐ welfare reform. In particular, we quantify the importance of safety net
programs by exploring the sources of household income and how they have changed over time. We also
examine child poverty and extreme poverty for immigrants and natives pre‐ and post‐ welfare reform.
We begin in Figure 6, by presenting the share of the quantity household cash income plus food
stamps contributed by each source for households with children in extreme poverty (below 50 percent
of official poverty). We compare these sources of income for a year pre‐reform (1994) and post‐reform
(2009). Ideally, we would have compared data for two similar points in the business cycle, but data
limitations prohibit this. In 2009, the U.S. unemployment was 9.3 percent, which is the peak in the
annual rate for the Great Recession. The early 1990s recession level of unemployment peaked in 1992 at
7.5 percent and by 1994 was down to 6.1 percent. We present a graph for households headed by
natives (panel a) and households headed by immigrants (panel b). We show shares for some important
income sources for lower income households: Earnings, cash welfare, food stamps, SSI, unemployment
compensation (pooled with workers compensation and veterans payments), and child support
combined with alimony.
The most striking feature of Figure 6 is that households headed by low‐income immigrants rely
much more heavily on earnings compared to native‐headed households. In 2009, among households
with children in extreme poverty, almost 50 percent of income comes from earnings for immigrant‐

20

headed households compared to less than 30 percent for native‐headed ones. This difference was also
present pre‐welfare reform but the gap has grown post‐reform. Second, the graph clearly shows the
declining role of cash welfare as a countercyclical income source for the poor and the increasing role
played by food stamps and earnings for both immigrants and natives. The other categories of income
presented are less important sources for this very low income group. Having said that, the share of
income from SSI is increasing over this period for natives and decreasing for immigrants (the opposite
pattern holds for child support and alimony).
Figures 7 and 8 present the same information for samples of households with children below
100 percent of poverty (Figure 7) and below 200 percent poverty (Figure 8). While the magnitudes
change, the basic findings are similar: immigrants tend to rely more on earnings and that has increased
over time; cash welfare is now much less important than it was; and food stamps is much more
important. Notably, in 2009, earnings represent 70 percent (80 percent) of total income (cash income
plus food stamps) for immigrant households below poverty (below 200 percent poverty). For natives,
earnings are 45 percent for those below poverty and just over 60 percent for those below 200 percent
of poverty.23
One reason why the results may differ for immigrants compared to natives may be the
immigrants more disadvantaged status even within a given poverty sample. To address this, we
examined similar graphs where we reweighted the native group to match the income distribution of
immigrants (based on 25 percent bins of the income to poverty distribution).24 This made little
difference in the results, which perhaps is not surprising given the similarity in the income distribution in
the two groups once we condition on being below 200 percent of poverty (Table 3). In addition, it is
23

On average, for households under 200% of poverty, the components we show make up 81% of total household
income (including food stamps). The three largest remaining categories (pooling 2009 and 1994) are Social Security
payments (pools OASI and DI): 5.1%, asset income (includes rents, dividends, and interest income): 3.5%, and
retirement income: 2.8%.
24
To do this, we summarized the shares within each bins, and then allocated the native shares according to the
relative shares of immigrants in each bin.

21

well known that beginning in the 1990s immigrant populations grew significantly beyond the traditional
immigrant destination states (e.g., Massey 2008). Much of the growth has been in areas, such as the
Southeast, where the safety net is less generous. To address this, we reweighted the immigrant groups
in 1994 and 2009 to represent their state population shares in 1990.25 This too made little difference to
the results, which may reflect the fact that while the growth rate increased in new destination areas, the
overall population of immigrants is still dominated by their shares in traditional destination states.26
What is the end result of all these changes to the safety net? One important summary measure
is the incidence of poverty, and how it compares between immigrants and natives. In the remainder of
our analysis, we present new evidence on trends in child poverty for immigrants versus natives. We
return to our three groups of children analyzed above: Children living in households headed by natives,
immigrant children living with immigrant heads, and native children living with immigrant heads. The
top two panels of Figure 9 present the percent of children living in extreme poverty (panel a) and in
poverty (panel b) for 1994‐2009 using the official poverty measure. Overall, poverty rates for children in
immigrant households exceed those of children living in native households, and this is true both before
and after welfare reform. Interestingly, during the 1990s, the gap between extreme poverty rates for
native children living in mixed‐status households and children in native households narrowed
substantially. All of these series illustrate the countercyclical nature of poverty, and improvements
during this period were especially apparent in the long economic expansion of the 1990s. However, it is
striking that child poverty among immigrant headed households has increased more in the current
recession compared to natives. We return to this below.
Many concerns have been raised about the ability of the official poverty measure to capture
resources households have. In particular, the official poverty measure uses pre‐tax income (missing the
25

We did this by using the IPUMS 1990 census (Ruggles et al. 2008) 1% micro data and calculating the share of
households with children within each state that were immigrant or native headed. We used these weights to
summarize the state‐by‐year‐by native/non‐native head weighted percentages for each group.
26
Results for the two reweighting procedures are available on request.

22

EITC, child tax credits, and the effects of the tax system) and does not count in‐kind transfers such as
food stamps in the measure of household income.27 To address this concern, and to explore more the
role of the safety net post‐welfare reform, the final panel of Figure 9 presents the percent of children
living below poverty using our alternative income measure. As defined above, we construct alternative
income by adding to money income the cash value of food stamps, school lunch, energy assistance and
housing subsidies and then subtracting payroll taxes, and net federal and state taxes (including the EITC
and child tax credits). Poverty rates are lower using alternative income, and appear to be slightly less
countercyclical (as we would expect if the safety net is insuring families against short‐term income
losses). Interestingly, alternative poverty actually declines for children in immigrant headed households
in 2009 which is surprising given that the unemployment rate rose between 2008 and 2009. It appears
that the large increase in food stamp participation in these households at the end of the period (Figure
3c) may explain part of this difference.
The difference‐in‐difference estimates show that poverty rates declined for children in
immigrant‐headed households compared to natives post‐welfare reform (2008‐2009) relative to pre‐
reform (1994‐1995). This result is unexpected but may be explained by a change in the composition of
immigrant children (see Figure 3). That is, while the time series plot in Figure 9 shows that a rise in
poverty for immigrant children beginning in 2007, the difference‐in‐difference reflects the decrease in
immigrant poverty in the 1994‐1999 period.
To further explore the role of welfare reform, we present mean poverty rates for immigrant
groups in Table 5 adopting the same groups that we presented in Table 4 (pre‐ and post‐welfare reform,
5 or less and 6 or more years since arrival, and pre‐and post‐enactment arrival). Again, at the bottom of
the table we present the two pre‐ versus post‐reform comparisons. We find increases or no change in
most poverty measures for immigrants who came at least 6 years ago, but surprisingly, we find

27

Other differences between our measure and the new supplemental measure are discussed above in footnote 16.

23

decreases in poverty for those who arrived 5 or fewer years ago. This is puzzling, given the expectation
that these recent immigrants are the least likely in the post‐reform period to have access to the safety
net. There are several possible explanations. First, it is possible that the recession has led to reduced
return migration (say from Mexico) or increased outflows, and that those who leave or don’t return are
negatively selected. Rendall et al. (2011) suggest that there has actually been a decline in return
migration from the United States to Mexico in the Great Recession and Van Hook and Zhang (2011)
show that having children is negatively correlated with emigration. A second explanation is that
immigrant households are doubling up in response to the Great Recession, and that this is most
common for those with the least amount of access to the safety net, those who came within the last 5
years. Kochhar and D’Vera Cohn (2011) use the American Community Survey data, finding that living in
multigenerational households is more common in 2009 than 2007 as a share of households, and that
some part of this might reflect doubling up in response to the Great Recession. Lastly, a third possibility
is that the CPS is simply missing more unauthorized immigrants who are reluctant to participate given
recent legislation that is restrictive towards the unauthorized, although this seems unlikely to drive our
findings for citizen children of immigrants.
Given the severity of the Great Recession, during which the unemployment rate has risen from
4.6 in 2007 to 9.3 in 2009, it is of interest to explore more fully the well‐being of immigrants and natives
in the current period. In particular, we take advantage of the substantial geographic variation in the
severity of the recession and plot the change in state unemployment rates against the change in the
state child poverty rate between 2007 and 2009. We present the results in a series of scatter plots in
Figure 10. There are six panels in the figure: the top two show extreme child poverty, the middle two
show official child poverty, and the bottom two show child alternative poverty. Native headed
households are on the left and immigrant headed households are on the right. In each graph, the x‐axis
is the change in unemployment rates by state between 2007 and 2009. On the y‐axis is the change in

24

state child poverty rates over the same period. The size of each state‐group’s population is represented
by the size of the circle representing the data point. These figures show that there is considerable
variation in the magnitude of the Great Recession across states: between 2007 and 2009, state changes
in the unemployment rate ranged from about 1.2 percentage points in North Dakota to 7.9 percentage
points in Nevada. We leverage this state variation to explore how the Great recession affects child
poverty in immigrant versus native families.
There are several findings apparent from these figures. First, the scatterplots reveal an upward
sloping tendency, showing the strong positive correlation between the severity of the recession and the
increase in official child poverty. Second, the poverty rate changes are everywhere higher for children in
immigrant‐headed households compared to natives, implying that this recession led to larger increases
in poverty for that group (note the immigrant and native groups have different y‐axis scales). Third, the
scatterplots have steeper slopes for children in immigrant‐headed households suggesting that a given
increase in unemployment leads to larger increases in poverty for immigrants compared to natives.
To explore this more fully, Table 6 presents estimates of the correlation between changes in
state unemployment rates and child poverty (e.g., the implied best‐fit slope of the data in the
scatterplots). Specifically, we regress the change in state poverty rates on the change in state
unemployment rates and a constant. The regression is weighted using the population in each state‐
group cell. An advantage of this approach, compared to the time series approach above, is that it allows
for a common time trend that may confound the simple time series. The first panel of the table presents
the estimates for the data in Figure 10—children in immigrant and native headed households. The first
number, for example, shows that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a
0.82 percentage point increase in the official poverty rate for children in native‐headed households
compared to a 0.92 percentage point increase for immigrants. We present similar figures for alternative
poverty and extreme poverty. While few of the coefficients are statistically significant, the results from

25

this first panel shows that immigrant child poverty rates increase more with unemployment than native
children; that is the estimates in the second row are everywhere higher than the estimates in the first
row. Second, the safety net provides less protection for immigrant children relative to natives—a one
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate increases alternative poverty by 0.59 for natives
(down from 0.82 for official poverty) while immigrant poverty increases by 1.5 percentage points (up
from 0.92 for official poverty). This is consistent with lower safety net participation for immigrants post
reform.28
We explore this further by presenting similar estimates for non‐native children with Mexican
heads versus non‐Mexican non‐native heads (panel 2), naturalized heads versus non‐citizen heads
(panel 3), and non‐citizen Hispanic heads versus non‐citizen non‐Hispanic heads (panel 4). In each
panel, the second row represents the group (e.g., Mexican, non‐citizen, Hispanic non‐citizen) more likely
to be impacted by the changes in eligibility due to welfare reform. The results are striking, while not
always very precisely estimated. In each panel, the more impacted group shows a much larger increase
in child poverty and much less protection from the safety net compared to the less impacted group. For
example, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.89 percentage point
increase in official poverty for children in households headed by Mexican born heads compared to a
0.34 percentage point increase for children in households headed by other foreign born heads. Using
alternative poverty the gap grows to 2.69 for Mexican born heads and 0.17 for other foreign born heads.
It is also notable that in each panel, the more‐impacted groups increase in alternative poverty with the
increase in the unemployment rate is statistically significant and that all four measures are significant for
non‐citizen heads.

28

Note that these results lead to different conclusions about the relative well‐being of immigrants post reform
compared to the trends in poverty in Figure 9—the time series trends show gains in poverty for immigrants versus
natives post–welfare reform. Using state variation in the cycle, with the ability to control for secular time trends,
leads us to the opposite conclusion.

26

VI. Conclusions
The 1996 federal welfare reform legislation has ushered in a new era for the safety net in the
U.S. As is well known, welfare reform replaced AFDC with TANF, introducing lifetime limits on
participation and stringent work requirements. Some 15 years later, welfare caseloads have decreased
dramatically, and TANF provides minimal counter‐cyclical aid. But, less known is the fact that not only
did PRWORA “change welfare as we know it” but it also changed immigration policy as we know it.
PRWORA severely curtailed access to TANF, as well as other key safety net programs such as food
stamps and SSI access, for legal immigrants who previously had been treated identically to natives.
Notably, the policy essentially devolved immigration policy to states, who are now engaged in many
aspects of immigration policy around hiring and employment, driver’s licenses, and others that had
previously been in the federal realm.
In this paper, we comprehensively examine program participation and poverty for immigrants
versus natives in the post‐welfare reform era. We update the existing literature by focusing on children,
updating the analysis through 2009, and paying particular attention to the well‐being of children using
official and alternative poverty measures.
We find that participation in the safety net declined for immigrants compared to natives, and
the declines were largest for food stamps and SSI (the programs with the most severe restrictions for
immigrants). Medicaid/SCHIP participation actually increased for immigrants compared to natives
which may reflect important outreach efforts of those programs to minority groups. We find that among
low income households with children, immigrant households rely more heavily on earnings and less on
the safety net, and these differences with native‐headed households have grown post‐welfare reform.
Using variation across states in the magnitude of the Great Recession, our results show that labor
market contractions have led to larger increases in poverty rates for children in immigrant headed
households compared to native‐headed households. Our results also show that the safety net acts to

27

dampen the effects of the economic downturn on child poverty for native‐headed households but offers
measurably less protection for children in immigrant‐headed households.

28

References
Aizer, Anna. 2003. “Low Take‐Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and for Whom?” American
Economic Review 93(2): 238‐41.
Aizer, Anna. 2007. “Public Health Insurance, Program Take‐up and Child Health.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 89(3): 400‐415.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes. 2010. “The State of the Safety Net in the Post‐Welfare Reform Era.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 71‐127.
Borjas, George. 1995. “Immigration and Welfare, 1970–1990.” Research in Labor Economics 14:251–280.
Borjas, George. 1999. “Immigration and Welfare Magnets.” Journal of Labor Economics 17(4):
607‐37.
Borjas, George. 2003. “Welfare Reform, Labor Supply and Health Insurance in the Immigrant
Population.” Journal of Health Economics 22(6): 933–58.
Borjas, George. 2004. “Food Insecurity and Public Assistance.” Journal of Public Economics 88(7–8):
1421–443.
Borjas, George. 2011. “Poverty and Program Participation among Immigrant Children.” The Future of
Children 21(1): 247‐266.
Borjas, George and Lynette Hilton. 1996. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant Participation in
Means‐Tested Entitlement Programs.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics May, 1996: 575‐604.
Blank, Rebecca. 2001. “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” The Journal of Human
Resources, 36(1): 85‐118.
Capps, Randy, Michael E. Fix and Everett Henderson. 2009. “Trends in Immigrants’ Use of Public
Assistance after Welfare Reform,” in Immigrants and Welfare, Michael E. Fix, ed. Russell Sage
Foundation: New York.
Citro, Constance and Robert Michael, eds .1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press.
Dalaker, Joe. 2005. Alternative Poverty Estimates in the United States. Current Population Report P60‐
227, US Census Bureau.
Fix, Michael E., Randy Capps and Neeraj Kaushal. 2009. “Immigrants and Welfare: Overview,” in
Immigrants and Welfare, Michael E. Fix, ed. Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Fix, Michael E., and Jeffrey S. Passel. 1994. Immigration and Immigrants: Setting the Record Straight.
Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Fix, Michael E., and Jeffrey S. Passel. 1999. Trends in Noncitizens’ and Citizens’ Use of Public Benefits
Following Welfare Reform: 1994–1997. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Fraker, Thomas M., Alberto P. Martini, James C. Ohls, Michael Ponza and Elizabeth A. Quinn. 1992. The
Evaluation of the Alabama Food Stamp Cash‐Out Demonstration: Volume 1 Recipient Impacts.
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Fremstad, Shawn and Laure Cox. 2004. “Covering New Americans: A Review of Federal and States
Policies Related to Immigrants' Eligibility and Access to Publicly Funded Health Insurance', Washington,
DC: Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, November

29

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Lynn Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Haider, Steven J., Robert F. Schoeni, Yuhua Bao, and Caroline Danielson .2004. “Immigrants, Welfare
Reform, and the Economy.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23(4): 745–64.
Haskins, Ron. 2009. “Limiting Welfare Benefits for Noncitizens: Emergence of Compromises,” in
Immigrants and Welfare, Michael E. Fix, ed. Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach .2009. “Consumption Reponses to In‐Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 1(4): 109‐139.
Hu, Wei‐Yin. 1998. “Elderly Immigrants on Welfare.” Journal of Human Resources 33(3): 711‐741.
Joyce, Ted, Tamar Bauer, Howard Minkoff, and Robert Kaestner. 2001. “Welfare Reform and the
Perinatal Health and Health Care Use of Latino Women in California, New York City, and Texas.”
American Journal of Public Health 91(11): 1857–864.
Kaestner, Robert, and Neeraj Kaushal. 2005. “Immigrant and Native Responses to Welfare Reform.”
Journal of Population Economics 18(1):69–92.
Kaushal, Neeraj. 2005. “New Immigrants’ Location Choices: Magnets without Welfare.” Journal of Labor
Economics 23(1): 59–80.
Kaushal, Neeraj, and Robert Kaestner. 2005. “Welfare Reform and Health Insurance of Immigrants.”
Health Services Research 40(3):697–722.
Lofstrom, Magnus, and Frank D. Bean. 2002. “Assessing Immigrant Policy Options: Labor Market
Conditions and Post‐Reform Declines in Welfare Receipt among Immigrants.” Demography 39(4): 617–
37.
Massey, Douglas. 2008. New Faces in New Places: The Changing Geography of American Immigration.
Russell Sage Foundation Publications.
Moffitt, Robert. 1983. "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma", American Economic Review 73(5):1023‐
35.
National Conference of State Legislatures. “2011 Immigration‐Related Laws and Resolutions in the
States (January‐June.” http://www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?TabId=23362
National Immigration Law Center. “Guide to Immigrant Eligibility for Federal Benefits”. 4th ed. Los
Angeles, CA: NILC, 2002.
NBER US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions. www.nber.org/cycles/cyclesmain.html accessed
8/14/2010.
Ohls, James C., Thomas M. Fraker, Alberto P. Martini and Michael Ponza. (1992). The Effects of Cash‐Out
on Food Use by Food Stamp Program Participants in San Diego. USDA, Food and Nutrition Service, Office
of Analysis and Evaluation.
Ratcliffe, Caroline, Signe‐Mary Mckernan, and Sisi Zhang 2011. “How Much Does The Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program Reduce Food Insecurity?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics.
March.
Redstone, Ilana and Douglas Massey. 2004. “Coming to Stay: An Analysis of the U.S. Census Question on
Immigrants’ Year of Arrival.” Demography 41(4): 721‐738.

30

Rendall, Michael S.. Peter Brownwell, and Sarah Kups. 2011. “Declining Return Migration from the
United States to Mexico in the late‐2000s Recession: A Research Note.” Demography 48(3): 1049‐1058.
Royer, Heather. 2005. “The Response to a Loss in Medicaid Eligibility: Pregnant Immigrant Mothers in
the Wake of Welfare Reform,” Mimeo.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall,
Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 4.0 [Machine‐
readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Schwartz, Sonya. 2001. “Immigrant Access to Food Stamps: Overcoming Barriers to Participation.”
Journal of Poverty, Law, and Policy September‐October 2001: 260‐275.
Schmidley. A. Dianne and J. Gregory Robinson. 1998. “How Well Does the Current Population Survey
Measure the Foreign Born Population in the United States?” U.S. Bureau of the Census Population
Division Working Paper 22.
Sherman, Arlene (2009). “Safety Net Effective At Fighting Poverty But Has Weakened For The Very
Poorest.” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, 7/6/2009.
Short, Kathleen "The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010." Current Population Reports P60‐
241. U.S. Census Bureau, November 2011.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/povmeas/methodology/supplemental/research/Short_ResearchSPM2010.
pdf
Social Security Administration. 2010. SSI Annual Statistical Report 2009. Released Sept 2010.
Tax Policy Center. 2010. “Tax Facts on Historical EITC”, downloaded from
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=37.
Unemployment Insurance Data Summary, 4th Quarter 2009.
workforecesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/content/data_stats/datasum09/DataSum_2009_4.pdf,
accessed 8/14/2010.
United States Department of Agriculture (various years). “Food Stamp Program State Options Report”.
5th ed. 2005 (Also 6th, 7th, 8th edition).
United States Department of Agriculture. “State‐Funded Food Programs for Legal Immigrants”.
<http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Memo/PRWORA/StatePrograms.htm>
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2008. Temporary Assistance For Needy Families Program
(TANF): Eighth Annual Report To Congress, Administration For Children And Families. Office of Family
Assistance.
U.S. Department of Labor 2010. Unemployment Insurance Chartbook, Section A‐16.
http://www.doleta.gov/unemploy/chartbook.cfm, accessed 9/7/10.
U.S. House of Representatives (1996). Background Material and Data on Programs Within the
Jurisdiction of the House Committee on Ways and Means. Committee on Ways and Means.
Van Hook, Jennifer. 2003. “Welfare Reform Chilling Effects on Noncitizens: Changes in Noncitizen
Recipiency or Shifts in Citizenship Status?” Social Science Quarterly 84(3): 613–31.
Van Hook, Jennifer, Susan K. Brown, and Frank D. Bean. 2006. “For Love or Money? Welfare Reform and
Immigrant Naturalization.” Social Forces 85(4): 643–66.

31

Van Hook, Jennifer and Weiwei Zhang. 2011. “Who Stays? Who Goes? Selective Emigration Among the
Foreign‐Born.” Population Research and Policy Review 30(1): 1—24.
Wasem, Ruth Ellen. 2010. “Noncitizen Eligibility for Federal Public Assistance: Policy Overview and
Trends.” Congressional Research Service RL33809.
Watson, Tara. 2010. “Inside The Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling Effects In Medicaid
Participation.” NBER Working paper 16278.
Zavodny, Madeline. 1999. “Determinants of Recent Immigrants’ Locational Choices.” International
Migration Review 33(4): 1014–30.
Zimmerman, Wendy and Tumlin, Karen. 1999. Pathchwork Policies: State Assistance for Immigrants
under Welfare Reform. Occasional Paper No. 24. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
Zimmerman, Wendy, Karen C. Tumlin, and Jason Ost (1999). “State Snapshots of Public Benefits for
Immigrants: A Supplemental Report to Patchwork Policies.” Occasional Paper #24 Supplemental Report.
Washington DC: Urban Institute.

32

Appendix: Data and Sources
Contractions/Expansions: We identified annual periods of contractions as the range of years from lowest
to highest annual unemployment and the expansions as the range of years from highest to lowest
annual unemployment rates that are near the beginning and end points of the various NBER recessions.
The contraction periods are 2000‐2003 (NBER recession: 3/2001‐11/2001), and 2007‐2009 (NBER
recession 12/2007‐6/2009). The expansion periods are 1992‐2000, and 2003‐2007. The end period of
2009 for the most recent contraction may end up not being the peak annual unemployment period, but
is the last year for which the bulk of our data are available.
AFDC/TANF administrative data on caseloads and expenditures: TANF caseloads are from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data‐reports/index.htm. TANF expenditures are from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/index.html. TANF total expenditures includes all
expenditures (maintenance of effort from the state and federal sources, including separate state
programs, combined federal and state expenditures on assistance, non‐assistance, and both together,
"Table F ‐ Combined Spending of Federal and State Funs Expended in FY XXXX"). Federal stimulus ARRA
is included in the 2009 data. The average monthly TANF benefit is the average family benefit for 2006,
inflated to be in 2009 real $ from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data‐
reports/annualreport8/TANF_8th_Report_111908.pdf , DHHS (2009). All AFDC and TANF data are for
the Fiscal Year (year ending Sept 30).
Food Stamp administrative data on caseloads and expenditures: Caseload and expenditures come from
unpublished USDA data generously provided by Katie Fitzpatrick and John Kirlin, of the Economic
Research Service, USDA.
Reduced Price School Lunch and Breakfast caseloads and expenditures: Can be found in Table 4
(recipients, lunch), Table 6 (costs, lunch), Table 8 (recipients, breakfast), and Table 10 (costs, breakfast)
in http://www.fns.usda.gov/fns/key_data/march‐2010.pdf. Recipients are average daily.
Unemployment Insurance administrative data on caseloads and expenditures: Data for calendar years
come from unpublished data provided by the Office of the Chief Economist at the Department of Labor.
The average benefit is the weekly average benefit amount for 2009, quarter 4 from
http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/content/data_stats/datasum09/DataSum_2009_4.pdf .
Deflator: The CPI‐U is from the Economic Report of the President,
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/tables10.html.

33

Table 1: Expenditures and Participation in Cash or Near‐Cash Safety Net Programs
Number of
recipients
(thousands)

Total benefit
payments
(millions of 2009$)

Average
monthly
benefit

Estimated number of children
removed from poverty
(millions, in 2005)

1,796
15,232
24,757
6,407

$9,324
$50,360
$50,669
$41,023

$397
$276
$171
$517

0.8
2.2
2.6
n/a

27,527
56,821
19,446
9,068

$53,716
$276,246
$7,563
$2,498

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

5,757

$131,420

n/a

n/a

Cash or near cash means tested programs
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Food Stamp Program
Federal Earned Income Tax Credit
Supplemental Security Income, non‐Disabled
Non cash means tested programs
Medicaid, Children (2007)
Medicaid, All (2007)
National School Lunch Program, Free and Reduced Price (2009)
School Breakfast Program, Free and Reduced Price (2009)
Other short term income replacement programs
Unemployment Compensation ‐ Total

Notes: Data for all programs refers to calendar year 2009 and are in 2009$ except the EITC which refers to 2008 (and amounts are in
2008$), TANF and the child nutrition programs (National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program) which are for fiscal year
2009 (year ending 9/30/09), and Medicaid which refers to 2007 (and amounts are in 2007$). For TANF, Food Stamps, the child nutrition
programs, and Unemployment Compensation program data sources, see the data appendix. EITC data are from the Tax Policy Center
(2010) and SSI data are from Social Security Administration (2010). SSI includes federal and state supplement payments and participation
and the EITC includes the total tax cost (not just refundable portion).

34

Table 2: Federal Laws Regarding Immigrant Eligibility for Federal Safety Net Programs
August 22, 1996

1997

1998

2002

2009

Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
1

Prior to
PRWORA

TANF

Medicaid

SCHIP

Pre-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Post-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Pre-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Post-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Pre-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Post-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Pre-Enactment Immigrants

Responsibility Act (IIRIRA)
Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA)

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Eligible; State option to bar
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs; State option after

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Barred for first 5 yrs; State option after
Barred for first 5 yrs; State option after
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs; State option after

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Eligible; State option to bar
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs; State option after

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Barred for first 5 yrs; State option after
Barred for first 5 yrs; State option after
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs; State option after

Balanced Budget Act

3

and Education Reform Act

4

Farm Security and Rural
Investment Act

5

Children's Health Insurance
Program Reauthorization
Act

6

Eligible for first 7 yrs; State option after
Eligible; State option to bar

Eligible for first 7 yrs; State option after
[SCHIP enacted in 1997]
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Barred for first 5 yrs

Eligible; State option to bar

Eligible
Eligible

Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Food Stamps
Post-Enactment Immigrants

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Ineligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs

Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Pre-Enactment Immigrants

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Ineligible
Barred for first 5 yrs
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs

Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees
Post-Enactment Immigrants
Qualified Immigrants
Exempted Groups 40 quarters of work
Military
Refugees/Asylees

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Ineligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs

Eligible
Eligible
Eligible
Eligible

Ineligible
Barred for first 5 yrs
Eligible
Eligible for first 5 yrs

SSI

Agriculture, Research Extension

2

Elig restored if as of 8/22/96 are
children, disabled , blind, elderly

Eligible for first 7 yrs
Eligibility restored to children,
disabled; Rest barred first 5 yrs

Eligible for first 7 yrs
Elig extended to SSI recip as of 8/22/96
and those legally residing in US on
8/22/96

Eligible for first 7 yrs

Eligible for first 7 yrs

Notes: Table refers to eligibility for programs under Federal law for qualified immigrants, see text for more details. Rules under SCHIP apply to stand‐alone SCHIP programs. SCHIP programs offered through Medicaid
operate under Medicaid rules.
1
Legislation can be found in: http://www.nacua.org/documents/iirira.pdf
2
Legislation can be found in Section 400‐451 of http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Legislation/pdfs/PL_104‐193.pdf
3
Legislation can be found in Sections 5301‐5308 and 5561‐5574 of http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS‐105hr2015enr/pdf/BILLS‐105hr2015enr.pdf.
4
Legislation can be found in Section 501‐510 in http://www.csrees.usda.gov/about/offices/legis/pdfs/areera98.pdf.
5
Legislation can be found in Section 4401 of: http://www.fas.usda.gov/excredits/FoodAid/Farm_Bill_2002.pdf.
6
Legislation can be found in Section 214 of: http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi‐bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=111_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ003.111

35

Table 3: Characteristics of Households with Children, by Immigrant Status of Head of Household

All households
Natives
Immigrants
Characteristics of household head (at survey)
Mean age
40.1
40.5
Male
0.467
0.524
White, non Hispanic
0.715
0.140
Black, non Hispanic
0.156
0.092
Hispanic
0.098
0.544
Less than high school
0.089
0.319
High school
0.285
0.241
More than high school
0.625
0.440
Never married
0.154
0.111
Married
0.661
0.758
Female unmarried family
0.226
0.153
Employed
0.725
0.716
Not in labor force
0.192
0.201
Any heath insurance
0.847
0.648
Characteristics of the household
Number of children
1.8
2.0
Any elderly
0.05
0.07
Number of persons
3.9
4.4
Own home
0.679
0.515
Household earnings
$74,210
$61,938
Household income
$81,615
$66,423
Less than 50% FPL
0.058
0.081
Less than 100% FPL
0.139
0.222
Less then 150% FPL
0.230
0.376
Greater than 200% FPL
0.678
0.496
Any foreign born
0.058
1.000
Any adult born citizen
1.000
0.248
Any child born citizen
0.996
0.877
Any child foreign born
0.008
0.226

Households < 200 % poverty
Natives

Immigrants

37.5
0.327
0.550
0.268
0.149
0.199
0.389
0.412
0.303
0.410
0.435
0.522
0.338
0.691

39.2
0.470
0.082
0.095
0.696
0.476
0.281
0.242
0.159
0.687
0.216
0.611
0.277
0.479

2.1
0.05
4.0
0.403
$17,894
$23,639
0.180
0.433
0.715
0.000
0.055
1.000
0.998
0.004

2.2
0.06
4.5
0.336
$22,913
$25,854
0.161
0.440
0.746
0.000
1.000
0.193
0.873
0.263

Notes: Authors’ tabulations of 2010 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement data for households with at least one child. Demographics and
living arrangements refer to the time of the survey (February, March or April 2010) and income and program receipt refer to calendar year 2009.
Statistics are weighted.

36

Table 4: Household Safety Net Participation Rates, for Immigrant‐Headed Households with Children with Income Less
than 200% of Poverty

N

Any safety Public
net
assistance

Food
stamps

Medicaid/
SCHIP

School
lunch

SSI

Pre reform (1994/1995)
Arrived 6+ years ago, pre‐enactment

(1)

6294

0.811

0.221

0.353

0.474

0.680

0.058

Arrived <=5 years ago, pre‐enactment

(2)

1648

0.792

0.287

0.394

0.553

0.569

0.049

Arrived 6+ years ago, pre‐enactment

(3)

6898

0.837

0.076

0.301

0.672

0.634

0.048

Arrived 6+ years ago, post‐enactment

(4)

3669

0.843

0.072

0.316

0.676

0.601

0.022

Arrived <=5 years ago, post‐enactment

(5)

1875

0.836

0.073

0.330

0.645

0.532

0.018

Post reform (2008/2009)

Post‐reform ‐ Pre‐reform
Arrived 6+ years ago

(4)‐(1)

0.032

‐0.149

‐0.037

0.202

‐0.079

‐0.036

Arrived <=5 years ago

(5)‐(2)

0.044

‐0.214

‐0.064

0.092

‐0.036

‐0.031

Notes: Authors’ tabulations of 1995, 1996, 2009, and 2010 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement data. Sample includes households with
children under 18 with heads born not a U.S. citizen and living in households with income under 200% of poverty and program participation is
measured at the household level. Any safety net program participation means someone in the household participated in public assistance
(AFDC/TANF or GA), food stamps, Medicaid/SCHIP, free or reduced price School Lunch, SSI, public housing or received a rental subsidy from the
government, or energy assistance. Arrival cohort is assigned using when the household head came to the US to stay. See text for details about
coding of time of arrival.

37

Table 5: Poverty Rates for Immigrant‐Headed Households with Children

N

Below 50% Below 100%
Below 50% Below 100% alternative alternative
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty

Pre reform (1994/1995)
Arrived 6+ years ago, pre‐enactment

(1)

10245

0.103

0.296

0.044

0.256

Arrived <=5 years ago, pre‐enactment

(2)

2301

0.187

0.425

0.124

0.372

Arrived 6+ years ago, pre‐enactment

(3)

13377

0.082

0.229

0.045

0.155

Arrived 6+ years ago, post‐enactment

(4)

5979

0.109

0.319

0.057

0.218

Arrived <=5 years ago, post‐enactment

(5)

2982

0.153

0.359

0.079

0.277

0.006

0.023

0.013

‐0.038

‐0.034

‐0.066

‐0.045

‐0.095

Post reform (2008/2009)

Post‐reform ‐ Pre‐reform
Arrived 6+ years ago
Arrived <=5 years ago

(4)‐(1)
(5)‐(2)

Notes: Authors’ tabulations of 1995, 1996, 2009, and 2010 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement data. Sample includes households with
children under 18 with heads born not a U.S. citizen and program participation is measured at the household level. Extreme poverty and official
poverty calculated using official CPS poverty thresholds and income sources and household size; alternative poverty calculated using official CPS
poverty thresholds and household size, and using household income measured as CPS cash income minus FICA and state and local taxes plus the
EITC and relevant child tax credits plus cash transfers. Arrival cohort is assigned using when the household head came to the U.S. to stay. See text
for details about coding of time of arrival.

38

Table 6: Impact of State Unemployment Rates on State Child Poverty Rates, 2007‐2009

Below 100%
poverty

Below 100%
alternative
poverty

Below 50%
poverty

Below 50%
alternative
poverty

0.82**

0.59**

0.04

0.17

(0.31)

(0.29)

(0.22)

(0.17)

0.92

1.50**

0.82*

0.76

(0.83)

(0.63)

(0.47)

(0.46)

0.34

0.17

0.31

0.16

(1.03)

(0.80)

(0.60)

(0.47)

0.89
(1.22)

2.69**
(1.11)

1.38
(0.83)

1.32*
(0.76)

‐0.42

0.74

0.36

0.15

(1.15)

(0.96)

(0.74)

(0.66)

2.54**
(1.06)

2.46**
(0.94)

1.43**
(0.68)

1.28**
(0.57)

Non‐hispanic head

0.79
(1.76)

‐0.80
(1.37)

1.59
(1.15)

1.56
(1.01)

Hispanic head

2.44**
(1.05)

3.18***
(1.14)

1.29
(0.84)

1.14
(0.76)

Sample: All children
Native head
Non‐native head

Sample: All children with non‐native heads
Non‐mexican head
Mexican head

Sample: All children with non‐native heads
Naturalized head
Non‐citizen head

Sample: All children with non‐citizen heads

Notes: Each cell in the table presents the estimate of a regression of change in state child poverty rates on change in state unemployment rate for
2007‐2009. Estimates are weighted using the population in the cell and ***, **, * indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%
or 10% level. Sample includes children and poverty is assigned at the household level. Official poverty uses total household income and household
size and the official Census poverty thresholds; alternative poverty uses total cash income plus the EITC and child tax credits and other transfers
minus FICA and state and local taxes. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were
born abroad to U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. See text for details.

39

Figure 1: Household Safety Net Participation Rates, Children by Immigrant Status of Head
(a) Any safety net
0.80

Federal welfare
reform

0.70

0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30

Contraction

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
0.001 (p=0.97)

0.20

0.10

Natives
Immigrants

0.00

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(b) Public assistance and food stamps
0.30

0.25

Federal welfare
reform

Contraction
Cash Welfare ‐ Natives
Cash Welfare ‐ Immigrants
FSP ‐ Natives
FSP ‐ Immigrants

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
PA: ‐0.024 (p=0.17)
FSP: ‐0.039 (p=0.01)

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995‐2010 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement data. Sample includes children
under 18 and program participation is measured at the household level. Any safety net program participation means someone in the household
participated in public assistance, food stamps, Medicaid, free or reduced price School Lunch, SSI, public housing or received a rental subsidy from
the government, or energy assistance. Shaded areas refer to annual periods of labor market contraction. Native household heads are those who
were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Figures
are weighted. Shaded areas refer to annual periods of labor market contraction. See text for details.

40

Figure 2: Household Safety Net Participation Rates in Households with Income Less than 200% Poverty, Children by Own
and Head’s Immigrant Status
(a) Any safety net
(b) AFDC/TANF
0.5

1.0

Federal welfare
reform

Federal welfare
reform
0.4

0.9

Contraction

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
0.032 (p=0.11)

Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.8

0.3

0.7

0.2

Diff‐Diff
2008/09 v 1994/95
Immigrant v Native
‐0.004 (p=0.77)

0.6

Contraction
Head native
0.1

Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.0

0.5

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

1994

2008

(c) Food stamps

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(d) Medicaid/SCHIP
0.8

0.6

Contraction
Federal welfare
reform
0.5

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.057 (p=0.002)

Head native

Federal welfare
reform

0.7

Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.6

0.4
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.3
0.2

Contraction

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
0.042 (p=0.05)

0.2
0.1

Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.1

0.0

0.0

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

1994

2008

(e) Free and Reduced Price School lunch

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(f) SSI
0.20

0.9
0.8

1996

Federal welfare
reform

Federal welfare
reform

0.7

0.15

Contraction

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.016 (p=0.01)

Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.6
0.5
0.10
0.4
0.3

Contraction

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.012 (p=0.39)

0.2

Head native

0.05

Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

0.1
0.0

1994

0.00

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995‐2010 Current Population Survey Annual and Social Economic Supplement data. Sample includes children under 18 with
household income below 200% poverty, Program participation is measured at the household level. Any safety net program participation means someone in the
household participated in public assistance, food stamps, Medicaid, free or reduced price School Lunch, SSI, public housing or received a rental subsidy from the
government, or energy assistance. Shaded areas refer to annual periods of labor market contraction. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or
Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Children’s immigration status defined in same way.
Figures are weighted. Shaded areas refer to annual periods of labor market contraction. See text for details.

41

Figure 3: Percent Distribution of Children in Households with Income Less than 200% Poverty, By Own and Head’s
Immigrant Status
30%

90%

Household head native [left scale]
85%

Household head immigrant, child immigrant [right scale]

25%

Household head immigrant, child native [right scale]
80%

20%

75%

15%

70%

10%

65%

5%

0%

60%

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995‐2010 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement data. Sample includes children
under 18 in households with income less than 200 percent of poverty. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico
or outlying areas or who were born abroad to U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Children’s immigration status defined in
same way. Figures are weighted. See text for details.

42

Figure 4: Noncitizens as percent of all SSI recipients
35

All
30

Percent of caseload noncitizen

Federal welfare
reform

Aged
Blind/Disabled

25

20

15

10

5

0

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Source: Table 29 in Social Security Administration (2010).

Figure 5: Child‐Only Caseload in AFDC/TANF (per 1,000 population)
4.0

Child Only Caseload per 1,000 Population

3.5

Federal welfare
reform

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Fiscal Year

Source: See http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/character/index.html.

43

2007

Figure 6: Share of Income by Source for Households with Children Below 50% Official Poverty, 1994 and 2009
(a) Households headed by natives
50
1994
2009

40

30

20

10

0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

(b) Households headed by immigrants
50
1994
2009

40

30

20

10

0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995 and 2010 Current Population Survey Annual and Social Economic Supplement data. Sample includes
households with children in which income is below 50% of official poverty, poverty is assigned at the household level. Total income includes the
value of food stamps. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to
U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Categories of income do not sum to 1, some income categories are omitted. Figures are
weighted.

44

Figure 7
Share of Income by Source for Households with Children Below Official Poverty, 1994 and 2009
(a) Households headed by natives
80
1994

70

2009
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

(b) Households headed by immigrants
80
1994

70

2009
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995 and 2010 Current Population Survey Annual and Social Economic Supplement data. Sample includes
households with children in which income is below 100% of official poverty, poverty is assigned at the household level. Total income includes the
value of food stamps. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to
U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Categories of income do not sum to 1, some income categories are omitted. Figures are
weighted.

45

Figure 8
Share of Income by Source for Households with Children Below 200% Official Poverty, 1994 and 2009
(a) Households headed by natives
90
1994

80

2009

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

(b) Households headed by immigrants
90
1994

80

2009

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Earned
income

Cash welfare
(AFDC, TANF)

Food Stamps

UI, WC,
Veterans

Child Support,
Alimony

SSI

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995 and 2010 Current Population Survey Annual and Social Economic Supplement data. Sample includes
households with children in which income is below 200% of official poverty, poverty is assigned at the household level. Total income includes the
value of food stamps. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to
U.S. parent(s), immigrant heads are other foreign born. Categories of income do not sum to 1, some income categories are omitted. Figures are
weighted.

46

Figure 9: Child Poverty Rates, by Immigrant Status of Child and Head of Household
(a) Below 50% official poverty
30%

25%

Federal welfare
reform

Diff.Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.012 (p=0.23)

Contractions
Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(b) Below 100% official poverty
50%

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.027 (p=0.12)

Federal welfare
reform
40%

Contractions
Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

30%

20%

10%

0%

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(c) Below 100% alternative poverty
60%

50%

Federal welfare
reform

Diff.‐Diff.
2008/09 vs. 1994/95
Immigrant vs. Native
‐0.051 (p=0.001)

Contractions
Head native
Head immigrant, child native
Head immigrant, child immigrant

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1995‐2010 Current Population Survey Annual and Social Economic Supplement data. Sample includes children
and poverty is assigned at the household level. Official poverty uses total household income and household size and the official Census poverty
thresholds; alternative poverty uses total cash income plus the EITC and child tax credits and other transfers minus FICA and state and local taxes.
Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to U.S. parent(s), immigrant
heads are other foreign born. Children’s immigration status assigned analogously. Figures are weighted. Shaded areas refer to annual periods of
labor market contraction. See text for details.

47

Figure 10: Change in Unemployment Rate and Child Poverty 2007‐2009, by State
(a) Below 50% poverty, head native
(b) Below 50% poverty, head immigrant
Child Extreme Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009

Change in official child poverty rate for HH
-5
0
5
10

Change in official child poverty rate for HH
-30
-10
10
30

Child Extreme Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009

0

2

4
Change in unemployment rate

6

0

8

(c) Below 100% poverty, head native

4
Change in unemployment rate

6

6

8

Child Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009
Change in official child poverty rate for HH
-40
10
60

Change in official child poverty rate for HH
-5
0
5
10

2

4
Change in unemployment rate

(d) Below100% poverty, head immigrant

Child Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009

0

2

0

8

(e) Below 100% alt. poverty, head native

2

4
Change in unemployment rate

6

8

(f) Below 100% alt. poverty, head immigrant
Child Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009

Change in alternative child poverty rate for HH
-6
0
6

Change in alternative child poverty rate for HH
-25
0
25

Child Poverty and Unemployment Rate
Change between 2007 and 2009

0

2

4
Change in unemployment rate

6

0

8

2

4
Change in unemployment rate

6

8

Notes: Scatter plots of state data where each point is the change in unemployment rate and poverty for a state between the peak and trough of
the contraction (2007‐2009). Authors’ tabulations using 2008 and 2010 CPS Annual and Social Economic Supplement Data. Sample includes
children and poverty is assigned at the household level. Official poverty uses total household income and household size and the official Census
poverty thresholds; alternative poverty uses total cash income plus the EITC and child tax credits and other transfers minus FICA and state and local
taxes. Native household heads are those who were born in the U.S. or Puerto Rico or outlying areas or who were born abroad to U.S. parent(s),
immigrant heads are other foreign born. See text for details.

48

Appendix Table 1: State TANF Immigrant Eligibility

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

State Option to Bar but
State Fill-in Programs, Post-Enactment Immigrants During 5 Year Bar
State Chooses Not to
PostPreEnactment
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Enactment
Immigrants,
Immigrants
Post 5-Year
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
1
1
1
1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
1
1
1
1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Notes: Sources are Welfare Rules Database (http://anfdata.urban.org/wrd/WRDWelcome.cfm) cross checked with Zimmerman
and Tumlin (1998) and the National Immigration Law Center (2002) and (2004). An "X" indicates that the state covers Legal
Permanent Residents (LPRs) in that year without any caveats and the state has implemented TANF. Prior to TANF
implementation, AFDC rules dictate eligibility. Certain subgroups of immigrants may be covered in unmarked states (see source
data for details). State policies electing whether to bar immigrants (first two columns) rarely changed over time; "X" indicates
covered as of TANF implementation. Exceptions include Idaho and North Dakota (both began coverage for post‐enactment,
post‐5 year bar group in 2004) and Montana (coverage for pre‐enactment group discontinued in 2002; coverage for post‐
enactment, post‐5 year bar discontinued in 2002 and reinstated in 2009). The coverage indicator is consistent across sources
except for the following cases: for pre‐enactment immigrants: Alabama in 1998; Mississippi in 1998, 2002, and 2004; and
Montana in 2002 and 2004. For post‐enactment post, 5‐year bar: Alabama, Florida, Idaho, Louisiana, Ohio and Utah in 1998;
Arkansas, Montana, and South Carolina in 2002 and 2003; North Dakota in 2004. For post‐enactment, during 5‐year bar:
Hawaii, New Mexico, and New York in 1998 and Georgia in 2004. In these cases the cross checked sources indicate opposite
coverage of what is listed.
1
Immigrants only eligible after they have resided in this state for 6 months

49

Appendix Table 2: State Medicaid Immigrant Eligibility
State Option to Bar
PreEnac tment
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connectic ut
Delaware
District of Columbi
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

State Fill-in Programs, Post-Enactment

Post Enactment, Post 5-Year Bar
1998

2002

2005

2008

1

1

1

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

1

Maryland

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Massachusetts

X

X

X

X

X

Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine

Michigan

X

X

X

X

X

Minnesota

X

X

X

X

X

Mississippi
Missouri

1

1

1

North Carolina

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

North Dakota

X

1

1

1

Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon

X
X
X
X

1

1

1

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York

Pennsylvania

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
x
X

X

X
X
X
X
1

1

1

Vermont

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Virginia

X

1

1

1

Washington
West Virginia

X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

1

1

1

Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah

Wisconsin
Wyoming

1

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Immigrants During 5 Year Bar
1998

2002

2005

2006

2007

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

2

X

2

X

2 ,3

X

4

X

4

X

2 ,3

X

X
X

X

X
X

2 ,3

X

X

5

X

2 ,3

X

4

X

X

X
X

3

X

5

2 ,3

2

X
X

2 ,3

X

5

3

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

2

X
X

7

2 ,3

X
X

2 ,3

7

X

X

X

X

6

X

X

2 ,3

X

2

X

2

2

X

2

X

2

X

2

2 ,3

X

8

X

8

X

8

X

X

X
X

6

Notes: An "X" indicates that the state covers Legal Permanent Residents (LPRs) in that year (see footnotes for major exceptions). Sources
include Tumlin, Zimmerman, and Ost (1999) for 1998 and National Immigration Law Center for 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. Certain
subgroups of immigrants may be covered in unmarked states (see source data for details). In 1998 a blank for post‐enactment, post 5‐year bar
can mean the state has not implemented this policy yet.
1
Only to LPRs with 40 quarters of work and the veteran and "refugee" categories.
2
Available for Children
3
Available for Pregnant women
4
Only available to Children, Pregnant Women, or Disabled immigrants
5
Seniors and Disabled eligible up to 100% FPL; Children up to 200% FPL. All children are eligible for preventative care.
6
Children and Parents are eligible. Beginning in 2007, limited funds for prenatal care are available for up to 200% of the federal poverty line.
7
Must be a resident for 6 months (Pennsylvania) or 1 year (Washington) before eligibility begins
8
Seniors and Disabled Immigrants receiving cash assistance are eligible. Prenatal care is available. Children are covered up to 100% of the FPL,
however total allowances are capped.

50

Appendix Table 3: State SCHIP Immigrant Eligibility
State Fill-in Programs, Post-Enactment Immigrants During 5-Year Bar
2002

2004

2005

2006

2007

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1

X
X

1

X
X

1

Wisconsin
Wyoming

Notes: Policies listed for SCHIP plans via Medicaid, Separate state program, or a combination of the two. An "X" indicates that
the state covers Legal Permanent Residents (LPRs) in that year (see footnotes for major exceptions). Sources include the
National Immigration Law Center for 2002, 2005, 2006, and 2007 and Fremstad and Cox (2004) for 2004. Certain subgroups of
immigrants may be covered in unmarked states (see source data for details).
1
Funding is capped such that everyone who was covered as of July 1, 2000 is covered. However anyone applying afterwards
was put on a waiting list. A second freeze and removal of the waiting list was done in July 2003

51

Appendix Table 4: State SSI Immigrant Eligibility
State Fill-in Programs, Post-Enactment Immigrants

1998
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho

2002

2005

2006

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1

Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland

X

Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

X

2

X

2

X

2

X

2

X

Notes: An "X" indicates that the state covers Legal Permanent Residents (LPRs) in that year (see footnotes for major
exceptions). Sources include Tumlin and Zimmerman (1999) for 1998, and the National Immigration Law Center for 2002, 2005,
and 2006. Following the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, all immigrants receiving SSI prior to 1996 as well as those who entered
before 1996 and would become eligible, were eligible for SSI.
1
Illinois is recorded immigrants was also covering pre‐enactment immigrants who are 65 or older, and are determined
ineligible because they do not have a disability in 2002, 2005, and 2006 and covering refugees past their 7‐year quota in 2005
and 2006
2
Funds only available after the individual exceeds the 5‐year bar

52

Appendix Table 5: State Food Stamps Immigrant Eligibility
State Fill-in Programs, PreEnactment Immigrants

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine

1998

2001

2002

2003

1998

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Missouri

X

X

2

X

X

X

3

X

X

3

X

X

Maryland
Massachusetts
Mic higan
Minnesota
Mississippi

State Fill-in Programs, Post-Enactment Immigrants

1

X

X

X
X

4

X
X

X

4

X

4

X

1

X

4

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

5

Montana
Nebraska

X

Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico

X
X

X

6

X

6

New York
North Carolina
North Dakota

X

5

X

7

X

7

Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania

X

5

X

8

X

8

X

X

9

X

9

Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

X

5

X

10

X

10

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Notes: An "X" indicates that the state covers Legal Permanent Residents (LPRs) in that year (see footnotes for major exceptions). Sources
include Zimmerman and Tumlin (1999) for 1998, Schwartz (2001) for 2001, National Immigrant Law Center for 2002, USDA's "State‐Funded
Food Programs for Legal Immigrants" for 2003 and 2004 and the USDA's "Food Stamp Program State Options Report" for 2005‐2009. In 1998
the Agriculture Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act restored eligibility for pre‐enactment immigrants receiving payments or
assistance for blindness or disability, those who were 65+ on August 22, 1996 and Pre‐enactment minors. The 2002 Farm Bill gave eligibility for
Post‐Enactment immigrants who have lived in the United States for 5 years, and for all immigrant children and disabled individuals. Effective
Oct. 1 , 2002, "qualified" immigrants receiving disability‐related assistance will be eligible. Effective Apr. 1, 2003 "qualified" immigrants who
have lived in the U.S. for five or more years as a "qualified" immigrant will be eligible. Effective Oct. 1, 2003, "qualified" immigrant children will
be eligible, regardless of their date of entry.
1 Qualified Immigrants in MA in 2002 and immigrants entering after 4/1/1998 in CT in 2002 must meet a 6 month residency requirement
2 Only children, elderly, and disabled are covered.
3 Only available to 60‐64 year olds (without a disability) or parents residing with children who are eligible for federal food stamps.
4 Only available to children under 18 years old.
5 Only available to former food stamp recipients.
6 Only eligible if the immigrant is (1) 65 or older; (2) legal guardian living with dependent children under 18; (3) mentally or physically
incapacitated; (4) receiving GA benefits and considered unemployable. Must apply for citizenship within 60 days of being certified for food
stamps.
7 Only eligible between the ages of 60 and 68. Must live in the same county as on August 22, 1996.
8 Only eligible if between 65 and 68 years old, are eligible for SSI, have been in the United States for 5 years, and are Ohio residents as of
August 22, 1996.
9 Must be residents of Rhode Island before August 22, 1996.
10 Only Eligible if turned 65 after August 22, 1996 but before March 1st, 1998 and have received food stamps anytime from Sept. 1996 to Aug.
1997.

53

