NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUATION EFFECTS OF GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSIFICATION:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. BANKS
Martin Goetz
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 17660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

The paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston or the International Monetary Fund, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Valuation Effects of Geographic Diversification: Evidence from U.S. Banks
Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 17660
December 2011
JEL No. G21,G34,L22
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the impact of the geographic diversification of bank holding company (BHC) assets
across the United States on their market valuations. Using two novel identification strategies based
on the dynamic process of interstate bank deregulation, we find that exogenous increases in geographic
diversity reduce BHC valuations. These findings are consistent with the view that geographic diversity
makes it more difficult for shareholders and creditors to monitor firm executives, allowing corporate
insiders to extract larger private benefits from firms.
Martin Goetz
Financial Economist
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
Martin.Goetz@bos.frb.org
Luc Laeven
Senior Economist
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
and CEPR
Llaeven@imf.org

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

1. Introduction

1

Does geographic diversification boost corporate valuation? Several theories suggest that

geographic diversity will enhance efficiency, spread idiosyncratic risk, and reduce agency costs,
with positive ramifications on corporate valuations. Specifically, geographic diversity could

enhance market valuations through economies of scale (Chandler, 1977; Gertner, Scharfstein,
and Stein, 1994; Houston, James, and Marcus, 1997; and Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan, 1999)
and by reducing exposure to idiosyncratic local shocks. And, for the case of banks, Diamond

(1984) holds that it is easier for outside investors to monitor whether a bank is well-diversified
than it is to assess the idiosyncratic investments of a specialized bank.

On the other hand, theories of corporate governance by Jensen (1986), Jensen and

Meckling (1986), Jensen and Murphy (1990), and Scharfstein and Stein (2000) suggest that if
small shareholders find it difficult to monitor and govern geographically dispersed

corporations then corporate insiders will have greater latitude to extract private benefits from
geographically diversified firms with adverse effects on firm valuations. Even if diversification
intensifies agency problems and reduces market valuations, insiders might still diversify the

corporation’s assets if the insider’s additional private benefits are greater than their own losses
from the corporation’s lower value.

Identifying the causal impact of diversity on the performance and valuation of firms has

proven challenging. For nonfinancial firms, a considerable body of research finds that firms
that diversify across different activities tend to have lower valuations, e.g., Lang and Stulz
(1994), Berger and Ofek (1995), Servaes (1996), and Denis, Denis, and Sarin (1997). For

financial firms, Laeven and Levine (2007) find a diversification discount in an international
cross-section of banks that diversify across different financial activities, and Acharya et al.

(2006) find that activity diversification reduces bank performance and increases risk in a

2

sample of Italian banks. But, many researchers question whether diversification causes these
valuation effects, e.g., Maksimovic and Phillips (2002), Campa and Kedia (2002), Graham,
Lemmon, and Wolf (2002), and Villalonga (2004). In particular, concerns remain about

causality because it is difficult to identify exogenous sources of variation in diversification
across firms.

Research on the valuation effects of geographic diversification are subject to similar

identification concerns. For nonfinancial firms, Denis, Denis, and Yost (2002) show that global

diversification is associated with valuation discounts. For banks, Deng and Elyasiani (2008)

find that diversification across U.S. states is associated with valuation premiums. But, it is

difficult to draw causal inferences about the impact of diversification on corporate valuations
from these studies.

In this paper, we design and implement two new empirical strategies for identifying the

causal impact of geographic diversification on firm valuation. Specifically, we use data on U.S.
bank holding companies (BHCs) to study the impact of geographic diversification across the
states of the United States on the market valuation of those BHCs.

We study U.S. BHCs for three reasons. First, specific regulatory changes that we describe

below and that applied only to banks provide a natural setting for identifying the causal impact
of geographic diversity on BHC valuations and behavior. Second, we have detailed information
on BHC subsidiaries and their geographic diversity. Third, banks provide vital services to all
sectors of the economy (Levine, 2005), so the impact of diversity on BHC valuation and

performance is of central importance. In this way, we contribute to the debate about the impact
of the diversity on the valuation and performance of firms in general and BHCs in particular.

At the core of both identification strategies, we exploit the cross-state, cross-time

3

variation in the removal of interstate bank branching prohibitions to identify an exogenous

increase in geographic diversity at the BHC level. From the 1970s through the 1990s, individual
states of the United States removed restrictions on the entry of out-of-state banks. Not only did

states start deregulating in different years, states also signed bilateral and multilateral

reciprocal interstate banking agreements in a somewhat chaotic manner over time. There is

enormous cross-state variation in the twenty-year process of interstate bank deregulation,
which culminated in the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking Act of 1995.

There are good economic and statistical reasons for treating this process of deregulation

as exogenous to bank valuation. Restrictions on interstate banking protected banks from

competition for much of the 20th century. During the last quarter of the century, technological
and financial innovations eroded the value of these restrictions. For example, Kroszner and

Strahan (1999) find that checkable money market mutual funds facilitated banking by mail and
phone, and improvements in data processing, telecommunications, and credit scoring

weakened the advantages of local banks. They hold that these innovations reduced the
willingness of banks to fight for the maintenance of protective regulations, triggering

deregulation. Furthermore, we find no statistical evidence that valuations or changes in

valuations affected the timing of deregulation. And, there is no evidence that states signed

bilateral and multilateral interstate banking arrangements based on BHC valuations. Thus, the

process of interstate bank deregulation provides a natural laboratory for evaluating the impact
of BHC diversification on valuations.

The first identification strategy uses the state-time variation in the dynamic process of

interstate bank deregulation as an instrument for the geographic diversity of BHCs. Past

researchers have treated interstate bank deregulation as a single, discrete event, typically

4

dating deregulation as the year in which a state first allows banks from any other state to enter.
We believe that we are the first to exploit the state-specific dynamics of deregulation. In this

first strategy, we only provide information on the dynamic impact of diversity of a state’s
“average” BHC, because our instrument does not have a BHC-specific component.

The second identification strategy imbeds the state-time variation in the dynamic

process of interstate bank deregulation into a gravity model of individual BHC investments in

“foreign” states to develop a BHC-specific instrumental variable of diversification. Inspired by
Frankel and Romer’s (1999) study of international trade and growth, we construct a BHC-

specific instrument for geographic diversity in the following manner. First, for each BHC in each
period, we use a gravity model to estimate the share of assets it will hold in each “foreign” state,
conditional on there being no regulatory prohibitions on establishing a subsidiary in that state.
Second, based on this estimate—and imposing a zero when and where there are regulatory

prohibitions on interstate banking—we compute the projected geographic diversity of each

BHC in each period. This gravity-deregulation model produces the instrumental variable that

we employ to identify the causal impact of geographic diversity on Tobin’s q at the BHC-level.
We believe that we are the first to exploit the gravity model to examine the “foreign” direct

investment decisions of banks. More importantly, we use this framework to differentiate among
banks within the same state while exploiting each state’s specific process of deregulation.

Both identification strategies indicate that increases in geographic diversity reduce BHC

valuations, which is consistent with the idea that diversification intensifies agency problems
within BHCs. This finding holds after controlling for BHC fixed effects, state-quarter fixed

effects, and a wide-array of time-varying BCH characteristics, such as size, profitability, and

market competition. The results reflect the impact of geographic diversification per se, not the

5

effects of greater competition triggered by interstate deregulation. Even when conditioning on
the degree to which the BHC engages in a diversity of activities, there is still a significant,

negative impact of geographic diversity on q. Robustness tests further indicate that the results
are not driven by changes in the accounting value of assets, or other oddities, around the time
of mergers and acquisitions.

This paper relates to several strands of research. For instance, while Goldberg (2009),

Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), and Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) find that cross-economy

banking boosts efficiency and growth while reducing economy volatility, Liberti and Mian

(2009), Mian (2008), Degryse and Ongena (2005), and Brickley et al. (2003) argue that the

effectiveness of banking deteriorates with the distance between bank and borrower. Moreover,

Demsetz and Strahan (1997) find that diversification tends to increase bank leverage and risk.
Deng and Elyasiani (2008) explicitly test for the role of geographic diversification in US banks
and find that geographic diversification boosts valuations while increased distance between

bank headquarters and branches reduces valuations. However, they do not identify exogenous
sources of variation in geographic diversification.

Another line of research estimates the cost functions of banks with different industrial

organizations (Berger and Humphrey, 1991; Berger, Hanweck, Humphrey, 1987; Ferrier et al,
1993). Drucker and Puri (2005) find that conglomerates that combine lending and

underwriting activities tend to charge lower fees. Rather than attempting to measure costs,
margins, idiosyncratic risk, and agency frictions directly, we assess the net effect of BHC

diversity on q. More generally, the purpose of this paper is to identify and estimate the net

effect of diversification on firm valuation and not to examine the precise nature of the

6

underlying channels of this effect.

Examining the geographic diversity of U.S. BHCs in the 1980s and 1990s informs current

debates on the value of international and cross-border banking. By examining the geographic

diversification of BHCs across U.S. states, we consider a very simple form of diversity that can
easily be measured. Our prior expectations were that geographic diversity within a single

country and industry should have positive effects on valuations through economies of scale and
risk diversification, with only minor agency effects. If, on the other hand, the adverse valuation
effects of diversifying across states dominate these positive effects, then this suggests that

consequential agency problems shape the behavior of financial conglomerates. Our results are
consistent with the latter.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the data and interstate bank

deregulation. Section 3 provides the ordinary least squares results, while Sections 4 and 5
discuss the instrumental variable findings. Section 6 concludes.
2. Data and interstate bank deregulation
2.1. Sources

We use balance sheet information on BHCs and their chartered subsidiary banks. For

BHCs, data are collected on a quarterly basis by the Federal Reserve and published in the

Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies. Since June 1986, domestic BHCs report their

consolidated balance sheet, income statement, and detailed supporting schedules to the Federal

Reserve. 1 Furthermore, all banking institutions regulated by the Federal Deposit Insurance

7

Corporation, the Federal Reserve, or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency file Reports

of Condition and Income, known as Call Reports, which include balance sheet and income data

on a quarterly basis. Call Reports also report the identity of the entity that holds at least 50% of
a banking institution’s equity stake (RSSD9364), which we use to link banking subsidiaries to

their parent BHCs. We obtain qualitatively similar results when performing the analysis using

Federal Reserve data on bank branches rather than subsidiaries, and constructing a measure of
diversification based on branches. The drawback of using information on branches is that such

information is available only on an annual basis and limited to commercial banks, while data on
subsidiaries is available at a quarterly level and for a broader set of financial institutions that
includes commercial banks, state-chartered savings banks, and cooperative banks. 2

Information on Market Capitalization of publicly traded BHCs is obtained from the

Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP), where we use the end of quarter market

capitalization for all registered BHCs in the United States. The Bureau of Economic Analysis
provides state level data on social and economic demographics.

For interstate deregulation, Amel (1993) and our own updates provide information on

changes in state laws that affect the ability of commercial banks to expand across state borders.
Commercial banks in the U.S. were prohibited from entering other states due to regulations.
Over the period from 1978 through 1994, states removed these restrictions by either (1)

unilaterally opening their state borders and allowing out-of-state banks to enter or (2) signing

The corresponding reporting form is called FR Y-9X. More information is available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/reportforms/ReportDetail.cfm?WhichFormId=FRY-9C.
1

We exclude subsidiaries that exclusively engage in foreign activities since they do not contribute to domestic
diversification, which is the focus of our study.

2

reciprocal bilateral and multilateral branching agreements with other states and thereby

8

allowing out-of-state banks to enter. The Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 repealed the prohibition on

BHCs headquartered in one state from acquiring banks in other states. Amel (1993) reports for

each state and year, the states in which a state’s BHC can open subsidiary banks. We confirmed

the dating of the state-by-state relaxation of interstate banking restrictions in Amel (1993) and

extended the data through 2007 using information from each state’s bank regulatory authority.
2.2. Geographic diversification
For each BHC, in each quarter, we determine the cross-state distribution of its bank

subsidiaries, typically weighting the subsidiaries by their assets. We use the location of the
BHC’s subsidiaries as reported in the Call Reports. We define BHC diversity in terms of the
location of its bank network, not the physical location of those receiving loans. This is

appropriate for gauging the effect of geographic diversity on agency problems within BHCs.

We use four variables to capture the extent of a BHC’s geographic diversification. First,

we use a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if a bank holding company has

subsidiaries in more than one state, and zero otherwise. Additionally, we compute the share of

a holding company’s assets that are held in out-of-state affiliates, i.e., subsidiaries not located in

the same state as the bank holding company. Our third measure of geographic diversification is

a bank holding company’s concentration of assets across states. We measure this by calculating
the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index of a BHC’s assets in each state in which it is active. To

construct a measure that is increasing in the degree of geographic diversification, we subtract
the value of this Herfindahl Index from one, and use this as our third measure of geographic

diversification. Our final measure of geographic diversification is the average distance (in

9

miles) between the BHC’s headquarters and its affiliated subsidiaries. We compute this distance
measure using information on the location of counties in which the holding company and its
subsidiaries are located.
2.3. Activity diversity
In our analyses, we account for differences in the diversity of BHCs’ financial activities in

order to focus on the independent impact of geographic diversity on BHC behavior. Laeven and
Levine (2007) show that financial institutions that combine lending activities and non-lending
activities (such as underwriting) have lower market values. We use their empirical proxies of

activity diversity to control for diversification across different financial activities. We use both
their index of income diversity (Income Diversity) and their index of diversity based on the

allocation of BHC assets across lending and non-lending activities (Asset Diversity). The indexes
take on values between zero and one, where larger values imply that the BHC’s income and
assets are more diversified across lending and non-lending activities. 3

3

Income Diversity is computed as follows:

.

Net interest income is Total interest income minus Total interest expenses. Other operating income includes net
fee income, net commission income, and net trading income. In turn, Asset Diversity is computed as:

.
Net loans is Total loans net of loan loss provisions, and Other earning assets include all earning assets other than
loans (such as Treasuries and other fixed income securities, including mortgage-backed securities).

10
2.4. Other factors
To account for other influences, we control for several bank-specific as well as state-

specific characteristics. To capture differences in the size of BHCs, we include the natural log of
total assets, the natural log of operating income, as well as the growth rate of these two

variables. In further robustness tests, we also include the ratio of bank capital to total assets

and its return on equity. To control for time-varying, state-specific characteristics, we include
the median level of q, the concentration of banking assets, and the real growth rate of state
personal income in our regression models.
2.5. Sample construction
Our sample of BHCs is constructed as follows. We first match subsidiaries of BHCs to

their ultimate parent company using information from the Call Reports. Specifically, each

subsidiary reports its unique parent company, and there can be several layers of subsidiaries

and parent companies before the ultimate parent company is reached. We assign a subsidiary
to the parent BHC that owns at least 50% of the subsidiary’s equity. We only focus on BHCs
located in the U.S. and therefore drop holding companies chartered in Puerto Rico.

Furthermore, we eliminate BHCs that change the location of their headquarters across states

during the sample period. This is an exceeding small number of institutions, and the results
hold when including them.

Next, we merge this data with information on stock prices of traded BHCs from CRSP to

11

compute Tobin’s q. 4 Three BHCs report two different stock prices for different classes of shares
for about 13 quarters and therefore report two values of market capitalization. We sum the
reported amounts of capitalization for each share class whenever two different classes of

shares are traded in a quarter. Using data on stock market capitalization of a bank’s equity, we
compute each bank’s Tobin’s q as the ratio of stock market capitalization of equity plus book

value of total liabilities, minority interest, and perpetual preferred stock divided by the book
value of total assets.

We further exclude observations below the 1st and above the 99th percentile of q to

mitigate the influence of outliers. Our final sample contains 28,337 BHC-quarter observations

of 756 BHCs. The time period of our sample ranges from the second quarter of 1986 to the last

quarter of 2007 and includes all publicly traded BHCs, headquartered in one of the 50 states of
the U.S. and the District of Columbia.

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics of the main variables, with the sample of 756 BHCs

split into diversified and nondiversified BHC-quarter observations. Since BHCs diversify during
our sample period, the same entity can appear in both columns of Table 1, being categorized as
a nondiversified BHC in the quarters before it diversifies and a diversified BHC afterwards.

About one quarter of our sample consists of BHCs with subsidiaries in more than one state.

Also, more than half of all geographically diversified BHCs have at least five subsidiaries located
in at least three different states. The majority of nondiversified BHCs, on the other hand,
operate only one subsidiary.

As shown, diversified banks tend to (1) have higher Tobin’s q, (2) be more profitable as

A data set matching Call Report and CRSP identifiers is available on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, see http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/banking_research/datasets.html.

4

measured by the return on equity, (3) be much larger, and (4) be more diverse in their

12

activities, as measured by Income Diversity and Asset Diversity. Thus, it is important to
consider BHC traits in assessing the relationship between diversity and q.

Table 2 presents ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regression results focusing on differences

between diversified and nondiversified BHCs. The regressions condition on state- and quarter
fixed effects. The results suggest that geographic diversification is associated with greater

activity diversity. Moreover, compared to nondiversified BHCs, geographically diversified BHCs
are more profitable and larger.

3. Geographic diversity of BHC assets and Tobin’s q: OLS results
3.1. Preliminary results
As a preliminary assessment of the relationship between the market valuation of a BHC

and its geographic diversification, we first estimate OLS regressions. The reduced form model is
specified as follows:

q = βD + X ρ + δ + δ + ε
'

ist

ist

ist

i

st

ist

where qist denotes the Tobin’s q of BHC i in state s during quarter t, Dist denotes alternative

(1)

measures of a BHC’s geographic diversification, X’ist is a matrix of conditioning information, and
δ’s are fixed effects, where we use BHC, state, quarter, and state-quarter fixed effects in various
specifications. Throughout the paper, the reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity
robust and adjusted for clustering. The BHC fixed effects account for unobserved, time-

invariant differences across BHCs and focuses the analysis on how the valuation of a BHC

changes after diversification changes. State-quarter fixed effects account for time-varying,

state-specific traits, including economic activity, changes in fiscal, labor, tax, and other

economic policies at the state level. In alternative specifications, we also consider different

13

combinations of fixed effects, including time-varying state fixed effects for the states in which a
BHC has subsidiaries.

In Table 3, we consider four measures of the cross-state diversity of BHC assets: (1) a

dummy variable that takes a value of one if the BHC has bank subsidiaries in more than one
state, and zero otherwise, (2) the fraction of the BHC’s total assets held in out of state

subsidiaries, (3) one minus the Herfindahl index of the distribution of the BHC’s assets across
states, and (4) the average distance (in miles) between the BHC’s central office and its

subsidiaries (including subsidiaries within the home state). In the first four regressions, we

simply condition on state and quarter fixed effects. In the next four regressions, we also control
for BHC fixed effects.

The relationship between geographic diversity and q depends on whether the regression

excludes or includes BHC fixed effects. Without BHC fixed effects, there is a positive association

between each of the four diversity measures and q, which confirms the results in Deng and

Elyasiani (2008). But, with BHC fixed effects, there is a strong negative relationship between

diversity and q, although only three of the four measures of diversification—the fraction of

assets held by out-of-state banks being the exception—enter significantly. 5 The association

between diversification and q also holds when using state-quarter fixed effects. These results
are consistent with the view that more highly valued BHCs diversify but valuations fall after
BHCs diversify geographically. 6

All four measures of diversification enter negative and significantly if we limit the sample to bank holding
companies without international activities.

5

Deng and Elyasiani (2008) distinguish between diversification and distance. As a robustness test, we control for
distance and obtain the same results on diversification.

6

14

Without addressing causality, the economic magnitudes are small. For example, the

estimated coefficient in column 7 indicates that if the median nondiversified BHC switched to

the median level of diversity, this would be associated with a drop in q of about 0.4, i.e., about
0.4% since median q is about 100. This drop translates into a drop in market capitalization of
the average bank of about $15 million. Aggregating across all banks in our sample, the

coefficient estimates suggest a drop of bank capitalization in the neighborhood of $20 billion

associated with geographic diversification. While small, the coefficients from Table 3 reflect a
net result that also incorporates the positive ramifications of diversification.

Of course, reverse causality is likely to attenuate the OLS coefficient if high valuations

encourage geographic diversification. Thus, using instruments that isolate the causal impact of
diversification on valuations might yield larger effects, which is indeed what we find below.

One concern about the results in Table 3 is that there might be trends in BHC valuations

that start before the BHC diversifies. Specifically, we want to know whether there is a break in

the evolution of q once a BHC diversifies. If values were falling before a BHC diversifies, then

the regressions in Table 3 would still indicate that q fell after diversification. However, it would

not imply that diversification was the cause of this fall as there was no break in the evolution of
q following diversification.

Thus, we trace out the dynamics between diversification and BHC valuations to assess

whether there are pre-diversification trends in q using the following regression:

q = α + β D + β D + ...+ β D + δ + δ + ε
it

−10

−10 t

−9

−9 t

10

10 t

i

st

it

,

(2)

where D-j equals one for BHCs in the jth quarter before the BHC first diversifies into another
state, D+j equals one for BHCs in the jth quarter after the BHC first diversifies, and β-j and β+j are

the corresponding coefficient estimates on these dummy variables. We do this while controlling

15

for BHC and state-quarter fixed effects. We consider a window of 20 quarters, spanning from 10
quarters before the BHC first diversifies until 10 quarters afterwards. We estimate this

relationship only for BHCs that expanded geographically during the sample period. Figure 1

plots the estimated coefficients from the regression: the solid line is the estimated coefficients
(β-10, β-9, etc.), while the dashed lines represent the 95% confidence interval.

As shown in Figure 1, there is a marked break in BHC q after it first diversifies across

state boundaries and the drop in q grows for a few quarters afterwards as well. There are no
signs of a change in q, or trends in q, prior to deregulation.
3.2 Robustness tests with additional controls
In Table 4, we assess the robustness of the relationship between the cross-state

diversity of BHC assets and a BHC’s q by controlling for many additional BHC-specific and statespecific factors, and by considering alternative combinations of fixed effects, including dummy

variables to control for the states where a BHC has subsidiaries. The regressions in Table 4 use

our broadest measure of geographic diversity, i.e., 1 – the Herfindahl index of BHC assets across
states.

The literature has raised several concerns about drawing inferences about a

diversification discount without accounting for the effects of mergers and acquisitions (M&A).

For example, using plant-level data from U.S. manufacturing firms, Maksimovic and Phillips

(2002) find that less productive firms tend to diversify, but diversity does not cause lower
productivity. Campa and Kedia (2002) find that the same characteristics that induce

manufacturing firms to diversify also lower firm values. Graham, Lemmon, and Wolf (2002)

argue that nonfinancial conglomerates tend to purchase already discounted target firms, which

produces the diversification discount. Custodio (2010) notes that M&As typically trigger an

16

upward revaluation of the book value of assets, which will mechanically reduce q, potentially

leading to spurious inferences about the relationship between diversity and valuations. Thus, a

proper examination of the impact of diversification must account for the potential complexities
introduced by M&As.

The particulars of BHC diversification permit us to assess the empirical importance of

these concerns. In our sample, changes in BHC diversity occur for three reasons: (1) M&As of

subsidiaries in other states, (2) de novo expansion, where a BHC establishes new subsidiaries,
and (3) organic diversification, where there are changes in the relative size of a BHC’s

subsidiaries. In the nonfinancial diversification literature, concerns have primarily been raised
about M&As, not the other methods of diversification. We consider both acquisitions and sales
of subsidiaries. While acquisitions tend to increase BHC complexity, sales of subsidiaries tend

to simplify the subsidiary structure of BHCs. According to the view that the complexity of BHCs
is positively associated with agency problems within the BHC, simplifying transactions should
increase q, while complicating transactions should reduce a BHC’s q. To control for the

influence of acquisitions and sales of bank subsidiaries on BHC q, we include a variable that
equals the share of BHC assets acquired or sold in quarter t.

We find that the negative association between BHC diversity and q is quite robust. First,

the results hold when controlling for BHC-specific factors, including the median q of all BHCs in

the state, the degree of market concentration in the BHC’s home state, the growth of total assets
and operating income, the return on equity, the capital-to-asset ratio, BHC asset size and

operating income, the degree to which the BHC receives income from diverse financial activities
and invests its assets in diverse activities, a dummy variable that denotes whether the BHC has

a subsidiary with international activity, and the share of assets acquired or sold during the

17

quarter, and after we control for time-varying, state-specific factors, such as the growth of

personal income. While the diversity of BHC activities, as measured by the degree to which the
BHC receives income from non-interest earning assets and invests in assets beyond loans, is

negatively associated with q, the regression still indicates an independent, negative association
between cross-state asset diversity and BHC q. Moreover, the results do not seem to be driven

by changes in the accounting value of assets or other oddities around the time of M&As. We
continue to find that a larger degree of BHC diversity is associated with lower q after
conditioning on BHC acquisitions and sales.

Second, the results are robust to controlling for the location of a BHC’s subsidiaries. For

example, two BHCs chartered in Rhode Island could each have a single subsidiary, one in

Massachusetts and the other in Connecticut. Thus, in Table 4, we incorporate a set of state

dummy variables for each BHC, where the value of each dummy equals one if the BHC has a

subsidiary in that state and quarter, and zero if the BHC does not have a subsidiary in that state
and quarter (column 4). Moreover, we allow the effect of diversifying into each particular state

to vary over time (column 6). Again, we find a robust negative relation between the cross-state

diversity of BHC assets and market valuations after controlling in this manner for the statespecific location of a BHC’s subsidiaries.

The OLS estimates presented thus far do not permit a causal interpretation. In

particular, OLS estimates might be biased because BHC valuations could shape the decision of

BHCs to expand geographically and because some third factor, such as time-varying differences

in BHC management, could drive both diversification and q. To address this concern we employ
an instrumental variables approach.

18
4. Instrumental variables: state-time instruments
To obtain a consistent estimate of the impact of BHC diversity on q, we need an

instrumental variable that is correlated with the cross-state diversity of BHC assets but not

independently correlated with q through other channels. We employ two instrumental variable

strategies. Our first strategy employs time-varying, state-level instruments. The next section
develops an instrumental variable strategy to identify diversity at the BHC-level.
4.1. The time-varying, state-level instruments

We use the state-specific process of interstate bank deregulation to identify exogenous

increases in the cross-state diversity of BHC assets. The idea is that as one state, say

Massachusetts, signed bilateral and multilateral reciprocal interstate banking agreements with
other states over the years, and as other states made unilateral decisions allowing the entry of
BHC subsidiaries from Massachusetts, BHCs from Massachusetts had greater opportunities to

open subsidiaries in other states. As emphasized, there are enormous cross-state differences in
the evolution of interstate bank deregulation. For each state, this was a dynamic process, not a
single event.

We consider nine sets of time-varying, state-level instruments. The first three do not

explicitly account for the evolution of deregulation. First, we simply use the number of years

since a state first started liberalizing its interstate banking restrictions (Years since interstate
bank deregulation), thereby allowing BHCs from other states to enter. Second, we use this

variable, Years since interstate bank deregulation, and its square to allow for a quadratic

relationship between interstate deregulation and the cross-state diversification of BHC assets.

Third, we consider a nonparametric specification that includes independent dummy variables

19

for each year since the state started liberalizing interstate banking restrictions, taking a value of
one all the way through the first ten years after deregulation, and zero otherwise.

The remaining six instrument sets explicitly account for state differences in the

evolution of deregulation. The fourth instrument set equals the logarithm of the number of

states in which a BHC can open subsidiaries, including its home state. This is a simple measure

of the number of states in which a BHC can potentially operate, and we refer to this variable as
Ln (Number of accessible states). Fifth, we weight the number of accessible states by the
inverse of their distance from the home state, since it might be less costly for a bank in

California to open a subsidiary in, say, Nevada than in, say, New Hampshire (Number of
accessible states – weighted). 7

For the sixth and seventh instrument sets, we use a measure of the potential interstate

market available to BHCs by including the natural logarithm of the total population of the states
in which the BHC could potentially operate, excluding the BHC’s home state. We refer to this

variable as Ln (Market Population). Thus, rather than simply counting the number of accessible

states, as done in Ln (Number of accessible states), Ln (Market Population) also captures

information on the potential market available to the BHC from the opening of subsidiaries

elsewhere. For the seventh instrument, we weight the sixth measure of the potential population
available to BHCs by the relative distance of the market from the BHCs home state, and refer to

7

 d f − dij
 d
f


The closest state receives a weight of one and the farthest a weight of zero: wij = 

 df
, where dij

d
−
d
c
 f

is the distance between home state i and state j, and df (dc) is the distance between the home state and the farthest
(closest) state.

this variable as Ln(Market Population – Weighted), where we use the aforementioned

20

weighting scheme.

Finally, the eighth and ninth instruments are based on Market Potential, which equals

Market Population divided by the population of BHC’s home state. This variable captures the

possibility that the desirability of opening a subsidiary in another state is positively associated

with the additional market made available by that state. Thus, a BHC in California and a BHC in
Nevada might view the appeal of opening a subsidiary in, say, Oregon differently. The ninth
instrument uses the weighted version of this instrument.
4.2. First-stage regression results and instrument validity
The first-stage regressions are presented in Panel B of Table 5. As shown in columns one

through nine, we find that interstate deregulation increased the degree of cross-state diversity

of BHC assets. The positive impact of deregulation on BHC diversity holds across the different
indicators of interstate bank deregulation. When considering the time-varying evolution of

interstate restrictions (column (4) to (9)), we find the link between diversification and

deregulation to be statistically weakest when focusing only on the number of states in which a
BHC can potentially open a subsidiary. The explanatory power of our measure of deregulation
in explaining BHC diversification increases when we also incorporate the size and distance of
potential markets into our instrument. This suggests that the distance and population of
potential markets shape BHC (“foreign-state”) direct investment decisions.

The significant impact of deregulation on BHC diversity holds when conditioning on a

full set of BHC-specific, and state-specific factors as well as state and quarter fixed effects. Since
the treatment is occurring at the state-time level, we do not employ BHC fixed effects in these

21

first set of instrumental variable results. However, we do include BHC fixed effects later when
we develop a BHC-level treatment.

Several pieces of evidence support the validity of the instrumental variables. First, the F-

test results show that interstate deregulation explains BHC diversity after controlling for many

potential influences. For seven out of the nine sets of instrumental variables, the F-test is above

ten and sometimes exceeds 30. For these sets of instrumental variables, there is a strong
statistical link between deregulation and BHC diversity. Second, for these seven sets of

instruments, the Hansen J-test results (not reported) indicate that we cannot reject the null
hypothesis of the validity of the instruments. Thus, there is no evidence that these seven

instruments explain BHC valuations beyond their ability to account for variation in the cross-

state diversity of BHC assts. Third, as depicted in Figure 1, there is no indication of any trends in
q prior to deregulation and hence no suggestion that changes in q prior to deregulation predict

the timing of deregulation or the evolution of q following deregulation. Fourth, we could find no
evidence—either in the historical evidence on how states formed bilateral and multilateral

interstate banking agreements or in the data—that states selected other states based on BHC
valuations. As suggested by Amel (1993), the state-specific process of forming a series of

interstate banking agreements with other states evolved in a relatively chaotic manner, in

which there is no evidence that states signed reciprocal interstate banking treaties based on q.

Indeed, Figure 2 shows that there is essentially no relationship between the valuations of BHCs
that sign interstate agreements.

4.3. Second-stage regression results with time-varying, state-level instruments

22

Panel A of Table 5 presents the two-stage least squares (2SLS) regressions of BHC q on

BHC diversity for the nine different sets of instrumental variables. As already mentioned, the
associated first-stage results are reported in Panel B of Table 5.

The second-stage results indicate that the cross-state diversity of BHC assets lowers q. In

particular, the projected value of BHC asset diversification is associated with a significant

reduction in BHC q. The only exception is when using the instrumental variable Ln (Number of
accessible states). As noted, this is also the only instrumental variable that has weak

explanatory power in explaining the cross-state diversity of BHC assets in the first-stage.

However, when we weight by the size of the accessible states or the distance of the accessible
states from the BHC, this (1) improves the fit of the first-stage regression and (2) yields a

second-stage result in which the exogenous component of BHC diversity is negatively, and
statistically significantly, linked to BHC q.

The economic size of the estimated impact of cross-state asset diversity on market

valuation of a BHC is large. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the asset

diversity index (1 – Herfindahl Index of assets across states) implies a decrease in q of about 30
percent of its standard deviation when using regressions (4) or (5), a reduction of over 40

percent of its standard deviation when using regressions (6) or (7), and a reduction of about 12
percent of its standard deviation when using the other regressions. As another example,

consider New Jersey and the regression estimates in regression (7) of Table 5. The results

suggest that if New Jersey were to change from a situation in which its banks were prohibited
from diversifying into any state to a situation in which all states allowed New Jersey banks to
enter that the average q of banks in New Jersey would fall by almost 5 percent. This is

substantial. Aggregating across the U.S. banking system, it would involve a drop in market

23

capitalization of about $225 billion.

The 2SLS estimates are between 10 and 20 times larger than the OLS estimates in

absolute value terms. One explanation for this result is that higher-valued BHCs are more likely
to diversify than lower-valued BHCs, biasing the OLS estimate toward zero. The 2SLS estimates

identify the true, larger, impact of BHC diversity on q.

5. Instrumental variables: gravity-deregulation model
One shortcoming with the analyses thus far is that we have examined the impact of

diversity on valuations for the average BHC in a state: We have not yet developed and

employed a BHC-level instrumental variable. We would like, however, to distinguish among

BHCs within the same state and identify the impact of an exogenous increase in diversity on
BHC valuations for individual financial institutions.

In this section, we design a strategy to identify the impact of diversity on q at the BHC-

level—or, more precisely, at the county-level. We do this by simultaneously (a) using the

dynamic process of interstate bank deregulation discussed above to differentiate across states
and time and (b) using the distance of each BHC’s county to other states (as well as other
county demographic traits) to differentiate across BHCs within the same state.
5.1. Gravity-deregulation model: strategy
We use a gravity model to construct a time-varying, BHC-county-specific instrumental

variable for diversification, which we then use in our two-stage least squares evaluation of the

impact of diversity on q. Frankel and Romer (1999) developed this approach to study whether

international trade causes economic growth. They first use a gravity model of international

24

trade to estimate bilateral trade volumes between countries. Based on the projected bilateral

trade volumes, they construct the projected aggregate trade volume of each country. Using this
projected trade share as their instrument for actual trade in their first stage regression, they
assess the causal impact of trade on growth.

Based on the gravity model, we hypothesize that BHCs will invest more in

geographically close states than in far states. BHCs that are close to another state might have
greater familiarity with its economic conditions and face lower costs to establishing and

maintaining subsidiaries than farther states. From this perspective, a BHC in the southern part

of California will tend to invest more in Arizona than Oregon and a BHC in the northern part
California might find it correspondingly more appealing to open a subsidiary in Oregon. To

measure closeness to other states, we compute the distance (in 100s of miles) of the county of
each BHC’s headquarters to each other state’s capital, which we call “Distance in 100 miles.”

Since we are focusing on interstate banking diversification, we assume that the distance to the
capital of a BHC’s home state is equal to zero.

We further hypothesize that BHCs will be more attracted to comparatively larger

markets than smaller markets. Thus, holding other things constant, BHCs in Colorado will

invest more in California than in Wyoming. To measure relative market size, we compute the

logarithm of the population of the BHC’s home state (in period t) divided by the population of a
foreign state (in period t): Ln(Population-ratio).

We also allow for the possibility that the comparative size of the BHC’s home county

affects its “foreign-state” direct investment decisions. BHCs based in a relatively urban, active
county might require a larger foreign market before investing abroad than BHCs in smaller

counties. At the same time, distance might matter less for a BHC from an urban, active county

25

than BHCs from smaller, less active environments. Adding these additional county-specific

traits also helps in differentiating between BHCs in the same state.
5.2. The gravity-deregulation model: two-step process

In the first step (“zero stage”) of the gravity-deregulation model, we estimate the

following model:

Shareb,i,j,t = a*Distanceb,i,j+ b*Ln(popi,t/popj,t) + c*Xb,i,j,t + δb + δi + δj + δi,j + δt + δi,t + εb,i,j,t , (3)
where Shareb,i,j,t is the percentage of assets of BHC b, headquartered in state i, held in its

subsidiaries in state j in quarter t; Distanceb,i,j is the distance in 100s of miles between the

county of BHC b’s headquarters and state j’s capital; and Ln(popi,t/popj,t) is the Ln(Populationratio) defined above. In some specifications, we also control for a matrix of variables Xb,i,j,t,

including (a) the interaction of Ln(popi,t/popj,t) and a dummy variable that equals one if the
BHC is headquartered in a comparatively big county (e.g., in the top-third of counties in the

home state by population) in quarter t, (b) the interaction of Distanceb,i,j and a dummy variable
that equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a comparatively big county, and (c) a dummy

variable taking on the value of one if BHC b is located in a comparatively big county, as defined
above.

Furthermore, we condition on many possible fixed effects. In the specifications, we

control for various combinations of BHC fixed effects (δb), separate fixed effects for each state
(δi + δj), state-pair fixed effects (δi,j), quarter fixed effects (δt), and state-quarter fixed effects

26

(δs,t). In this first step, we only include observations in which it is legally feasible for BHC b with
headquarters in state i to open a subsidiary in state j during quarter t. 8

As reported in Table 6, the gravity model can explain BHC investment in “foreign-states.”

First and foremost, across the various specifications, there is a negative relationship between a
BHC’s investment in a foreign state and the distance between the BHC’s county and the foreign

state. Distance, however, matters less when the BHC is headquartered in a comparatively urban
county, as demonstrated in regressions (2) – (5). Thus, there are good reasons for believing

that interstate bank deregulation between state i and state j will differentially affect BHCs in

state i, depending on their distance to state j and the nature of the county in which the BHC in

state i is headquartered. Second, the size of the foreign market matters for the foreign state

investment decisions of a BHC. As shown, BHCs are less likely to diversify into comparatively

small states and this is particularly pronounced effect for BHCs from more urban counties.

In the second step of the gravity-deregulation model, we construct a projected aggregate

diversity measure for each BHC in each quarter, where the aggregation is done across all

possible states into which the BHC can legally diversify. For observations in which a BHC is

legally permitted to open a subsidiary in a particular state, we use the projection share from the
estimated gravity models given in Table 6. For observations in which regulations prohibit a

BHC from opening a subsidiary in a state, we set the projected share equal to zero. Then, we use
these projected shares to compute the diversity index—the projected Herfindahl index of each
BHC assets across states. We use this predicted diversity index from the gravity-deregulation

model as the instrument for actual diversity in our first stage regression to assess the impact of
In this first step of the gravity-deregulation model, we tried several variations. Since many BHCs do not diversify,
the dependent variable has many zeros. Thus, we estimate a Tobit rather than a linear OLS model. This yields
stronger results than those reported below.

8

27

diversity on q. We use the various specifications from the “zero stage” equations from Table 6
to construct the first-stage instruments.

5.3. Results using BHC instruments based on the gravity-deregulation model
The first-stage results in Table 7 suggest that the instrumental variable is very useful in

explaining BHC diversity as the F-test of the excluded instruments is above ten. In this table, we

use regression (5) of Table 6, but the results hold for the other gravity models provided in

Table 6.

As shown in Table 7, the second-stage results indicate that geographic diversity reduces

Tobin’s q. By using time-varying, BHC-county-specific instrumental variables, this gravity-

deregulation strategy differentiates among BHCs within the same state and quarter. It identifies
the impact of BHC’s diversity on q, so we can condition on BHC and state-time fixed effects

throughout. Indeed, following Frankel and Romer (1999), all of the fixed-effects included in the

zero stage are also included in the first and second stages. 9

In columns (2) and (3), we show that the influence of diversification on Tobin’s q

operates primarily through changes in market capitalization rather than changes in other

components of Tobin’s q. This provides additional evidence that the findings on q do not simply

reflect accounting quirks around cross-state mergers and acquisitions that alter a bank’s book

value. Rather, the change in q reflects a change in the market’s valuation of the BHC.
9

Furthermore, Rubinstein (2011) has critiqued the Frankel and Romer (1999) approach because the fixed effects
from the zero stage enter in a nonlinear manner when aggregating to produce the instrument for the first-stage.
Thus, we also conducted the analyses in two ways to address this concern. First, we excluded all fixed effects from
the zero-stage. Second, we did the estimation in the zero-stage with the fixed effects, but did the projections to
form the instrumental variables while setting the coefficients on the fixed effects in the zero-stage to zero. All of
the results hold. Indeed the magnitude of the coefficient in the valuation regression increases markedly.

28

Columns (4)-(6) provide additional evidence on the robustness of the Table 7 findings.

Since some of the banks in our sample engage in international activities, we wanted to assess
whether the banks drive the results. As shown, the results are robust to excluding BHCs with
subsidiaries that engage in international activities. Moreover, we were concerned that there

might be accounting oddities around the time of BHC M&As. Although the results in columns

(2) and (3) suggest that accounting factors are not driving the results, we tried eliminating the

period immediately around M&As. The results are even stronger when excluding observations
during quarters when BHCs acquire or sell subsidiaries.

5.4. Advantages of the gravity-deregulation model and the economic effects
The BHC-county-level instrumental variable results in Table 7 have two particularly

valuable properties relative to the results based on state-level instruments (Table 5). First, the
BHC-county-level instruments differentiate among BHCs within the same state and quarter.

Although we control for state-quarter characteristics in the earlier analyses (including the time-

varying level of competition within each state), the state-time level instrumental variable

results only provide information on the “average” BHC in a state. But, the BHC-county-level

instrumental variable specification provides information on the average BHC within each

state’s county. This allows us to draw sharper inferences about the impact of BHC diversity on
valuations.

Second, the BHC-county-level instrumental variable results suggest that diversification

per se—not an intensification of bank competition triggered by interstate deregulation—is

driving the results. In particular, we were concerned that if state A signs an interstate banking
agreement with state B, then valuations of state A’s BHCs might fall because of greater

29

competition coming from state B’s banks, not because of an intensification of agency problems
caused by some of state A’s BHCs diversifying into state B. However, the county-level analyses
reduce these concerns for two reasons. First, they account for statewide, unobservable time-

varying changes, such as changes in competition within a state, by introducing state-quarter

fixed effects into the analyses. Second, the gravity-deregulation model distinguishes among
BHCs within the same state. This helps identify the impact of diversity on valuations by

controlling for changes in statewide bank competition resulting from the signing of interstate
banking agreements. To see this, consider state A, which is closed to “foreign” banks. Banks

within state A compete with one another. When state A deregulates with state B, competition
within state A intensifies. The interstate banking agreement affects state A’s entire banking

market since banks within state A compete with one another. Thus, by differentiating among

counties within state A, we show that only BHCs in treated counties that diversified into other

states experienced a drop in q; the drop in q cannot be due to a state-level effect because we are

differentiating by county. Under the assumption that a state is the relevant banking market,
these results suggest that geographic diversification lowered BHC valuations.

Economically, the BHC-county-level instrumental variable results—based on the

gravity-deregulation model—are substantially larger in magnitude than the results based on

state-level instruments. Regulatory induced changes in diversity that affect BHCs differently

depending on their location have large economic effects on valuations, reducing Tobin’s q by

between five and ten percent when a state goes from completely closed to completely open. As
the treatment becomes more refined, moving from a state-time treatment to a county-time

instrument, we better identify the impact of an exogenous increase of diversification on BHCs’
valuations—and, the estimated impact has a larger economic magnitude.

30

The results are consistent with the following view. First, the process of interstate bank

deregulation that started in 1978 increased the cross-state asset diversity of some BHCs.
Second, this increased diversity boosted the complexity of BHCs and intensified agency

problems, making it more difficult for small shareholders and creditors to monitor corporate
insiders and easier for insiders to extract larger private benefits from controlling these

financial institutions. Lower market valuations reflect such increase in agency problems due to
BHC diversity triggered by interstate bank deregulation.
6. Conclusions
This paper examines how an exogenous increase in the geographic diversity of a BHC’s

assets affects the market’s valuation of the BHC. We first use the state-specific, time-series

pattern of interstate bank deregulation to identify the exogenous component of the geographic

diversity of BHC assets and we then also incorporate a gravity model of BHC investments across
states to differentiate among BHCs within the same state. This allows us to draw more precise
inferences about the causal impact of geographic diversity on the valuation of firms than
previous research.

We find that increases in geographic diversity due to interstate bank deregulation

reduced BHC valuations. These results can be interpreted more broadly than simply providing
information about the increased complexity of monitoring geographically diffuse BHCs. The

results are consistent with the view that an exogenous increase in complexity—by making it
more difficult for outside investors to exert effective corporate control—allows corporate
insiders to extract larger private rents with adverse implications on firm value.

References

31

Acharya, V., Hasan, I., and Saunders, A., 2006, Should banks be diversified? Evidence from
individual bank loan portfolios, Journal of Business 79, 1355 – 1411.

Amel, D., 1993, State laws affecting the geographic expansion of commercial banks, Manuscript,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Berger, A., Demsetz, R., Strahan, P., 1999, The consolidation of the financial services industry:
causes, consequences, and implications for the future, Journal of Banking and Finance
23, 135 – 194.

Berger, A., Hanweck, G., Humphrey, D., 1987, Competitive viability in banking: Scale, scope, and
product mix economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 20, 501 – 520.
Berger, A., Humphrey, D., 1991, The dominance of inefficiencies over scale and product mix
economies in banking, Journal of Monetary Economics 28, 117 – 148.

Berger, P., Ofek, E., 1995, Diversification’s effect on firm value, Journal of Financial Economics
37, 39 – 65.

Boyd, J. H., Prescott, E.C., 1986, Financial intermediary-coalitions, Journal of Economics Theory
38, 211 – 232.
Brickley, J., Linck, J., Smith, C., Jr., 2003, Boundaries of the firm: evidence from the banking
industry, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 351 – 383.

Campa, J., Kedia, S., 2002, Explaining the diversification discount, Journal of Finance 57, 1731 –
1762.
Chandler, A., 1977, The Visible Hand, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Custodio, C., 2010, Mergers and acquisitions can explain the diversification discount, Arizona
State University, mimeo, W.P. Carey School of Business.
Degryse, H., Ongena, S., 2005, Distance, lending relationships, and competition, Journal of
Finance 60, 231 – 266.

Demsetz, R.S., Strahan, P.E., 1997, Diversification, size, and risk at bank holding companies,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 300 – 313.

Deng, S., Elyasiani, E., 2008, Geographic diversification, bank holding company value, and risk,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40, 1217 – 1238.
Denis, D. J., Denis D. K., Sarin, A., 1997, Agency problems, equity ownership, and corporate
diversification, Journal of Finance 52, 135 – 160.

32
Denis, D.J., Denis D.K., Yost, K., 2002, Global diversification, industrial diversification, and firm
value, Journal of Finance 57, 1951 – 1979.

Diamond, D. W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of Economic
Studies 51, 393 – 414.
Drucker, S., Puri, M., 2005, On the benefits of concurrent lending and underwriting, Journal of
Finance 60, 2763 – 2799.
Ferrier, G., Grosskopf, S., Hayes, K., Yaisawarng, S., 1993, Economies of diversification in the
banking industry: A frontier approach, Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 229 – 249.

Frankel, J., Romer, D., 1999, Does trade cause growth? American Economic Review, 89, 379 –
399.
Gertner, R., Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 1994, Internal vs. external capital markets, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109, 1211 – 1230.

Goldberg, Linda S., 2009, Understanding banking sector globalization, IMF Staff Papers 56, 171
– 197.
Graham, J., Lemmon, M., Wolf, J., 2002, Does corporate diversification destroy value? Journal of
Finance 57, 695–720.
Houston, J., James, C., Marcus, D., 1997, Capital market frictions and the role of internal capital
markets in banking, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 135 – 164.
Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P. E., 1996, The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
deregulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639 – 670.

Jensen, M., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 332 – 329.
Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W., 1986, Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and
ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305 – 360.

Jensen, M.C., Murphy, K.J., 1990, Performance pay and top management incentives, Journal of
Political Economy 98, 225 – 264.

Kroszner, R., Strahan, P., 1999, What drives deregulation? Economics and politics of the
relaxation of bank branching restrictions, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1437 –
1467.
Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2007, Is there a diversification discount in financial conglomerates?
Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 331 – 367.

33
Lang, L.H.P., Stulz, R.M., 1994, Tobin’s q, corporate diversification and firm performance,
Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248 – 1280.

Liberti, J., Mian, A., 2009, Estimating the effect of hierarchies on information use, Review of
Financial Studies 22, 4057 – 4090.

Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., 2002, Do conglomerate firms allocate resources inefficiently across
industries? Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 57, 721 – 767.

Mian, A., 2006, Distance Constraints: The limits of foreign lending in poor economies, Journal of
Finance, 61, 1465 – 1505.
Morgan, D., Rime, B., and Strahan, P., 2004, Bank integration and state business cycles,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1555 – 1584.

Petersen, M., Rajan, R., 2002, Does Distance Still Matter? The information revolution in small
business lending, Journal of Finance 57, 2533 – 2570.
Rajan, R., 1992, Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and arm’s length debt,
Journal of Finance 41, 1367 – 1400.

Rajan, R., Servaes, H., Zingales, L., 2000, The cost of diversity: the diversification discount and
inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35 – 80.
Rubinstein, Y., 2011, Estimating the impact of trade on income: trade volumes and trade
partners. London School of Economics, mimeo.

Saunders, A., Walter, I., 1994, Universal Banking in the United States: What Could We Gain?
What Could We Lose? Oxford University Press.

Servaes, H., 1996, The value of diversification during the conglomerate merger wave. Journal of
Finance 51, 1201 – 1225.
Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional rent-seeking
and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537 – 2564.
Stein, J., 2002, Information production and capital allocation: decentralized versus hierarchical
firms, Journal of Finance 57, 1891 – 1921.
Villalonga, B., 2004, Diversification discount or premium? New evidence from the business
information tracking series, Journal of Finance 59, 479 – 506.

-3

-2

-1

0

1

q before and after geographic expansion

-10

-5
0
5
Quarters before/after geographic diversification

10

Figure 1. The Dynamic Impact of Geographic Expansion on q. This figure plots the
impact of a geographic expansion on BHC’s q. We consider a window of 20 quarters,
spanning from 10 quarters before diversification until 10 quarters after geographic
expansion. We report estimated coefficients from the following regression:
qit = α + β−10 D−10t + β−9 D−9t + ...+ β10 D10t + ε it , where D-j equals one for banks in the jth quarter
before expansion, D+j equals one for banks in the jth quarter after expansion. Our
coefficients are centered on the quarter of expansion. The solid line denotes the estimated
coefficients (β-10, β-9 ...), while the dashed lines represent the 95% confidence interval.

35

Differences in q

95

q in state 1 before banking agreement
100
105
110

Average q before bilateral banking agreements

96

98

100
102
104
q in state 2 before banking agreement

Figure 2. Differences in q before (bilateral) interstate banking agreement. This figure
plots the average q in state 1 against the average q in state 2 before both states remove their
interstate banking. The dashed line represents the linear relationship, computed from an
OLS regression.

106

36
Table 1: Summary Statistics

Nondiversified bank holding companies

Diversified bank holding companies

N

Mean

Std.Dev.

Min.

Max.

Median

N

Mean

Std.Dev.

Min.

Max.

Median

Tobin's Q
Fraction of assets held by out-of-state-banks
1 - Herfindahl index of assets across states
Number of states
Number of subsidiaries
Income diversity
Asset diversity
=1 if BHC has subsidiary with international activity
Share of assets acquired or sold in quarter
Equity (in $millions)
Total assets (in $ millions)
Net interest income (in $ millions)
Total operating income (in $ millions)
Return on equity
Average distance between HQ and subsidiaries
Capital-to-asset ratio
Growth of total assets

21,837
21,833
21,833
21,837
21,837
21,268
21,706
21,837
21,834
21,837
21,837
21,277
21,277
20,893
21,755
21,837
20,797

105.76
0
0
1
1.99
0.64
0.77
0.03
6.14
227.23
2,793.69
23.03
57.30
3.00
5.33
8.68
0.03

5.70
0
0
0
2.62
0.12
0.17
0.16
21.80
837.51
1.11E+04
65.50
219.01
1.58
12.78
2.32
0.05

94.95
0
0
1
1
0.02
0.00
0
0.00
1.72
77.28
-77.54
1.69
-9.61
0
0.48
-0.08

130.59
0
0
1
38
1
1
1
96.68
2.07E+04
2.99E+05
1,195.28
5,287.60
6.81
893.21
40.87
0.40

104.85
0
0
1
1
0.63
0.80
0
0.00
67.68
792.34
7.88
16.07
3.18
0.00
8.43
0.02

6,500
6,497
6,487
6,500
6,500
6,443
6,395
6,500
6,500
6,500
6,500
6,444
6,444
6,339
6,500
6,500
6,317

106.17
0.19
0.43
3.20
8.41
0.74
0.81
0.24
10.51
3,187.83
4.21E+04
308.66
927.79
3.31
91.38
8.03
0.03

6.17
0.17
0.26
1.86
9.62
0.12
0.14
0.42
23.41
1.16E+04
1.52E+05
979.57
3,112.60
1.58
125.52
1.81
0.06

95.00
0.00
0.00
2
2
0.06
0.00
0
0.00
11.63
150.62
-1.57
-685.44
-9.55
1.13
3.01
-0.08

130.69
0.90
1.00
14
72
1.00
1.00
1
93.80
1.47E+05
2.36E+06
1.29E+04
4.57E+04
6.81
807.80
17.76
0.40

104.80
0.14
0.40
3
5
0.73
0.84
0
0.00
575.57
7,146.60
64.97
155.00
3.54
47.13
7.95
0.02

Growth of total operating income

20,250

0.03

0.08

-0.26

0.59

0.02

6,208

0.03

0.08

-0.26

0.59

0.02

This table shows summary statistics for the used samples. Banks are 'nondiversified' if they have subsidiaries in only one state. 'Diversified' banks have subsidiaries in at least two states. The sample ranges from the second quarter of
1986 to the last quarter of 2007. State-quarter observations for 756 BHCs.

37
Table 2: Differences between Diversified and Undiversified Bank Holding Companies
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable

Income
diversity

Asset
diversity

Return on
equity

Ln(Total
assets)

Diversification dummy

0.090***

0.024***

0.329***

2.316***

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.026)

(0.035)









28,476

28,696

27,946

29,732

State-quarter fixed effects

Observations

This table reports regression results from a state-quarter fixed effects OLS analysis. The dependent variable is given in the second row. Diversification
dummy is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if a bank holding company has subsidiaries in other states, and zero otherwise. Income Diversity
is given as 1 - |(Net Interest Income - Total Noninterest Income)/( Total Operating Income ) |, Asset diversity is defined as 1 - |( Net Loans - Other Earning
Assets)/( Total Earning Assets ) |.
State-specific time dummies for each quarter are used. Standard errors are robust, clustered at the state-quarter level
and reported in parentheses below. Significance stars are: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

38
Table 3: Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Value
(1)
Diversification dummy

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.158***

(6)

-0.305

(0.269)

(0.313)
1.534***

-0.395**

(0.129)
Ln(Average distance between HQ and subsidiaries)

(0.161)
0.284***

-0.056**

(0.020)

(0.026)

Quarter fixed effects









State fixed effects









Bank holding company fixed effects

28,337

(8)

(0.096)
3.189***

1 - Herfindahl index of assets across states

Observations

(7)

-0.205**

(0.072)
Fraction of assets held by out-of-state-banks

(5)

28,330

28,320

28,255

















28,337

28,330

28,320

28,255

This table reports regression results from a fixed effects OLS analysis. The dependent variable is Tobin's q and given as (Capitalization + Perpetual Preferred Stock + Total Liabilities and Minority Interest)/(Total
Assets). For expositional purposes, Tobin's q is multiplied by 100. Diversification dummy is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if a bank holding company has subsidiaries in another state, and zero
otherwise. 'Fraction of assets held in out of state subsidiaries' is the fraction of assets that are in affiliated subsidiaries of a holding company that are not located in the same state as the bank holding company. '1Herfindahl index of assets across states' is 1 - the sum of squared share of assets held in different states. Ln(Average Distance between HQ and subsidiaries) is the log of the average distance in miles between a
bank holding company headquarters’ county and the county of its affiliated subsidiary banks. Regressions in columns (1) through (4) include state and time dummies for each quarter (not reported). Regressions in
columns (5) through (8) include bank holding company and quarter fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors are robust, clustered at the state-quarter level and reported in parentheses. Significance stars are: * p
< 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

39

Table 4: Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Value: Controls

1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across states
Median q in state and quarter
Market concentration (HHI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.930***

-0.777***

-0.458***

-1.187***

-0.374**

-2.150***

(0.133)

(0.128)

(0.139)

(0.194)

(0.182)

(0.305)

0.840***

0.618***

0.644***

0.655***

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

-1.438***

-0.928***

-1.002***

-1.048***

(0.241)

(0.270)

(0.340)

(0.340)

3.852***

2.943***

2.959***

2.745***

-0.672

(0.596)

(0.476)

(0.473)

(0.558)

(0.602)

0.989***

0.434***

0.420***

0.469***

0.591***

(0.035)

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.026)

(0.029)

Capital-to-asset ratio

0.267***

-0.027

-0.037**

-0.013

0.118***

(0.021)

(0.019)

(0.019)

(0.023)

(0.024)

Growth of total operating income

-4.950***

-3.904***

-4.034***

-4.364***

-1.091***

(0.440)

(0.328)

(0.329)

(0.397)

(0.422)

Ln(Total operating income)

6.836***

7.294***

7.486***

7.789***

0.934**

(0.313)

(0.349)

(0.348)

(0.424)

(0.386)

Income diversity

-6.912***

-5.940***

-5.770***

-6.017***

-5.466***

(0.324)

(0.369)

(0.368)

(0.434)

(0.456)

-1.121***

-0.369**

-0.329*

-0.188

-1.207***

(0.192)

(0.183)

(0.182)

(0.222)

(0.231)

-0.734***

-0.424***

0.029

-0.407**

-0.249

(0.126)

(0.151)

(0.160)

(0.199)

(0.251)

0.003***

0.004***

0.004***

0.005***

0.004***

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.716***

-5.995***

-7.467***

-7.679***

-8.066***

0.263

(0.029)

(0.312)

(0.360)

(0.358)

(0.437)

(0.361)





Growth of total assets
Return on equity

Asset diversity
=1 if BHC has subsidiary with international activity
Share of assets acquired or sold in quarter
Ln(Total assets)
Growth of state personal income
Growth of state personal income (lag)

State fixed effects

3.907

-1.853

2.565

2.379

(2.684)

(2.830)

(2.658)

(2.626)

6.931***

-2.663

3.848

3.837

(2.679)

(3.025)

(2.840)

(2.818)











Subsidiary state fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects
Bank holding company fixed effects











State-quarter fixed effects



Subsidiary state quarter fixed effects
Observations

28,320

25,505

25,505

25,505

25,505

25,505

This table reports regression results from a fixed effects OLS analysis. The dependent variable is Tobin's q and given as (Capitalization + Perpetual Preferred Stock
+ Total Liabilities and Minority Interest)/(Total Assets). For expositional purposes, Tobin's q is multiplied by 100. '1-Herfindahl index of assets across states' is 1 the sum of squared share of assets held in different states by the parent bank holding company. 'Median q in state and quarter' is the median value of Tobin's q in a
state in that quarter. 'Market Concentration (HHI)' is a Herfindahl Index of banking asset concentration in a holding company's market. 'Income Diversity' is given as
1 - |(Net Interest Income - Total Noninterest Income)/( Total Operating Income )|, 'Asset Diversity' is defined as 1 - |( Net Loans - Other Earning Assets)/( Total
Earning Assets ) |. 'Capital-Asset-Ratio' is the fraction of bank equity over total assets, 'Return on Equity' is defined as Net income / Equity. The used fixed effects
model is indicated in the table: 'State fixed effects' account for the location of the holding company headquarter by including dummy variables, that take on the
value of one if a holding company is headquartered in that state, and zero otherwise. The regression models labeled 'Subsidiary-state fixed effects' include a set of
dummy variables that take on the value of one for each state a bank holding company has subsidiaries in. Standard errors are robust, clustered at the state-quarter
level and reported in parentheses. Significance stars are: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 5: Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Value: Instrumental Variables based on Interstate Branching Deregulation
Panel A: Second Stage

1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across states

Bank and macro controls
State fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects
Observations
F Test of instruments' joint significance

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-1.912
(2.639)

-1.822
(1.162)

-3.291***
(1.028)

-14.081*
(7.494)

-11.264***
(3.848)

-22.442**
(10.405)

-17.341***
(5.151)

-12.620***
(4.842)

-11.728***
(3.185)





































25,431
32.08

25,431
67.30

25,431
15.94

25,431
6.864

25,431
23.38

25,431
6.335

25,431
19.88

25,431
16.58

25,431
36.74





Excluded instrument:
Years since interstate branching deregulation
(Years since interstate branching deregulation)2
Years since interstate branching deregulation [nonparametric]
Ln(Number of accessible states)
Ln(Number of accessible states - weighted)
Ln(Market population)
Ln(Market population - weighted)
Ln(Market potential)
Ln(Market potential - weighted)










This panel reports 2nd stage regression results from 2SLS analysis. The dependent variable is Tobin's q and given as (Capitalization + Perpetual Preferred Stock + Total Liabilities and Minority Interest)/(Total Assets). For expositional purposes,
Tobin's q is multiplied by 100. The endogenous variable '1-Herfindahl index of assets across states' is 1 - the sum of squared share of assets held in different states by the parent bank holding company. The excluded instruments are given in the
rows titled 'Instruments': 'Years since interstate branching deregulation' is the number of years since the liberalization of interstate branching restrictions. 'Number of accessible states' is the number of states a bank holding company can enter
because of bilateral or unilateral branching agreements. It is zero if a bank holding company is not allowed to branch into any other state apart from the state where it is headquartered in. 'Market Population' is the total population, excluding the
holding company's headquarter state's population, a bank holding company can access due to bilateral or unilateral branching agreements. 'Market Potential' is 'Market Population' divided by the population of a holding company's headquarter
state. As indicated, these variables are weighted by the relative distance of each state to every other state whereas the closest state receives a weight of one and the farthest state receives a weight of zero.
State and time dummies for each quarter are used. Standard errors are robust, clustered at the state-quarter level and reported in parentheses. Significance stars are: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

41

Panel B: First Stage

Years since interstate branching deregulation

(1)

(2)

0.008***
(0.001)

0.037***
(0.003)
-0.003***
(0.000)

(Years since interstate branching deregulation)2

(3)

Ln(Number of accessible states)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.018***
(0.007)

Ln(Number of accessible states - weighted)

0.035***
(0.007)

Ln(Market population)

0.011**
(0.004)

Ln(Market population - weighted)

0.020***
(0.004)

Ln(Market potential)

0.018***
(0.004)

Ln(Market potential - weighted)

0.028***
(0.005)
0.079***
(0.012)
0.115***
(0.013)
0.129***
(0.013)
0.134***
(0.013)
0.146***
(0.014)
0.143***
(0.014)
0.154***
(0.015)
0.161***
(0.016)
0.160***
(0.016)
0.145***
(0.017)

=1 if one year after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if two years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if three years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if four years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if five years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if six years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if seven years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if eight years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if nine years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise
=1 if more than 10 years after interstate branching deregulation, 0 otherwise

Bank and macro Controls
State fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects





































F Test of joint significance
Observations

32.08
25,431

67.30
25,431

15.94
25,431

6.864
25,431

23.38
25,431

6.335
25,431

19.88
25,431

16.58
25,431

36.74
25,431

42
Table 6: The Relationship between Population, Distance and BHC Asset Holdings: Zero-Stage

Distance (in 100 miles)
Ln(population ratio)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-1.165***
(0.006)
-0.827***
(0.005)

-1.100***
(0.008)
-0.954***
(0.008)
0.257***
(0.011)
-0.134***
(0.013)
0.002***
(0.001)

-1.912***
(0.013)
-3.473***
(0.129)
0.208***
(0.014)
-0.111***
(0.013)
0.002**
(0.001)

-0.243***
(0.012)
-0.035
(0.042)
0.032***
(0.005)
0.035***
(0.003)
-0.002***
(0.000)

-1.948***
(0.014)
-5.829***
(0.248)
0.369***
(0.026)
-0.097***
(0.014)
0.001
(0.001)







(County population in state-quarter above 66th percentile) * Ln(Population ratio)
(County population in state-quarter above 66th percentile) * Distance (in 100 miles)
County population in state-quarter above 66th percentile




State fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects
Bank holding company fixed effects
State-pair fixed effects
State-quarter fixed effects
Observations


1,123,007

1,122,940

1,122,940

1,122,940

1,122,940

This table reports regression results from a state-quarter fixed effects OLS analysis. The dependent variable is the share of assets (in %) a BHC holds in a state. 'Population ratio' is the
total population in a BHC's home state divided by the population in state A; 'Distance in 100 miles' is the distance between a BHC's home county and the capital of state A (in 100 miles).
Standard errors are robust and reported in parentheses. Significance stars are: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

43

Table 7: Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Value: BHC-Specific Instrumental Variables Based on a Gravity-Deregulation Model
(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: Components of q

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel B: Sample: BHCs without subsidiaries that engage in
international activities
Exclude quarter if a bank holding company
acquires/ sells a subsidiary

1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across states

Bank and macro controls
Bank holding company fixed effects
State-quarter fixed effects
Observations
F-test of instruments' joint significance

Tobin's Q

Market
Capitalization /
Total Assets

(Total Liabilities +
Perpetual Preferred
Stock)/ Total Assets

… in that quarter

… up to two quarters
after acquisition/sale.

-33.740***

-31.718**

-0.322

(12.237)

(12.478)

(0.845)

-28.338***

-40.632***

-55.587***

(9.298)

(12.704)

(20.366)

























24,524
12.84

24,751
11.98

24,565
12.08

22,762
14.35

19,597
12.47

18,022
8.182










Fixed effects in gravity model:
Bank holding company fixed effects
State-quarter fixed effects










This panel reports 2nd stage regression results from 2SLS analysis. The dependent variable is given in the column header. The endogenous variable '1-Herfindahl index of assets across states' is 1 - the sum of squared share of assets
held in different states by the parent bank holding company. The excluded instrument is Herfindahl Index of assets across states (Predicted), which computed as follows:
Using a gravity-deregulation model, we estimate how (a) the distance between a BHC's home county and the capital of state A and (b) the difference in population between a BHC's home state and state A, and (c) an indicator
variable taking on the value of one if a BHC is located in a populous county are related to the share of assets a BHC holds in state A using a OLS regression. Using coefficient from this regression, we predict the share a BHC holds
in a state and quarter, where we impose that BHC's projected holdings of assets are zero in states that they cannot enter because of interstate bank regulations. Finally, we aggregate the information for each BHC at the BHC-quarter
level and compute the predicted Herfindahl Index of assets across state (Predicted). Standard errors are robust and reported in parentheses. Significance stars are: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

