                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PROSPECTS FOR NUCLEAR POWER

                                            Lucas W. Davis

                                         Working Paper 17674
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17674


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2011




I am thankful to David Autor, Severin Borenstein, Chad Jones, John List, John Parsons, Tim Taylor,
Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at the University of Tennessee, Brookings Institute, University
of California Energy Institute, Berkeley Energy and Resources Collaborative Symposium, California
Public Utilities Commission, and the University of Chicago for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lucas W. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Prospects for Nuclear Power
Lucas W. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 17674
December 2011
JEL No. L51,L94,Q40,Q53

                                              ABSTRACT

The prospects for a revival of nuclear power were dim even before the partial reactor meltdowns at
the Fukushima nuclear plant. Nuclear power has long been controversial because of concerns about
nuclear accidents, proliferation risk, and the storage of spent fuel. These concerns are real and important.
In addition, however, a key challenge for nuclear power has been the high cost of construction for
nuclear plants. Construction costs are high enough that it becomes difficult to make an economic argument
for nuclear, even before incorporating these external costs. This is particularly true in countries like
the United States where recent technological advances have dramatically increased the availability
of natural gas.


Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
Prospects for Nuclear Power
Lucas W. Davis
December 9, 2011

Lucas Davis is Assistant Professor at the Haas School of Business, University of California,
Berkeley, California. His e-mail address is <ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu>.



     In September 2007 the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) received a license
application for a proposed nuclear power reactor to be built in Southern Texas. The application was
significant because it marked the first new license application in almost three decades. During the
following year the NRC went on to receive 16 license applications for a total of 24 proposed reactors.
The time was right, so it seemed, for a nuclear power renaissance in the United States. Natural gas
prices were at their highest level ever in real terms. The 2005 Energy Policy Act provided loan
guarantees, production tax credits, and other subsidies for new nuclear plants. And many believed
that the United States was close to enacting legislation that would limit emissions of carbon
dioxide.

     Then everything changed. Natural gas prices fell sharply in 2009. Legislation to limit
carbon emissions stalled in Congress. The global recession slowed the growth of electricity
demand. And, in March 2011, an earthquake and tsunami knocked out power at the Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Plant in northern Japan, causing partial meltdowns at the plant’s three active
reactors and large-scale releases of radioactive steam. Since 2009 only a single additional license
application has been filed with the NRC. The project proposed for Southern Texas has been
cancelled and few of the applications pending with the NRC are moving forward. Fukushima has
had perhaps an even stronger impact worldwide leading Germany, Switzerland, and Italy to
announce plans to phase out their nuclear power programs and causing China to suspend approvals
for new reactors.

     Nuclear power has long been controversial because of concerns about nuclear accidents,
storage of spent fuel, and about how the spread of nuclear power might raise risks of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. These concerns are real and important. However, emphasizing these concerns
implicitly suggests that unless these issues are taken into account, nuclear power would
otherwise be cost-effective compared to other forms of electricity generation. This implication is



                                                  1
unwarranted. Throughout the history of nuclear power, a key challenge has been the high cost of
construction for nuclear plants. Construction costs are high enough that it becomes difficult to
make an economic argument for nuclear, even before incorporating these external factors. This is
particularly true in countries like the United States where recent technological advances have
dramatically increased the availability of natural gas.

       The chairman of one of the largest U.S. nuclear companies recently said that his company
would not break ground on a new nuclear plant until the price of natural gas was more than double
today’s level and carbon emissions cost $25 per ton (Wald, 2010). This seems to pretty well
summarize the current economics of nuclear power. Yes, there is a certain confluence of factors that
could make nuclear power a viable economic option. Otherwise, it seems unlikely that there will
be much of a renaissance.



The First Boom and Bust

       This recent ebb and flow in the nuclear power sector recalls a much larger boom and bust that
occurred starting in the 1960s and 1970s. Figure 1 plots U.S. nuclear power reactor orders from
1950 to 2000. By 1974 there were 54 operating reactors in the United States with another 197 on
order. This was a period of great enthusiasm for nuclear power. U.S. coal prices were at their
highest level ever in real terms and utilities were forecasting robust growth in electricity demand
into the distant future.1 The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (1974) predicted that by the end of
the twentieth century half of all U.S. electricity generation would come from nuclear power.

       Instead, reactor orders fell precipitously after 1974. Over the next several years not only
were new reactors not being ordered, but utilities began suspending construction on existing
orders. Less than half of the reactors on order in 1974 were ever completed. Much has been
written about the problems that faced the nuclear industry during this period (see, for example,
Joskow and Yellin, 1980; Joskow, 1982; McCallion, 1995). Part of the explanation is that
concerns about safety and the environment began to take a more central role. In 1974, the NRC

   1
     For historic coal prices see U.S. Department of Energy (2011a), Table 7.9 “Coal Prices, 1949-2010”. Natural
gas was much less important during the 1970s because modern combined cycle technology had not yet been widely
introduced and because shortages associated with federal price controls on natural gas limited the availability of
natural gas for electric generation.




                                                        2
was created to replace an organization called the Atomic Energy Commission that had been
charged with both regulating and promoting nuclear power, a combination of duties which many
viewed to be in direct conflict. This new organization was to oversee the safety and security of all
aspects of nuclear power, including the initial licensing of reactors, the handling of radioactive
materials, and the storage and disposal of spent fuels. Beginning in the 1970s it also became more
difficult to site nuclear power plants. Communities began challenging nuclear power projects in
federal and state courts, leading to extended construction delays and changing public attitudes
about nuclear power.

      This was also a period of structural change for utility regulation. During the 1950s and
1960s economies of scale, decreasing commodity costs, and relatively low inflation led to steady
decreases in the nominal cost of electricity. Public utility commissions and consumers were
pacified with prices that remained essentially the same in nominal terms year after year. Joskow
(1974) explains that inflation in the early 1970s, “wreaked havoc on this process that appeared to
function so smoothly before... and most major firms found that they had to raise prices (some for
the first time in 25 years) and trigger formal regulatory reviews.” These reviews led to increased
scrutiny of utilities’ capital expenditures, and in particular, investments in nuclear plants.

      Then in March 1979, one of the reactors at the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania
suffered a partial core meltdown. Although not a single person was injured, the accident
intensified public concerns about nuclear safety. The combination of severe public concern about
the risk of nuclear accidents and escalating construction costs put nuclear projects in an
extremely vulnerable position. By the time the Chernobyl disaster occurred in April 1986 the
industry was already moribund. Today in the United States, there are a total of 104 nuclear power
reactors at 65 sites, accounting for 20% of U.S. electricity generation.2 All of these reactors were
ordered prior to 1974.

      Nuclear reactor construction outside the United States followed a similar pattern with a
substantial boom in the 1960s and 1970s, followed by a long period of decline (see Figure 2). In
addition to the United States, the other large-scale early adopters of nuclear power were the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Canada, and Japan. By the 1990s, construction had moved

2
  According to U.S. Department of Energy, 2011a, Table 8.2a, U.S. net generation of electricity in 2010 included
coal (45 percent), natural gas (24 percent), nuclear (20 percent), hydroelectric power (7 percent), and wind and other
renewables (4 percent). Davis and Wolfram (2011) examine in detail operating performance at U.S. nuclear plants.



                                                          3
to Eastern Europe and in particular, Russia and the Ukraine. The increase in construction 2008-
2010 comes primarily from China, which today has more reactors under construction than any
other country.



Historical Construction Costs

      Nuclear power plants are characterized by high construction costs and relatively low
operating costs. Later in the paper, I present estimates of “levelized costs” which facilitate
comparisons with other generating technologies with different cost profiles. It is worth starting
with construction costs, however, because they represent a large share of the total cost of nuclear
power.

      Nuclear power plants are enormous facilities with high construction costs. The sheer scale
of commercial-sized nuclear reactors means that most components must be specially designed and
constructed, often with few potential suppliers worldwide. These components are then assembled
on site and structures are constructed to house the assembled components. All stages of design,
construction, assembly, and testing require highly-skilled, highly-specialized engineers and
differences in reactor design and site-specific factors have historically meant that there was little
scope for spreading design and production costs across multiple projects.

      Figure 3 plots “overnight” construction costs for selected U.S. nuclear reactors from U.S.
DOE (1986). The overnight cost is the hypothetical cost of a plant if it could be built
instantly, and thus excludes financing and other costs incurred during plant construction. Costs
are reported in year 2010 dollars per kilowatt of capacity. The figure reveals a pronounced increase
in construction costs, particularly for plants completed during the 1980s.3

      Plants also kept taking longer and longer to build. As shown in Table 1, reactors ordered
during the 1950s took on average about 5 years to build, whereas reactors ordered during the
1970s took on average 14 years. Most studies attribute this increase in construction time to a

3
  The figure includes predicted costs from the same source for a handful of reactors that were under construction but
not yet in operation in 1986. See Koomey and Hultman (2007) for a more recent study of U.S. nuclear construction
costs, and Mooz, 1978, Komanoff, 1981, and Zimmerman, 1982 for related studies. Joskow and Rose (1985)
examine increases in construction costs for coal plants during the same period finding significant cost increases
associated with measurable environmental-related technologies such as scrubbers and cooling towers, as well as a large
increase in residual real costs that they attribute to changes in environmental regulation and to an unexplained decline
in construction productivity.



                                                           4
rapidly evolving regulatory process. A joke in the industry was that a reactor vessel could not be
shipped until the total weight of all required paperwork had equaled the weight of the reactor
vessel itself. Regulation also contributed directly to construction costs. The NRC implemented
revised safety codes and inspection requirements leading in several cases to extensive reactor
redesigns (Cox and Gilbert, 1991; McCallion, 1995).

      An interesting point of comparison is France. After the United States, France has more
nuclear reactors than any other country and 75% of electricity generation in France comes from
nuclear power. Grubler (2010) finds that the 58 reactors constructed in France’s main nuclear
program were constructed at an average cost that increased over time from $1,000 per kilowatt in
the 1970s, to $2,300 per kilowatt in the 1990s. The cost escalation is less severe than is observed
in the United States, but still somewhat surprising. As I discuss later, in many ways the French
nuclear program was the ideal setting for encouraging learning-by-doing, so one might have
expected costs to decrease over time.



Financing Risks

      The long period of time required for construction means that the cost of capital is a critical
parameter for evaluating the viability of nuclear power. Even for a low cost of capital, the
extended construction period imposes financing costs that are a substantial part of total project
costs. However, nuclear projects typically face a cost of capital well above the risk-free rate.
These are large-scale projects with a historically high risk of default and the high cost of capital
reflects the fact that there are a number of sources of risk that threaten the profitability, and even
viability, of a nuclear project.

      More so than in most other investments, nuclear power plants face substantial regulatory
risk. The NRC has recently adopted several new procedures intended to streamline the regulatory
process. These reforms include pre-approving standard reactor designs, an early site permitting
process, and combining construction and operating licenses which previously were applied for
separately. It remains to be seen how these procedures will work in practice. Regulatory approval
is also required at the state and local level and there is precedent for this being a real constraint
on plants. For example, in 1989 New York Governor Mario Cuomo and the Long Island
Lighting Company closed the Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant over long-standing concerns about


                                                  5
how nearby residents would be evacuated in the event of an emergency. The plant was 100 percent
completed and had been connected to the grid, yet was never used to produce a single kilowatt hour
of commercial electricity.

     Nuclear power is also sensitive to federal energy policy. The enthusiasm for nuclear power
in 2007 and 2008 was driven in part by the prospect of a federal cap on carbon emissions, and so
when the key legislative vehicle (H.R. 2454, the “Waxman Markey bill”) stalled in the Senate in
2009, it was a significant blow to the economic viability of new nuclear plants. In the last few
years, the Obama administration and some members of Congress have voiced support for a federal
“clean energy standard” under which a proportion of total electricity generation would be required
to come from sources that do not generate carbon emissions. Such a policy could be a considerable
boost for nuclear power, but the exact form of such legislation or the likelihood as to whether it
would be adopted is unclear.

     Investors in nuclear power also face the risk that fossil fuel prices could decrease. In the
United States, natural gas prices typically determine the marginal cost of electricity, so a decrease
in natural gas prices reduces profits for nuclear plants who sell power in wholesale electricity
markets. Global availability of natural gas has increased dramatically in recent years with
improvements in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing technology. Natural gas producers
have long known that shale and other rock deposits contain large amounts of natural gas. It was
not until recently, however, that these resources could be accessed at reasonably low cost.

     Figure 4 plots U.S. natural gas prices 1990-2011 and a price forecast through 2030. During
the long period of relatively low natural gas prices there was not a single new nuclear plant
ordered in the United States, and the surge in orders in 2007 and 2008 came at the same time
that U.S. natural gas prices reached their highest level ever in real terms. The baseline forecast
from Department of Energy (2011b) predicts that U.S. natural gas prices will remain under $5
through 2022. If true, this is a significant challenge for nuclear power.

     Finally, investments in nuclear power face considerable technology risk. Over the 40-plus
year lifetime of a nuclear plant, the available sources of electricity generation could change
considerably. An alternative, lower-cost technology could come along, perhaps a technology that is
known today such as wind or solar that quickly becomes more cost-effective. An alternative
technology for carbon abatement could become practical, like some form of carbon capture and



                                                  6
storage, which would render moot one of the advantages of nuclear power. New energy
efficiency technologies might reduce electricity demand.



Recent International Experience

     More recent evidence on construction costs comes from nuclear reactors currently being built
in Olkiluoto, Finland and Flamanville, France. Much has been written about these reactors because
they are the first new reactors to be built in Europe in many years, and because they use a “next
generation” design which incorporates several new safety features into a reactor design that is
widely used around the world. Construction in Finland began in 2005 and was expected to be
completed in 2009 at cost of about $2,800 per kilowatt. A series of problems and delays
have now pushed operations back to 2013, and costs are now estimated to be about twice the
original estimate. Similarly, construction in France began in 2007 and the reactor was expected
to be completed by 2011 at a cost of $2,900 per kilowatt. Completion has now been pushed
back to 2014 and the project is reported to be 50 percent over budget.

     These experiences provide a reminder about problems that can occur during reactor
construction, particularly given the lack of recent construction experience. Both projects were
delayed substantially when federal safety inspectors found problems. In Finland, the concrete
foundation of the reactor building was found to be too porous. In France, inspectors found cracks
in the concrete foundation and steel reinforcements in the wrong places. Project managers have
been blamed in both projects for hiring inexperienced contractors and for providing insufficient
oversight.

     Construction costs have tended to be lower elsewhere. Du and Parsons (2009) report a mean
overnight cost of $3,100 per kilowatt from five reactors completed in Korea and Japan between
2004 and 2006. Construction costs from plants recently completed in China are reported to be
even lower and an important area for future research is to examine these costs in detail.

     Several studies have attempted to synthesize this recent international construction
experience with historical U.S. data and engineering studies to estimate current construction
costs for the United States. Table 2 reports estimates of overnight construction cost from two
such studies. MIT (2009) estimates $4,200 per kilowatt of capacity for nuclear, compared to




                                                 7
$2,400 and $900 per kilowatt of capacity for coal and natural gas. U.S. Department of Energy
(2010) predicts somewhat higher costs particularly for nuclear plants, citing increased prices for
plant components and key commodities and arguing that costs will be driven up by the fact that
there is a limited set of construction firms with the ability to complete a project of this scale.
Both studies were completed prior to Fukushima and thus do not incorporate any cost increases
due to recent elevated regulatory scrutiny.

     Adding financing costs to these estimates implies that a typical two-reactor 2,000 megawatt
plant could cost more than $12 billion. This is probably not unreasonable. The long period of
time since nuclear power plants were constructed in the United States means that the relevant
experience that had been accumulated by companies involved with nuclear engineering and plant
construction has atrophied substantially (Joskow and Parsons, 2009). There is some scope for
importing nuclear engineers and other professionals who have worked on more recent nuclear
projects in other countries, but the overall level of nuclear construction activity worldwide over
the last 20 years has been so low that there is a limited amount of available global talent.
Moreover, the supply of nuclear plant components is now more limited than it was during the
first wave of nuclear power plant construction. For example, there is currently only one facility
in the world that can produce the nuclear-grade heavy-steel reactor vessel needed for a boiling
water reactor and there is currently a long waiting period for these forgings and for other key
nuclear components (Ives, McCabe and Gilmartin, 2010).

     There is a great deal of uncertainty about these construction cost estimates. This
uncertainty is itself a barrier to investment. Pindyck (1993) uses a model of irreversible
investment to illustrate how uncertainty over the prices of construction inputs and over
government regulation affecting construction costs can lead investors to delay investment on
nuclear projects. One of the economic arguments made in support of the subsidies for new
nuclear plants in the 2005 Energy Policy Act was that they would help resolve this uncertainty
about construction costs.



Levelized Cost Estimates

     The total cost of producing electricity depends both on construction costs and on operations
and maintenance expenditures, including fuel. These variable costs tend to be low for nuclear,


                                                8
potentially offsetting the higher cost of construction. Table 3 reports “levelized” costs for
electricity generated in the United States from nuclear, coal, and natural gas, the three primary
forms of baseload electricity generation. These estimates are based on a cash flow model
developed in an ongoing series of studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT,
2003; MIT, 2009; Joskow, 2006; Du and Parsons, 2009; Joskow and Parsons, 2009). For these
estimates all costs including construction, operation, maintenance and fuel are calculated and
discounted back to the present using an assumed cost of capital. This total cost is then
“levelized” over the lifetime of a plant in constant dollars to yield the long-run average cost of
producing a kilowatt hour of electricity. This is equivalent to the real price per kilowatt hour that
the plant would need to receive over its lifetime in order to break even.

     Under the baseline assumptions nuclear is not competitive with either coal or natural gas.
The first row reports the base case estimates reported in MIT (2009). The levelized cost of
nuclear power is 8.7 cents per kilowatt hour, compared to 6.5 cents for coal, and 6.7 cents for
natural gas. This gap widens in the second row after updating these estimates to reflect higher
construction cost estimates from U.S. DOE (2010). The third row updates the estimates to reflect
changes in fuel prices since 2009. Uranium prices have increased modestly, but fuel expenditures
represent a relatively small proportion of the total cost of nuclear power and at this higher price
even after including costs for conversion, enrichment, and fuel fabrication, nuclear fuel costs are
still less than one cent per kilowatt hour. Moreover, the medium to long-run supply of uranium is
highly elastic, with substantial known reserves worldwide with a cost of recovery below current
uranium prices (MIT, 2003, Appendix 5.E; OECD 2009). Fossil fuel prices are extremely
important for the prospects for nuclear power and the cost estimates in third row reflect somewhat
higher coal prices but also considerably lower natural gas prices. With these updated prices the
levelized cost of electricity from natural gas is just above 5 cents per kilowatt hour, compared to
more than 10 cents per kilowatt hour for nuclear.

     These estimates follow the MIT studies in applying a somewhat higher cost of capital to
nuclear power. As discussed earlier, this reflects the high risk of default and numerous forms of
risk faced with nuclear projects. It is worth noting, however, that even without this risk premium
nuclear still has higher levelized cost than coal or natural gas. The model also assumes a 40-year
lifetime for nuclear, coal, and natural gas plants. Over half of U.S. nuclear plants have received
license extensions to 60 years. Incorporating a longer lifetime into the model makes nuclear look


                                                 9
better, but not by very much. The increased net revenue is far in the future so with discounting
there is only a modest decrease in levelized costs. Moreover, coal and natural gas plants are also
tending to be used for more than 40 years and one would want to incorporate those longer
lifetimes as well.

      It is important to emphasize that these levelized cost estimates depend on a series of
assumptions, many of which can be only partially verified empirically. Perhaps most
importantly, alternative assumptions about nuclear construction costs or natural gas prices can
begin to change the outlook considerably. Moreover, it is worth highlighting that these cost
estimates are for the United States and may not easily generalize to other countries. Construction
costs vary substantially across countries due to differences in the cost of labor and other inputs,
as well as differences in the regulatory environment. Another key factor is the availability of
natural gas. Global capacity to transport liquefied natural gas is increasing rapidly, but still
insufficient to have eliminated price differences across countries.



Incorporating Externalities

      Levelized cost estimates are typically designed to reflect the private costs of investing in
different forms of electricity generation. Thus they provide a basis for determining whether
different types of plants will be built, but not necessarily for determining whether different types
of plants should be built.

      The fourth row in Table 3 incorporates a tax of $25 per ton of carbon dioxide. As a point of
comparison, the Federal Interagency Working Group (2010) adopts a central social cost of
carbon dioxide of $22 for 2015. Under this scenario, nuclear continues to have the highest
levelized cost. The levelized cost of coal increases by 2 cents per kilowatt hour, but the levelized
cost of natural gas increases by only about 1 cent, not nearly enough to close the gap between
nuclear and natural gas. Moreover, this static comparison based on current fuel prices ignores
that coal and natural gas prices would likely fall in response to a carbon tax. For both coal and
natural gas there is a range of different sources available, much of which with a marginal cost of
extraction below current prices.

      Fossil fuel plants also emit large amounts of local and regional pollutants. Muller,




                                                 10
Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus (2011) calculate that the external costs from sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
oxides, and particulates average 3.5 cents per kilowatt hour for coal, but only 0.1 cents per
kilowatt hour for natural gas. Thus incorporating the external costs of these pollutants improves
the prospects considerably for nuclear power versus coal, but does little to close the gap versus
natural gas. A comprehensive welfare analysis would also incorporate the negative production
externalities from coal and natural gas. Perhaps most importantly, recent increases in shale gas
production have raised environmental concerns about water consumption and contamination of
drinking water. These costs are still poorly understood. However, the levelized cost estimates
give some sense about how large these externalities would need to be in order to make nuclear
power the low cost option.

     There are also external costs associated with nuclear power. Included in these levelized
cost estimates is a spent fuel waste fee of 0.1 cents per kilowatt hour. Since 1983 the Department
of Energy has collected this fee from U.S. nuclear reactors, intended eventually to finance a
centralized storage facility for spent nuclear fuel. Currently, most spent nuclear fuel is stored
onsite in spent fuel pools and dry casks. A comprehensive welfare analysis would need to
include both the private and external costs of this on-site storage. See MIT (2010) and NRC
(2011) for details about the nuclear fuel cycle.

     Considerably harder to quantify are the risks from nuclear accidents. Since 1957 the Price-
Anderson Act has indemnified U.S. nuclear plant operators from accident liability above a
certain cap, currently $12 billion. A Fukushima-type accident in the United States could easily
cause damages well above this cap. It is too early to measure the long-term external costs of
Fukushima, but an early study estimates that radioactive contamination could cause 1,000 total
cancer deaths (Hippel 2011). As a point of comparison, cancer deaths from Chernobyl are
estimated to be approximately 14,000 (Cardis, et al 2006). In addition to cancer deaths, one
would want to incorporate the costs from other health outcomes, as well as the pecuniary and
psychological costs associated with relocating people living near the accident site.

     Perhaps hardest of all to measure are the risks associated with the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This could come through the misuse of nuclear facilities to produce weapons materials,
or from a “dirty bomb” in which stolen radioactive materials from any source are dispersed using
conventional explosives. These risks are particularly acute in countries like France, the United



                                                   11
Kingdom, and Japan that have facilities for reprocessing nuclear waste. See MIT (2003) and MIT
(2010) for a discussion of these issues.

     Incorporating the external costs of nuclear power would further increase the gap between
the levelized costs of nuclear and natural gas. An important priority for future work is to refine
measures of these external costs and incorporate them explicitly into levelized cost analyses.
However, given current market conditions in the United States, it becomes difficult to make an
economic argument for nuclear power regardless of the exact magnitude of these external costs.
The first challenge continues to be construction costs, which are high enough that nuclear power
struggles to compete with natural gas even if one ignores these external costs completely.



Learning-By-Doing

     What would it take to reduce nuclear construction costs? One argument is learning-by-
doing. In 2004 the President of the Nuclear Energy Institute testified in front of the Senate that
nuclear construction costs would decrease by 20-30% after the first few plants (Nuclear Energy
Institute, 2004). In part on the basis of this testimony, the 2005 Energy Policy Act was drafted to
include loan guarantees, production tax credits and other subsidies for new nuclear plants. If
learning-by-doing could push construction costs down this could indeed change the equation
considerably for nuclear power. A substantial literature in economics indicates that learning-by-
doing matters in a variety of markets (Alchian, 1963; Joskow and Rose, 1985; Irwin and Klenow,
1994; Benkard, 2000; Thornton and Thompson, 2001; Kellogg, forthcoming), and several studies
have examined learning-by-doing in the construction of nuclear power plants.

     Recall that the time pattern of construction costs in Figure 3 did not provide any immediate
evidence of learning-by-doing. Instead, construction costs tended to increase considerably over
time. Several studies have nonetheless attempted to disentangle learning-by-doing from industry-
wide factors that were changing over time. Using data from the early nuclear builds, both Mooz
(1978) and Komanoff (1981) find evidence of modest amounts of learning-by-doing in nuclear plant
construction that accrue to the construction company in charge of the project, but no evidence of
industry-wide learning-by-doing. Zimmerman (1982) also finds learning-by-doing for the
construction company and some evidence of spillovers across companies. Using a longer panel,
McCabe (1996) finds evidence of learning-by-doing for both the construction company and the


                                                12
utility managing the project, but does not test for industry-wide learning.

     Regardless of whether or not it is privately captured, learning-by-doing is important for the
prospects of nuclear power because it provides a plausible mechanism by which nuclear
construction costs could decrease below the levels reported in Table 2. Who captures the learning-
by-doing is important, however, for government policy. The economic argument for an industry-
specific subsidy hinges on there being learning-by-doing that is not captured by individual
companies. If learning is fully appropriable, then firms face efficient incentives for investment and
no government intervention is necessary. In addition, while there is almost certainly some
industry-wide learning-by-doing in nuclear, there is also likely to be learning-by-doing in
emerging forms technologies such as wind, solar, and biomass. When there are a number of
competing alternatives as there are in electricity generation, many economists favor broad-based
subsidies that do not single out individual technologies (Schmalensee, 1980).

     Tied up in this discussion is a key tradeoff between innovation and standardization. On the
one hand, it is important to continue allowing for new and better reactor designs with enhanced
features for reliability and safety. On the other hand, frequent redesigns make it harder to spread
engineering costs across projects. The first wave of U.S. reactors were manufactured by four
different companies—Westinghouse, General Electric, Combustion Engineering, and Babcock &
Wilcox—each with several different designs. At the time, these differences were inevitable.
The United States led the way in the development of commercial nuclear reactors and the
technology was evolving rapidly. Still, this diversity of designs provides a possible explanation
for the lack of immediate evidence of learning-by-doing (Lester and McCabe, 1993).

     France is an important point of comparison. Development of nuclear power in France
began later and with much less design variation. When Electricité de France began seriously
building reactors in the 1970s it adopted a single design for all of its reactors. With one exception,
all nuclear power reactors currently in operation in France are of exactly this same design (IAEC,
2011). In addition, Electricité de France has long enjoyed a high degree of regulatory stability
due to its close relationship with the French National Safety Authority and broad public support
for nuclear power. Given this high degree of standardization, the apparent cost escalation in
French construction costs is particularly striking.

     Nonetheless, some within the nuclear industry claim that the U.S. is headed more toward



                                                 13
the French model. For example, Michael Wallace, chairman of a major nuclear power company
predicted a couple of years ago (as quoted in Kanter, 2009) that new reactors would be
standardized down to “the carpeting and wallpaper.” Perhaps the industry will quickly coalesce
around a very small number of reactor designs, but this is not obvious based on applications
received to date by the NRC. Among the 17 applications that have been received, there is a mix
of both pressurized water reactors and boiling water reactors, manufactured by five different
reactor manufacturers (Areva, Westinghouse, Mitsubishi, GE-Hitachi, and GE). At a minimum, it
seems clear that the French approach of supporting a single reactor design is not going to be
adopted in the United States.



Conclusion

       Nuclear power continues to generate enthusiasm based on its potential to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. A single pound of reactor-grade uranium oxide produces as much electricity as over
16,000 pounds of coal – enough to meet the needs of the average U.S. household for more than a
year.4 And, while burning 16,000 pounds of this coal generates thousands of pounds of carbon
dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen oxides – nuclear power is virtually emissions free.

       Nuclear power, however, is not without challenges. Fukushima has brought to the forefront
ongoing concerns about nuclear accidents and the handling and storage of spent fuel. These
external costs are in addition to substantial private costs. In 1942 with a shoestring budget in an
abandoned squash court at the University of Chicago, Enrico Fermi demonstrated that electricity
could be generated using a self-sustaining nuclear reaction. Seventy years later the industry is still
trying to demonstrate how this can be scaled up cheaply enough to compete with coal and natural
gas.




4
 This is my own back-of-the-envelope calculation based on U.S. Department of Energy (2011a), Table 8.2a “Electricity
Net Generation”, Table 8.5a “Consumption of Combustible Fuels”, Table 8.9 “Electricity End Use”, Table 9.3
“Uranium Overview”, and Table 12.7b “Emissions from Energy Consumption for Electricity Generation.”



                                                        14
Acknowledgements

I am thankful to David Autor, Severin Borenstein, Chad Jones, John List, John Parsons, Tim
Taylor, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at the University of Tennessee, Brookings
Institute, University of California Energy Institute, Berkeley Energy and Resources
Collaborative Symposium, California Public Utilities Commission, and the University of
Chicago for helpful comments.




                                             15
References

Alchian, Armen. 1963. “Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production,” Econometrica
31, 679-694.

Benkard, C. Lanier. 2000. “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production,”
American Economic Review 90, 1034-1054.

Cardis, Elisabeth, et al. 2006. “Estimates of the Cancer Burden in Europe from Radioactive
Fallout from the Chernobyl Accident,” International Journal of Cancer 119, 1224-1235.

Cox, A.J. and R. J. Gilbert. 1991. “An Economic Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of Diablo
Canyon.” In Regulatory Choices: A Perspective on Developments in Energy Policy, ed. Richard J.
Gilvert, 260-289. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Davis, Lucas W. and Catherine Wolfram. 2011. “Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency:
Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power,” Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper #217.

Du, Yangbo and John E. Parsons. 2009. “Update on the Cost of Nuclear Power.” MIT Center for
Energy and Environmental Policy Research Working Paper 09-004.

Federal Interagency Working Group, Appendix 15A: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory
Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866, 2010.

Grubler, Arnulf. 2010. “The Costs of the French Nuclear Scale-Up: A Case of Negative Learning
By Doing.” Energy Policy 38, 5174-5188.

Hippel, Frank N. von. 2011. “The Radiological and Psychological Consequences of the
Fukushima Daiichi Accident.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 67(5), 27-36.

International Atomic Energy Agency. 2011. “Nuclear Power Reactors in the World, 2011 Edi-
tion”, Vienna, June 2011.

Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow. 1994. “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semicon-
ductor Industry,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 1200-1227.

Ives, Nathan, Steve McCabe and Gary Gilmartin. 2010 “Nuclear Renaissance and the Global
Supply Chain: Avoiding Pitfalls, Realizing Benefits.” Public Utilities Fortnightly, December.

Joskow, Paul L. 1974. “Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the Process of
Public Utility Price Regulation.” Journal and Law and Economics 17(2), 291-327.

Joskow, Paul L. 1982. “Problems and Prospects for Nuclear Energy in the United States.” In
Energy, Economics and the Environment, ed. Gregory A. Daneke, 231-254. Lexington: D.C.
Heath and Company.




                                              16
Joskow, Paul L. 2006. “The Future of Nuclear Power in the United States: Economic and
Regulatory Challenges.” MIT CEEPR Working Paper 06-019.

Joskow, Paul L. and John E. Parsons. 2009. “The Economic Future of Nuclear Power.”
Daedalus, 138(4): 45-59.

Joskow, Paul L. and Nancy L. Rose. 1985. “The Effects of Technological Change, Experience, and
Environmental Regulation on the Construction Cost of Coal-Burning Generating Units.” RAND
Journal of Economics 16(1), 1-17.

Joskow, Paul L. and Joel Yellin. 1980. “Siting Nuclear Power Plants.” Virginia Journal of
Natural Resource Law, summer 1980.

Kanter, James. 2009. “In Finland, Nuclear Renaissance Runs Into Trouble.” New York Times,
May                 28.                <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/29/business/energy-
environment/29nuke.html?pagewanted=all>

Kellogg, Ryan. forthcoming. “Learning by Drilling: Inter-Firm Learning and Relationship
Persistence in the Texas Oilpatch,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Komanoff, Charles. 1981. Power Plant Escalation: Nuclear and Coal Capital Costs, Regulation, and
Economics, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York.

Koomey, Jonathan and Nathan E. Hultman. 2007. “A Reactor-Level Analysis of Busbar Costs for
U.S. Nuclear Plants 1970-2005.” Energy Policy 35, 5630-5642.

Lester, Richard K. and Mark J. McCabe. 1993. “The Effect of Industrial Structure on Learning By
Doing in Nuclear Power Plant Operation.” RAND Journal of Economics 24(3), 418-438.

McCabe, Mark J. 1996. “Principals, Agents, and the Learning Curve: The Case of Steam-Electric
Power Plant Design and Construction.” Journal of Industrial Economics 44(4), 357- 375.

McCallion, Kenneth. 1995. Shoreham and the Rise and Fall of the Nuclear Power Industry,
Praeger, Westport.

MIT. 2003. “The Future of Nuclear Power: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study.” MIT Energy
Initiative.

MIT. 2009. “Update of the MIT 2003 Future of Nuclear Power.” MIT Energy Initiative.

MIT. 2010. “The Future of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study.” MIT
Energy Initiative.

Mooz, William E. 1978. Cost Analysis of Light Water Reactor Power Plants, R2304-DOE.

Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus. 2011. “Environmental



                                              17
Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy.” American Economic Review 101(5),
1649-1675.

Nuclear Energy Institute, Marvin S. Fertel, President and Chief Executive Officer, March 2004.
“Testimony before the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, U.S. Senate”.

OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and International Atomic Energy Agency, Uranium 2009:
Resources, Production, and Demand (“The Red Book”), 2009.

Pindyck, Robert S. 1993. “Investment of Uncertain Cost.” Journal of Financial Economics 34,
53-76.

Schmalensee, Richard. 1980. “Appropriate Government Policy Toward Commercialization of
New Energy Supply Technologies.” Energy Journal 1(2), 1-40.

Thornton, Rebecca A. and Peter Thompson. 2001. “Learning from Experience and Learning
from Others: An Exploration of Learning and Spillovers in Wartime Shipbuilding,” American
Economic Review, 91, 1350-1368.

U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, Office of Planning and Analysis. 1974. “Nuclear Power
Growth, 1974-2000.” WASH-1139(74).

U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 1986. “An Analysis of Nuclear
Power Plant Construction Costs.” DOE/EIA-0485.

U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 1997. “Nuclear Power Gen-
eration and Fuel Cycle Report 1997.” DOE/EIA-0436(97).

U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 2010. “Updated Capital
Cost Estimates for Electricity Generation Plants”, released November 2010.

U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 2011a. “Annual Energy Review
2010”, DOE/EIA-0384, released October 2011.

U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 2011b. “Annual Energy Out-
look 2011”, DOE/EIA-0383, April 2011.

U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 2011. “Information Digest 2011-2012” NUREG-1350,
Volume 23, Published August 2011.

Wald, Matthew L. 2010. “Giant Holes in the Ground.” MIT Technology Review, 60-65.

Zimmerman, Martin B. 1982. “Learning Effects and the Commercialization of New Energy
Technologies: The Case of Nuclear Power.” Bell Journal of Economics 13(2), 297-310.




                                              18
                              Figure 1: U.S. Nuclear Power Reactor Orders


40                                                                             Three Mile Island

                                                                                                         Chernobyl
30
20
10
0




        1950          1955          1960         1965          1970          1975          1980          1985        1990    1995    2000
      Source: Author's tabulation based on U.S. Department of Energy (1997), Appendix C.




                 Figure 2: Nuclear Reactors under Construction Worldwide
200




                                                                                                  Other



                                                                                                  Eastern Europe
150
100




                                                            Western Europe
50




                                                   United States and Canada
0




      1950                   1960                  1970                   1980                    1990                2000          2010
      Source: Author's calculations based on International Atomic Energy Agency (2011), Tables 13-16.




                                                                          19
Figure 3: Construction Costs for U.S. Nuclear Reactors by Year of Completion


                        8000                                                                                                                                                                    Shoreham
                                                                                                                                                                                     Nine Mile Point 2


                                                                                                                                                                                    Clinton 1
                                    6000
   Cost Per Kilowatt (in 2010 dollars)




                                                                                                                                                                       Limerick 1

                                                                                                                                                                         Millstone 3


                                                                                                                                                 San Onofre 2                  Perry 1
                                                                                                                                                                  Waterford 3
                 4000




                                                                                                                                                                                     Braidwood 1

                                                                                                                                                                       Diablo Canyon 2
                                                                                                                                                                                Byron 2
                                                                                                                     North Anna 1
2000




                                                                                                                                                           LaSalle 2


                                                                                                         Browns Ferry 3
                        0




                                                          1970                            1975                             1980                            1985                                  1990
                                                          Source: Author's tabulation based on U.S. Department of Energy (1986), Table 4.




                                                          Figure 4: U.S. Natural Gas Prices and Applications to the U.S. NRC
                            12
   Price Per Thousand Cubic Feet (in U.S. 2010 dollars)
                                                    10




                                                                                                                                        Vertical Lines Indicate
                                                                                                                                        Applications to NRC
                4          6           8




                                                                                                                                                    Baseline Price Forecast, DOE 2011b
    2                       0




                                                          1990                              2000                               2010                              2020                                    2030
                                                           Source: Author's tabulation based on data from U.S. Department of Energy (2011a, 2011b) and U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2011).




                                                                                                                          20
           Table 1: U.S. Nuclear Reactor Orders and Construction Time

                                                Construction Time (In Years)
                                                  For Completed Reactors

              Number of     Percent
               Reactors    Eventually
  Decade       Ordered     Completed         Average    Minimum       Maximum

  1950s           6          100%             4.5           3             7
  1960s          88           89%             8.6           3             22
  1970s          155          25%             14.1          8             26

Source: Author’s tabulations based on U.S. Department of Energy (1997).
Construction time is calculated as the difference in years between when a reactor
is ordered and when it begins commercial operation.




                                        21
                          Table 2: Construction Costs Excluding Financing

                                                      Cost Per Kilowatt of Capacity
                                                          (in year 2010 dollars)

                       Source                   Nuclear            Coal            Natural Gas

            MIT (2009)                           4200              2400                 900

            U.S. DOE (2010)                      5300              2800                1000




                                  Table 3: Levelized Cost Comparison

                                                                       Levelized Cost in Cents per kWh

                             Source                                    Nuclear         Coal       Natural Gas

MIT (2009) Baseline                                                       8.7           6.5             6.7

Updated Construction Costs                                                10.4          7.0             6.9

Updated Construction Costs and Fuel Prices                                10.5          7.4             5.2

Carbon Tax of $25 Per Ton CO2                                             10.5          9.6             6.2


Note: These calculations follow MIT (2009) except where indicated in the row headings. All costs are reported
in 2010 cents per kilowatt hour. Row (1) reports the base case estimates reported in MIT (2009), Table 1. The
cost estimates reported in row (2) incorporate updated construction cost estimates from U.S. DOE (2010). Row
(3), in addition, updates fuel prices to reflect the most recent available prices for uranium, coal and natural gas
reported in U.S. DOE (2011a). Finally, row (4) continues to incorporate updated construction costs and fuel
prices and, in addition, adds a carbon tax of $25 per ton of carbon dioxide.




                                                       22
