NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE FLEXIBILITY, CREDIT
RATIONING, AND ECONOMIC
FLUCTUATIONS: EVIDENCE FROM
THE U.S., 1879—1914

Charles W. Calomiris

R. Glenn Hubbard

Working Paper No. 1767

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Benjamin Friedman, James
Stock, and participants in the 1985 NBER Summer Institute Program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics for helpful comments
and suggestions. David Koenig, Akira Motomura, and John Shea provided excellent research assistance, and financial support from
Northwestern University is acknowledged. The research reported
here is part of the NBER1s research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #176 7
Noverrber 1985

Price

Flexibility, Credit Rationing, and Economic Fluctuations:
Evidence from the U.S., 1879—1914

2\BSTRACr

The reawakening of interest in links between price flexibility and
fluctuations in economic activity calls for a reconsideration of models of
price and quantity adjustment. We examine relationships between credit
disturbances and real activity under flexible prices, using monthly data on
real and financial variables over the period from 1879—1914.
Recent theoretical and empirical work has focused on models and
institutions of the post World War II period. Historical episodes of
pronounced business cycles, however, challenge our present formulations of the
causes of fluctuations in output and employment. In this paper we pursue two
goals: (1) to demonstrate that substantial price flexibility existed during
the period to point Out that models of economic fluctuations relying on sticky
prices are not appropriate for analyzing the period, and (ii) to consider the
effects of deflationary shocks on real variables in such a world. Our
principal findings are two. First, we present evidence from several empirical
tests to corroborate the stylized fact of price flexibility during our period
of study (relative to patterns of flexibility observed in postwar data).
Contrary to conclusions of many models applied to postwar data, we find that
shocks to inflation rates produce positive and persistent effects on output.
Second, extending earlier examinations of credit rationing as an outcome under
imperfect information, we motivate this link by considering the impact of
deflation on credit availability. The addition of measures of credit
rationing accompanying deflation contributes substantially to our empirical
explanation of output fluctuations during the period.

W. Calomiris
Epar-brent of Economics
Northwestern University
Pndersen Hall

R. Glenn Hubbard
Departrrent of Economics

2003 Sheridan Road

2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201

charles

Evanston, IL

60201

Northwestern University
1ndersen Hall

I. INTRODUCTION
Much of modern macroeconomics grapples with the implications for

policy of how markets clear. Indeed, the adjustment of prices and
quantities lies at the heart of analyses of business cycles and the

effectiveness of stabilization policies.' Variations in cyclical
patterns provide a natural focus for economic analysis, because of their
importance for understanding how public policy and the organization of

markets ——

for

labor, products, and credit —

figure

in explanations of

business cycles.2 In this paper, we examine the importance of price
flexibility and credit availability in explaining cyclical fluctuations.
In a textbook, "perfect—markets' model of aggregate price and

quantity adjustment, inertial price adjustment must lead to market
clearing through greater movements in output in response to demand

shocks. Institutional motivations for increasing wage and price
rigidity during this century have been discussed by Okun (1981), and

Sachs (1980) has provided empirical evidence of a trend toward sticky

wages and prices. Institutional changes notwithstanding, some
observations about the business cycle remain surprisingly robust over

time. Gordon (1980) and James (1985) find a consistent Phillips—curve
pattern of association between prices and output for the U.S. in the

nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The robustness of the Phillips
curve to changes in the product aix, structure of markets, and degree of
price stickiness presents a puzzle for those who interpre-t the Phillips

curve as a measure of price rigidity.

The emphasis on price flexibility is particularly important for
analyzing these effects of the organization of markets on fluctuations

in economic activity. Recent theoretical and empirical work has focused

—2--

primarily on models and institutions of the post World War II period.
Quantity fluctuations are amplified by price rigidity stemming from
institutional or contractual arrangements in labor and product

markets. Alternatively, confusion related to government policy
uncertainty produces departures from desired outcomes. Historical
episodes of pronounced business cycles in the U. S. and Europe challenge
our present formulation of the causes of fluctuations in output and

employment. Indeed, little attention has been directed toward
explaining the existence of business cycles in an environment where
prices are flexible and where policy uncertainty is not important.

Understanding cyclical fluctuations in a regime of flexible prices
may contribute substantially to our understanding of the modern

economy.3 It is often asserted, for example, that greater price
flexibility would reduce the economic costs of adverse aggregate demand

and supply shocks, or of disinflationary monetary policy. Any positive
link between price flexibility and output fluctuations raises questions
about the supposed stabilizing effect of wage and price flexibility.

Keynes (1936) himself discussed aspects of this channel, emphasizing the
likely increase in real interest rates accompanying wage deflation.

In particular, we argue that such flexibility can have adverse
•

effects on macroeconomic performance through constraints on the
availability of- credit in the presence of nominal contracting in

financial markets. In section II, we examine links between price
flexibility and credit rationing within the imperfect—information models

suggested by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) and others. Our principal

findings there are two —

that

(1) price flexibility makes worse the

potential rationing of credit to "information—intensive" borrowers noted

—3—
by Stiglitz and Weiss, and (ii) the coexistence of Wairasian "full—
information" credit markets and "information—intensive" bank credit

markets complicates the definition of a sufficient statistic for credit
scarcity (i.e., "'the' interest rate" is not enough) and sharpens credit
rationing to information—intensive borrowers when the supply of funds to
that market is reduced.

We test these hypotheses and the potential real effects of bank

credit rationing in section III. Throughout the paper, we use vector
autoregressions (VARs) to focus on short—run dynamics of inflation,

output, and credit—market variables. We need, of course, a period in
which prices are flexible, and we constructed a monthly data base on
real and financial variables covering the period from 1879 to 1914 (see

the detailed description in the Appendix).4 The period from the late
nineteenth century to the creation of the Federal Reserve System
provides an excellent laboratory for testing alternative models of price
adjustment, financial—market equilibrium, and economic fluctuations.
Fluctuations in output were pronounced in the last half of the
nineteenth century and the early years of the twentieth century, with
much greater variability of output than in the extensively studied
modern period (see Sachs, 1980; Gordon, 1980; DeLong and Summers, 1984;

Taylor, 1984; James, 1985).
We demonstrate that substantial price flexibility existed during
the period, to point out that models of economic fluctuations relying on

sticky prices are not appropriate for analyzing the period. Contrary to
the conclusions of many models applied to postwar data, we find that
shocks to inflation rates produce positive and persistent effects on

output. The finding of a negative effect of deflationary shocks on

—4—
output, consistent with the recent results of Delong and Summers (1984),
suggests the importance of isolating structural channels.

We motivate this link by considering the impact of deflation on

credit availability. The special role of banks in financial
intermediation for information—intensive credit can create real effects

of bank credit rationing. We do not argue for a strict "banking panic"
view of credit rationing (see also the arguments of Cagan, 1965; DeLong
and Summers-, 1984; and Bordo, 1985);6 we explore local changes in credit

under a regime of flexible prices rather than extreme cases associated

only with systematic collapse. Specifically, we focus on the potential
real effects of deflation and credit rationing, given imperfect
information in credit markets.

We find strong support for the importance of credit rationing and

its links to deflation. Output fluctuations are predicted by a set of
credit—market indicators. Deflationary shocks in our VARs provide
additional evidence, with negative effects on loans and output, and a
positive effect on interest rates in "price—clearing" credit markets.
It is important to note that these arguments are made against a

background of a passive monetary policy. The active presence of a
lender of last resort might forestall much of the credit rationing and

illiquidity accompanying deflation in our model.7 We abstract from the

role of a central bank for two reasons. Conceptually, we ant to
illustrate the role of market failures in credit markets in explaining

the potential destabilizing effects of flexible prices. In addition, we
argue that these effects were present in the period prior to the
creation of the Federal Reserve System, the period we study here.

—5-.

II.

PRICE FLEXIBILITY, CREDIT MARKETS, AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

Background

Previous

discussions of links between banking system Instability

and output fluctuations during our period of study can be divided into
two principal camps with respect to their assumptions about price

flexibility. The first——the "monetarist" approach associated with
descriptions in Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965) —

considers Thank panics" important because of their effect on the nominal
money stock and hence (if prices are sticky) on real activity. Friedman
and Schwartz, and Cagan focus on the decline in public confidence in the

banking system attendant to panics, which raised the currency—deposit
ratio8 and the reserve—deposit ratio, and precipitated a decrease in the
nominal money supply.

A second school of thought——identified with Fisher (1933), Minsky
(1975) and (1977), and Kindleberger (1978)——focuses on price flexibility
and "debt deflation" as a link between financial crises and economic

activity. Emphasis is placed on an irrational boom and bust cycle, in
which upswings encourage excessively sanguine views, "overindebtedness,"
illiquidity, and eventually banking crises, as deflationary pressures
from liquidation raise the real value of nominal debt commitments.

Reductions in the price level bring about increases in real interest

rates and decreases in net worth and profits. Recovery is brought about
when overindebtedness is eliminated or policy stimulus is applied. The
cycle then repeats itself.

Neither of these lines of inquiry provides a convincing explanation
of the relationships among contractual arrangements (in labor, product,

and credit markets), banking panics, and output fluctuations. For

—6—
example, against the Fisher—Minsky school, Cagan (1965) finds that U.S.
panics did not in general foreshadow cyclical downturns; see also Bordo

(1985). Fisher and Minsky do not explain the persistence of
irrationality or the precise channels through which the degree of price
flexibility in the economy and the way in which banks adjust to shocks

are related. The monetarist approach depends on price rigidity to
transform nominal shocks into real effects. This liquidity—preference
transmission mechanism is, however, difficult to econcile with the
evidence for price flexibility in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries .

Aside from the problem of reconciling itself with the stylized fact
of price flexibility, the monetarist school has been challenged by Fama
(1980) and others who point out that, under the Modigliani—Miller
theorem, banks are powerless to fix even the nominal supply of money.
Of course, a world which includes financial intermediaries suggests de
facto the implausibility of the Modigliani—Miller theorem; still the
challenge to macroeconomic theory remains identifying which assumptions
necessary to the Modigliani—Miller theorem are violated in practice.
If, as many recent authors suggest (e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981;

Bernanke, 1983), banks are information—intensive financial
intermediaries involved in costly monitoring in a world of asymmetric
information, then banks are more than passive mutual funds a la Fama.
It follows that their importance is related to the real costs of
intermediation and their role as least—cost suppliers of credit, rather
than their role as nominal money creators in a world of flexible

prices.10

—7—
DeLong and Summers (1984) challenge the two schools of thought by

emphasizing a link between deflation and the real interest rate. That
is, to the extent that nominal interest rates are sticky, deflationary

shocks would raise real interest rates. If the interest rate examined
represents the full—information cost of capital, a decline in aggregate

demand should follow. While their argument focuses on the important
link between price flexibility and connections between financial—market

outcomes and real activity," three qualifications are in order. First,
while long—term rates did not respond significantly to inflationary
shocks (because of the price—level—reverting characteristic of the gold
standard), we present evidence that, ceteris paribus, the sort of short—
term rate examined by DeLong and Summers did exhibit a Fisher

effect.12 Second, interpretation of the real—interest—rate effect
described by DeLong and Summers is difficult in a world with capital—
market imperfections. As we wiLl. argue later, movements in commercial
paper rates may reflect, inter alia, credit rationing to the banking
sector, indicating that the DeLong—Summers reduced—form model may be
consistent with several competing hypotheses regarding links between

price shocks and economic activity. We present additional evidence in
section III to distinguish among these hypotheses. Finally, the notion
that sticky nominal interest rates caused changes in real rates seems
inconsistent with the historical gold—standard regime in which interest
rates across countries responded to one another's changes to preserve a
common risk—adjusted real rate (Calomiris and Hubbard, 1985).

Our approach follows Bernank&s (1983) attempt to provide an
analytical foundation for the debt—deflation view of financial crises by
focusing

on the role of price flexibility in linking financial

—8—

disturbances

and real activity, tinder fixed nominal contracting, price

flexibility with the possibility of deflation can exacerbate

fluctuations in real interest rates and aggregate demand and their

persistence.13 In addition, deflationary pressures can reduce aggregate
demand and supply through reductions in bank credit, the erosion of
borrowersT collateral and the failure of financial intermediaries as

fears of potential debtor insolvency rise. This view, however, does not
depend on "financial crises;" it can describe localized movements along
credit supply and demand schedules.

Deflation, Bank Credit,

and Economic Activity

To motivate our examination of the effects of price flexibility on
macroeconomic performance, we begin with the following simple stylized

macroeconomic model. Income and prices are expressed in logarithms.
Let real aggregate demand be determined according to

—

8(i

—

(Ep+i

—

82 t + tyt' 8i' 82 > 0,

where p and I denote the (log of the) price level and the nominal cost

of funds under full information, respectively. Etp÷i denotes the
expectation at time t of the price level during period t + 1. The first
term represents the standard negative impact of higher real interest
rates, on aggregate demand (through, say, the interest sensitivity of

business investment and spending on consumer durables).
In the simplest possible model, no information problems exist, and
the competitive equilibrium in a Walrasian credit market involves

clearing through "price." Firms borrow to finance projects until the

—9—
marginal return on new projects no longer exceeds the cost of borrowed

funds in the market. That is,

is

is— (Ep+i —

an accurate proxy

for the scarcity of credit. If, however, capital markets operate under
imperfect information, then banks and other intermediaries may play a

special role; that is, they may enjoy an advantage relative to potential
or actual centralized securities markets in certain forms of
Intermediation due, for instance, to differences in information cost.
Thus, variables which proxy for rationing of real bank credit will be

marginally significant as indicators of capital scarcity when bank
credit is costly to "produce" and imperfectly substitutable with other

methods of intermediation. The presence of P

in

the aggregate—demand

equation is designed to capture this "special" role of bank credit.
The observation by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) that lenders ("banks")

cannot necessarily distinguish "good" borrowers from "bad" borrowers
implies that adverse selection will render unprofitable a price—only—

clearing credit—market equilibrium. That is, with a nonzero probability
of default, banks consider the potential for loan repayment as well as
the interest rate charged when assessing the profitability of a loan.

Past some critical interest rate, banks will be selected against by
borrowers with a high probability of default; quantity rationing will be
part of a competitive equilibrium in the credit market.
This story Is complicated by the fact that many markets for credit
exist side by side, differing in quality of borrowers and the terms of

loans. These markets effectively sort borrowers along dimensions of
"Information intensity." Borrowers with significant financial resources
and reputations (e.g., the federal government and large, publicly traded
corporations) have access to "full—information" Wairasian credit markets,

— 10 —

(such as those for commercial paper or for long—term bonds), while
information—intensive borrowers (e.g., small businesses and households)
require more monitoring and are typical of the transactors in the most
basic version of the Stiglitz—Weiss model.'4
Information—intensive and Walrasian markets exist side by side,

with borrowers of the highest quality able to participate in all
markets, and so on down to the restriction of borrowers in the lowest

class to the confines of the bank market. Borrowers allocate their
borrowings according to portfolio considerations, as do suppliers of

credit. In the price—clearing markets, we expect the interest rate to
decline with the risk class. There is no presumed risk relationship
between the bank interest rate and the rates charged in the Wairasian
markets.

Suppose for simplicity that one can divide the credit market into

three categories: (i) banks (servicing information—intensive
borrowers), (ii) a Wairasian market servicing risky full—information
borrowers (W1), and (iii) a Walrasian market servicing full—information

borrowers (W2). The sequential—market—clearing approach outlined above
implies that there is no single sufficient statistic to describe credit

conditions. To assess real effects of credit rationing, one must look
at changes in three components of the "state of the credit market": the

full—information risky rate i, the quantity of credit provided in the
information—intensive sector, and the spread between the risky and safe

Wairaslan rates (i — 1w2)• This last consideration measures the
portfolio reallocation effect on the supply side of the credit market
(see the related discussion of this point in Bernanke, 1983).

I

I

I
I

I

L

(8tipIitz—WeIaa)

Information-Intenaiva

Market

Is

LW)

1*

1

RIaky

1w1

I
I
I

I

Wairoalan Market

Is

Equilibrium in the Credit Markets

Figure

L*w2

1w2

1w2

I

I

I

I

"Rlsklesa Wairaslan Market

1W2

Is

— 12

We

—

illustrate our discussion of sequential market clearing in

For simplicity, we consider the case of two Wairasian

Figure 1.

markets, for risky and riskless securities. The first panel represents
the market for information—intensive credit per the Stiglitz—Weiss

model. In that panel,

P and Z represent the maximum return to banks

from making loans and the extent of credit rationing, respectively. i
and i represent the "Walrasian" and "rationed equilibrium" interest
rates. Interest rates in the full—information, Wairasian credit markets
are determined by the intersection of su-pply and demand schedules.

The mechanism linking price flexibility and credit rationing can be

formalized as follows. First, nominal project returns available for
debt

service will be riskier in a regime where there is uncertainty over

both prices and real project returns. Second, the value of collateral
will vary in a regime of flexible prices both because of variation in
the

price level and because of the likely correlation between project

returns and the value of collateral (particularly with "specific"
industry capital or farm land).

As in the Stiglitz—Weiss model, let the banks nominal gross return
p represent the minimum

of

the sum

of

the realized return R and the

collateral value V and the nominal payment contracted for. That is,
under nominal contracting, with a debt of B,

p =

mm

(R + V, (1 + i)B).

Of course, both R and V are random variables so that the expected return
EP

is just
EP

mm (ER + EV, (1 +

i)B).

Price flexibility increases the nominal riskiness of R and V (which
was a constant ex ante and ex post in the Stiglitz—Weiss model), so that

— 13 —

for

any quoted interest rate i on loans, the likelihood of default is

higher than under the case of uncertainty only over real project

returns. That is, the p function in the lower—right—hand quadrant of
Figure 1 becomes more shallow, magnifying the credit rationing for

borrowers with access to only the information—intensive market in the

model outlined above. For such borrowers, more projects with positive
net expected value ex ante will not be undertaken. Credit rationing to
information—intensive borrowers is likely to be more significant in a
regime of flexible prices.

In addition, within a flexible—price regime, credit allocation will

be affected by deflationary shocks. The process of sequential market
clearing and credit rationing in response to deflationary shocks can be

described as follows. In the presence of nominal financial contracting
in the information—intensive ("banking") sector the financial system is

prone to instability. In particular, unanticipated deflation weakens
confidence in the viability of information—intensive loans, causing a

shift in the supply of funds from the banking sector. That is, the LS
schedule in Figure 1 shifts in, further restricting bank credit.

Supplies of funds to the Walrasian markets increase. The tightening of
bank credit causes those borrowers with comparatively large stocks of
information capital who need additional loans to move into the Wairasian

market (although at higher interest rates ex post). Bank loan rates may
or may not rise; increased quantity rationing allocates bank loans.
Interest rates in the risky full—information market rise because of the

spillover from the bank market. Rates on safe assets may even fall,
because of the influx of funds to that market.

— 14 —

Stated differently, a deflationary shock increases the debt burden
of borrowers and decreases their net worth. The resulting increased
probability of default leads to a rise in the reserve—to—loan ratio as
banks attempt to reduce the riskiness of their portfolios and brace

themselves for potential deposit liquidation. At the same time,
depositors react to increased risk by reducing their deposits. The
depletion of collateral increases the cost of monitoring loans or,

alternatively, reduces the availability of collateralized debt. If some
banks do fail, the idle information capital of failed intermediaries

will disrupt the flow of credit to certain borrowers. All of these
channels cause backward shifts of the real loan supply function. The
increased scarcity of bank credit may not lead to higher interest rates
if, as Sti.glitz and Weiss (1981) suggest, higher interest rates are

associated with greater risk taking; deflationary shocks which reduce
collateral may lower the upper bound on Interest rates and increase
excess loan demand.

These links among deflation, price flexibility, and the provision
of bank credit were not lost on contemporary chroniclers; indeed

illustrations of the transmission mechanism abound in the scholarly

literature.'5 Three economic themes emerge from the historical
discussion. First, there appears to be sequential market clearing, in
which credit markets close down, starting with those for lowest—quality

borrowers and moving to those for higher—quality borrowers. Second, the
use of short—term credit is one means of rationing available credit to

some high—quality borrowers. These phenomena are particularly visible
during the Panic of 1907 when credit became increasingly quantity—

rationed and short—term, as Exhibit 1 shows. Note that the market for

— 15 —

short—term bank loans was the only market cleared by interest rates
rather than quantity rationing in November of 1907. Perhaps most
important for our analysis, there appears to be a recognized linkage

between deflationary shocks and the rationing of credit —

(I)

from the

public to the banking system (through a decrease in deposits) and (ii)
from the banking system to the public (through a reduction in loans
relative to reserves, and quantity rationing to low—quality borrowers).
In the next section, we test for the real effects of this
rationing, examining links between price flexibility and economic

fluctuations and the importance of credit channels. We first present
evidence that prices were

indeed

"flexible" during our period of

study. Estimates of time—series relationships among inflation,
financial variables, and real variables follow.

III •

MEASURING REAL EFFECTS OF PRICE FLEXIBILITY

?deling the Relation Between Output and Price

Evidence for price flexibility and for persistent effects of
deflationary shocks on output would fit well with neither the
Keynesian" nor "new classical" views on the origins of business

cycles. For example, implicit in the Keynesian model is the view that
shocks to money supply or demand, or to autonomous expenditure are
transmitted through changes in real balances or interest rates to cause

fluctuations in aggregate demand. Because aggregate output adjusts more
rapidly than price in that framework, changes in the movement of the

price level are revealed only after output movements. The price level
is assumed to respond to its own lagged values and the level of nominal

demand. Such a view could not explain a significant positive link from

— 16 —

prices

to output (e.e., deflationary shocks followed by a reduction in

output).

An alternative classical theory associated with Phelps (1970) and
Lucas (1973) suggests that if the economy were composed of a large
number of scattered markets and information flows among them were
costly, suppliers of goods would have difficulty distinguishing relative

price changes from general movements in the price level. The presence
of imperfect information leads to a positive association of price and
output. changes in the short run as suppliers misinterpret general price

level changes for relative price changes. For the nineteenth century
when transportation and communication were significantly more costly

than today, such a characterization of markets may be appropriate. In
its empirical formulation, the new classical approach holds that lagged
price changes should be useless as predictors of current deviations of
the price level from its expected level, and hence of current output
movements.

Evidence on Price Flexibility
Early evidence on price flexibility for many commodities during the

period is presented in Mills (1927).16 The lack of short—run price
predictability during this period has been demonstrated by Klein (1975),
who notes significant negative autocorrelation in rates of price

change. In Calomiris and Hubbard (1985), we show that prices were
linked to international markets even over reasonably short periods, and
commodity price arbitrage between the U.S. and England was quite

rapid. Below we present some of that evidence.

— 17 —

Measuring price flexibility directly is problematic because
"flexibility" refers to the responsiveness of wages and prices rather

then simply to their volatility. In the traditional interpretation of

the Phillips curve, wage and price rigidity is the sine gnon of the
explanation of the relationship between prior deviations of output

growth from trend and subsequent departures from "core" inflation. The
Phillips curve relation is necessary but not sufficient evidence of wage

or price rigidity. It must also be shown that statistical information
flows from quantity deviations to price deviations rather than vice—

versa. We estimated traditional specifications of the Phillips curve
using monthly data and found contemporaneous correlation between output
and price deviations,'7 but the pattern of intertemporal priority
between output and prices was reversed from that of the post World War
II period.

To explore formally the role of price flexibility more carefully,

we estimate a reduced—form vector autoregression18 with eight (monthly)
lags of the commercial paper rate, the rate of change of the wholesale

price index, and the growth rate of output. For output we use pig Iron
production.'9 The well—known Persons (1931) index of industrial
production relies mainly on bank clearings and other variables of

questionable relevance for output. Another alternative, the level of
imports, is unattractive for our purposes because price effects on

imports are contaminated by the terms—of—trade effect. Our sample
period, 1879—1914, runs from the end of the "Greenback Ear" to the

origins of the Federal Reserve System. This is a peacetime period for
the U.S. during which counter—cyclical fiscal and monetary policy
intervention was negligible.

— 18 —

In

this reduced form model, if the short—term nominal interest rate

contains ex ante inflation expectations, then a Lucas confusion effect

would imply significant marginal predictive power of output for
inflation in a VAR which includes inflation, output growth, and the

interest rate. Moreover, there should be no marginal information from
inflation for output growth changes. Alternatively, in a sticky price
model, aggregate shocks would influence quantities before prices, and
the predictions for the VAR are broadly the same as in the Lucas model.

The estimation and simulation results in Tables 1A and lB indicate
that inflation and interest rates are (1) statistically significant in
the determination of output, and (ii) important contributors to the

forecast variance of output. In addition, lagged coefficients on the
inflation variable are positive and statistically significant, so that

shocks to inflation exert a persistent effect on output. Current and
lagged output levels are neither significant nor important in predicting
inflation; note, for example, that while inflation accounts for 6
precent of the long—run forecast variance of output growth, output
growth accounts for only 1 percent of the forecast variance of

inflation. These findings are not consistent with either the confusion
or the sticky—price model.
Additional evidence for the flexibility of wages and prices is
provided by examining the intertemporal linkages between factory

employment and the real wage. Using quarterly data for 1889—1914 and
1953—1984 on factory employment, manufacturing wages, and wholesale
prices, we estimated reduced—form equations for inflation, employment,

and the real wage; data sources are given in the Appendix. The results
are presented in Table 2.

— 19 —

The significance and importance of patterns of prediction among
these series differ substantially between the two samples. In the
recent period, all three variables contain significant and important

information for predicting prices, while in the historical sample prices
are, for all intents and purposes, unresponsive to past movements in

prices, employment, and real wages. Moreover, in the modern period,
employment is a far better predictor of real wages than in the
historical sample, while variation in real wages iS

important

and

significant for employment only in the historical sample.

Though not reported here, we also considered the importance of
price—clearing channels in international markets (specifically between

the United States and England) as evidence for price flexibility. In a
vector autoregression of interest—rate differentials for commercial
paper of similar maturity and quality in England and the U.S., gold
f lows into England, gold flows out of the U.S., the U.S. trade balance,

and the log of relative prices between the two countries, we find the
lagged quantity variables are not significant predictors of relative

prices. In addition, relative prices are both statistically significant
and economically important contributors to explaining movements in the
trade balance..

Evidence

on Credit Rationing

The evidence from Tables 1A and 13 indicates that the positive
association between output and price for the period 1879—1914 Is mainly

explained by shocks which originate in price. This result is supportive
of the debt—deflation view, and suggests extending the empirical model
to include variables more directly related to credit rationing.

— 20 —

From our discussion in section II, two transmissions of rationing
are important: (1) depositors' rationing to banks, and (ii) banks
rationing to borrowers. In the former, because information—intensive
bank loan portfolios are most Sensitive to fears about deflationary
shocks, the public's supply of funds to the banking sector will be
curtailed, reducing deposits, and forcing more conservative behavior by

banks. As depositors ration banks, even the full—information cost of

credit from banks goes up — as reflected in the "double—name, choice"
commercial paper rate.2° Commercial paper rates probably reflect the
full shadow price of funds to borrowers in that segment of the credit

market. If historical highs are indicators of the latitude for price
clearing In the high—grade commercial paper market, then the commercial
paper rate was well within the range of price—clearing levels during the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.2'

Second, as noted before, in a world with capital—market

imperfections, focusing on one interest rate is inappropriate. Banks
will charge even higher rates to less desirable borrowers, and employ

quantity rationing for least desirable borrowers. That is, borrowers of
differing "quality" will have differential access to credit, with credit
rationing of distressed firms and individual borrowers (see Stiglitz and

Weiss, 1981; Friedman, 1981; and Bernanke, 1983). The two transmission
mechanisms we emphasize can be independent. For example, Bernanke
(1983) notes that banks held substantial excess reserves during the
depth of the Great Depression of the 1930s, indicating that the second
mechanism served as the binding constraint.
In our empirical work, we construct a set of instruments which
proxy for the credit scarcity effect (Y) .

These instruments

21 —

approximate the difference between the cost of capital under full
information and the actual cost of borrowed funds. In addition to the
commercial paper rate, our price indicator of credit scarcity due to
depositors' rationing of banks, we consider three types of measures:

(i) interest rate differentials on commercial papers of different
"quality," 22 (ii) indicators of quantity rationing in the banking
system, and (iii) proxies for the influence of nonfinancial business

failures. Detailed descriptions of the construction of the variables
are presented in the Appendix.

First, we include the differential between 60—90 day averages of
highs and lows for end—of--month "single—name, good" commercial paper of

4—6 months maturity (i') and "single name, prime" commercial paper of

4—6 months maturity (jCP) This spread reflects the interest premium
charged on paper of lower quality but with similar maturity.23
Inclusion of such interest differentials permits a test of effects of

credit availability on output.24 That is, if interest rate movements in
response to deflatio[iary shocks reflect only adjustment in the full—

information cost of capital, interest rate differentials (on securities

with similar maturities) should be unaffected. Responses of the
differentials to such shocks reflect credit rationing in securities of
low quality and the movements of borrowers with access to multiple
sources of credit.

That the various commercial paper rates may be imperfect indicators
of bank credit crunches implies that quantity flows may contribute
explanatory power at the margin above that contributed by the price of

funds. For this reason we include the real change in loans
(( Lt —

Li)

I

where L and P denote the stock of loans and the

price level, respectively).25

— 22 —

Finally,

we also consider the monthly percentage change in the

liabilities of business failures (Lf) ; this variable is constructed
from the monthly series reported by Dun and Company. To the extent that
the rate of change of prices and proxies for credit channels are still
statistically significant and economically Important factors in

explaining output movements, the "credit—availability explanation" is

strengthened.26 Indeed, the use of Lf

in

the models we estimate

uniformly improves the statistical significance and economic importance
of the effects of inflation on output.27
To test for the effects of price flexibility and credit
availability on output described above, we examine vector

autoregressions of inflation, output, and financial variables. While
such models are not structural, they are well suited for. examining the

dynamic properties of the interactions. Though not reported here, we
also estimated the regression models suggested by Bernanke (1983), and

obtained similar results —

(i)

that current and lagged "price

surprises" are important for explaining deviations of output from trend,
and (ii) that the addition of real changes in loans provides additional
explanatory power for output.

In Table 3 we present results illustrating the four credit measures

suggested in section II. The reduced—form model includes eight lags of
the following variables: the real flow of loans, the commercial paper
rate, the interest differential between "single—name, good" and "single—
name, prime" commercial paper of 4—6 months maturity, the rate of change
of the wholesale price index, the growth rate of pig iron production,
and the percentage change in the liabilities of business failures.
Measures of statistical significance and of the importance of variables

— 23 —

in

accounting for long—run forecast variance are reported in Tables 3A

and 3B, respectively. The contemporaneous correlation matrix of
residuals is also presented in Table 3B. In estimations and
simulations, we find statistically significant and economically
important effects connecting credit proxies, inflation, and output.

As before, inflation is statistically exogenous to the other

variables, as Indicated by the results in Table 3A. Inflation predicts
output significantly, and accounts for 10.7 percent of the long—run (40

month) forecast variance of output growth in simulations. The
percentage contribution of inflation shocks to output growth forecast
variance reaches a peak of 14.3 percent at the three—month time

horizon. Inflation is also statistically significant in predicting the
interest differential. The near significance of the commercial paper
rate for predicting short—run Inflation is probably best explained by
the Fisher effect, while the small contribution of shocks to the
commercial paper rate to the forecast variance of inflation indicates
the "causes" of inflation are not channelled through interest rates.

Output growth is predicted by our credit—market indicators —

the

commercial paper rate, the real flow of loans, and the percentage change

in liabilities of business failures —

all

of which turn out to be

Important in simulation. The percentage change in the liabilities of
business failures is predicted by the real change in loans, the

commercial paper rate, and the Interest differential. The lack of
significance and Importance of the interest—differential proxy is to be
expected since it is endogenous and not an independent source of credit
rationing.

— 24 —

Examining the contemporaneous correlation matrix of residuals
permits some identification of shocks. While

these

are results from

reduced—form models, the pronounced negative correlation (—0.41) between
interest—rate and loan shocks indicates the predominance of shocks to

the supply of bank credit over shocks to credit demand. That the debt—
deflation—cum—credit—rationing effect is important is also reflected in
the negative associations between shocks to output growth and the change
in liabilities of failures, between shocks to inflation and the change
in liabilities of failures, and between output growth and the comjnercial

paper rate; and in the positive association between output growth and
inflation.

Results from the impulse—response functions for the model reported
in Table 3 are broadly supportive of the dominance of credit supply

shocks. First, positive loan shocks exert persistent negative effects
on the commercial paper rate and positive effects on output. Shocks to
interest rates exert effects in the same direction for the liabilities

of business failures and in the opposite direction for output. Positive
shocks to the interest differential have a persistent negative effect on

loans. Perhaps most interesting, shocks to inflation provide an
impressive corroboration of the credit channel, with positive effects on
loans and output and a negative effect on the interest differential.
Our results presented here strongly suggest the importance of
deflationary shocks for financial markets and of constraints on the

availability of credit for real activity. That these effects are both
economically important and persistent emphasizes the Importance of
studying more carefully the dynamics of market clearing across various

credit markets in the presence of nominal financial contracting. Hence

— 25 —

the

banking panics occurring during our period of study may be best

studied as symptoms of the problems of providing credit in a world of

flexible prices. Our approach is relevant for localized changes in
aggregate supply and demand due to small changes in credit quality and
information, so that we avoid any dependence on "panic" explanations.

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Modern theoretical and empirical research on U. S. business cycles
has in general relied on models with limited ability to explain cyclical
fluctuations when prices are flexible and little uncertainty exists

about government policy. In particular, the existence of pronounced
swings in economic activity during the period between the Civil War and
World War I, a period in which prices exhibit little rigidity, does not
fit well with these approaches.

In contrast to many recent conclusions about links between price
rigidity and the adjustment of output to demand and supply shocks, we
put forth an approach in which such flexibility can be destabilizing

through market failures in credit markets. We present a model of credit
markets in which "imperfect—information" markets of the sort put forth
by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) coexist with "full—information" Walrasian

credit markets. The potential for deflation magnifies credit rationing
for information—intensive borrowers and projects, and deflationary
shocks precipitate a sequential market clearing among classes of lenders
in which the supply of credit to borrowers in information—intensive

markets is reduced.
In section III, we test for price flexibility and for aggregate

real effects of our credit—rationing channel. Three conclusions

— 26 —

underscore the principal findings of the paper. First, we demonstrate
that prices were.lndeed flexible during our sample period relative to
their behavior in the post World War II period studied by modern

macroeconomists. Second, contrary to the predictions of current
theories about the sources of business ccles, we find that shocks to
the rate of change of prices produce positive and persistent effects on

output. Finally, we analyze ways in which deflationary pressures can
affect real activity through disruption of the information—intensive
financial intermediation involved in the provision of bank credit.

We are currently pursuing two extensions of this research. First,
the issue of why nominal financial contracts were used (given the

frequent realization of substantial losses ex post) is of particular

interest. Though it lies beyond the scope of this paper to show why
nominal debt contracts might be optimal ex ante, there are several

possible explanations. For example, fully contingent contracts may be
costly to monitor and enforce; indeed, as Bernanke (1983) points out,

the very existence of bankruptcy indicates the costliness of contingent

contracting. Why nominal debt contracts are superior to indexed
-

contracts, however, remains to be demonstrated.28 Our approach to

analyzing

credit rationing lends itself well to extended analyses of

models in which short—term instruments along with quantity rationing
serve as equilibrating mechanisms when access to longer—term nominal
financial contracts is restricted.29

Second, although our emphasis is on a historical episode of price
flexibility, our results do not imply that credit rationing may not be
important for economic activity in a world with substantial price

rigidity. One sector of the modern economy for which our approach is

— 27 —

particularly

relevant is the farm sector. Agricultural prices (and

hence farm land values, the principal asset of farmers) are relatively

flexible. If the sort of market failures discussed in this paper have
aggregate effects, a likely place for them to be observed is in a link

between farm bank failures and credit rationing and farm incomes. More
broadly, to the extent that banking—system difficulties and loan
restrictions have important real effects, important implications for
monetary and regulatory policy may follow.

— 28 —

Notes
1

See the survey and review of alternative theoretical models in Gordon
(1981). As discussed in Zarnowitz (1985), the search for
"universal" models of business cycles which do not rely on
institutional factors has proven to be difficult.

2See the discussions by Burns (1960), Baily (1978), and DeLong and
Summers (1984) of the changing extent of cyclical variability in
the U.S. economy.
3Many recent contributions in macroeconomics (e.g., Fischer, 1977; and
Taylor, 1979) have emphasized the economic costs of wage and price
rigidity.
4Previous uses of annual data, of course, make studies of cyclical
fluctuations difficult. The more frequently collected, data
reported by the Comptroller of the Currency (see for example
Gorton, 1984) are not evenly spaced.
5Romer (1985) has challenged the view that early business cycles were so
volatile. Her reinterpretations of the data on employment, output,
and industrial production provided by Lebergott, Kuznets, and
Frickey, respectively, have in turn been challenged by Weir (1985)
and Lebergott (1985). None of Romer's suggested adjustments,.
however, would indicate that historical business cycles were less
or equally severe than those of the post World War II era.
6Historical accounts (e.g., the classic studies of Bagehot, 1873;
Sprague, 1910; and Mitchell, 1913) usually point to "financial
panics" before the creation of the Federal Reserve System, though
little effort is made to connect instability in financial markets
per se with macroeconomic variables.
70f course, as the l930s show well, nothing about the existence of a
central bank per se guarnatees that these problems will be
mitigated.
8Gorton (1984) emphasized the predictability of bank panics, as changes
in the perceived riskiness of bank deposits affects the currency—
deposit ratio.
9Contemporary accounts emphasized the credit (as opposed to the
liquidity preference) transmission mechanism. Brown (1910)
notes: "...it is not the saving of capital in the form of coinage
which brings after it a lower rate of interest. Rather is it, that
either is absolutely conditional on the other, that the lower
interest charge made possible by the banking function enables bank
credit, in open competition, to substitute itself for cash, or
induces among banks the policy of lending in general only their own
credit." (p. 748)
'0Greenbaum, Kanatas, and Deshmukh (1984) discuss the importance of bank
credit rationing for small businesses in the current environment.

— 29 —

11DeLong and Summers do note that increases in price flexibility magnify
the impact of deflationary shocks on output, though the result
comes from a model of gradual price adjustment based on labor
contracts, a model not as well suited for the nineteenth century as
for the post World War II period.
finding Is consistent with a model of financial contracting in
which short—term price variability exceeds long—term price
variability (as it would under a gold standard), leading to more
"indexed" rates in the short run.
13Discussion of a model emphasizing the problem of destabilizing
deflation accompanying price flexibility is also useful for
analyzing the behavior of aggregate demand during the Great
Depression of the 1930s. Researchers like Temin (1976), who blame
declining "animal spirits" lack a convincing motivation.
Furthermore, that real Interest rates rose In the face of a decline
in aggregate demand confounds explanation without analyzing the
contributions of deflation.
is, "informatIon capital" can also be considered a factor of
production, so that reductions In the availability of bank credit
will reflect real effects on aggregate supply as well as aggregate
demands. Hence Increases In
unambiguously reduce real output.
Blinder (1985) considers working capital in a similar context,
emphasizing the notion of a "credit multipller' (see also Bernanke,
1981): "Firms may have a desired or 'notional' supply based on
relative prices, expectations, and other variables. But they may
need credit to produce the goods. If the required credit is
unavailable, there may be a 'failure of effective supply' in which
firms fail to produce as much as they can sell?" (p. 2)

'5For example, Persons (1920) discusses the link between deflation and
credit market instability, and Brown (1910) identifies links from
deposits through bank credit to economic activity. Analyses in the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle are typified by the following:
"The effect of the unstable paper currency in checking the credit
system, and forcing cash transactions upon the business community,
is very apparent in the returns made by the number of failures, and
the amount of their liabilities, In the past few years."
(February, 1865, p. 113)
Furthermore, evidence of rationing of credit to worthy borrowers
appeared frequently in the writings of contemporaries. Stevens
(1894, p. 133) notes that many solvent businesses closed during the
panics of 1884 and 1893, and (p. 140) that wholesale business done
on a credit basis prior to the panics was done on a cash—only
basis. That the rationing longer—erm loans accompanying deflation
in commodity prices led to more extensive and expensive reliance on
hort—term paper is noted as far back as 1865 by the Commercial
Chronicle and Review of Hunt's Merchants' Magazine.
Sprague (1910)'s work reflects these same themes: "It would seem,
then, that business distress from lack of credit facilities was due
to at least three influences: The restriction of cash payments by
the banks increased the requirements of borrowers; the supply of

— 30 —

loans was reduced by a moderate amount of contraction; and the
shifting of loans involved considerable uncertainty and
inconvenience." (pp. 302—303) Examples of the importance of
credit rationing and credit market segmentation appear frequently
in Sprague. "Their loans also must have been of high average
quality after four years of thoroughgoing liquidation and
recuperation in the business world." (p. 217, emphasis added)
"....it is certain that the demand for additional capital was
outstripping current savings seeking investment. Increasing
difficulty was experienced in marketing securities of the very
highest class. (p. 237, emphasis added)
"Whatever the causes, the inability to secure capital by the sale
of securities in a period of active business should have been
enough in itself to inspire unusual caution in the management of
banking institutions. When corporations of the highest standing
are obliged to resort to short—term notes it may be assumed without
question that other corporations are expanding upon an insufficient
foundation of working capital, that current obligations are
increasing, and that bank credits are being used to their utmost
extent." (p. 238)
"Borrowers are forced to resort almost entirely to their own
banks....This shifting of loans involves much strain and uncertainty
and in many instances it is not possible to carry it out at all."
(p. 302)
16Mills notes substantial differences in price flexibility across
individual commodities, presenting evidence for price flexibility
on average.
Prices of the large bulk of commodities at wholesale are
affected to some extent during general business revivals
and recessions...The number of commodities sharing in
business revivals has constituted, on the average, 79.7
percent of the commodities studied in specific cycles.
This proportion has fluctuated, from cycle to cycle
during the period since 1890, between 67 percent and 95
percent. The proportion affected by general price
recessions has averaged 77.7 percent, and has ranged in
different cycles, between 70 percent and 95 percent.
(pp. 434—435)
He also, however, describes an overall decline in the monthly
variability of wholesale commodity prices in the U.S. over the
1890—1913 period.

171n our estimates of the Phillips curve for 1879—1914 we employ monthly
and quarterly data on wholesale prices and pig iron output (see the
Data Appendix) to test for contemporaneous correlation between
devlationsfrom trend in prices, on the one hand, and those in
output on the other hand. We estimate equations with inflation as
the dependent variable and two lags of inflation, monthly dummies,
and deviations of output from trend as independent variables. In
monthly data, the coefficient on the output variable is 0.013 with
a coefficient standard error of 0.010 and a significance level of
0.19. This implies a .01 percent response in inflation to a 1
percent contemporaneous output deviation. The coefficients on

— 31 —

lagged inflation imply a long—run coefficient for output deviations
of 0.017. In quarterly data, the output coefficient is 0.047 with
a coefficient standard error of 0.020 and a significance level of
0.02. The long—run coefficient for output is 0.040.
'8For this and all subsequent VAR models, time, time squared, the tariff
on pig iron, and seasonal dummies are included as independent
variables in the estimation equations.
'9For a description of the cyclical properties of various output
measures over our period of study, see Eckler (1933). Following a
suggestion from Larry Neal we also used bank clearings outside New
York as a substitute output proxy. In the VARs, this substitution
did not change any of the results qualitatively.
20Conunercial paper rates, may, then, fully reflect the shadow price of

funds — that is, if quantity rationing is absent in the commercial
paper market, and there are players, for whom the choice is
relevant, who elect to raise funds through commercial banks.

21Earlier in the nineteenth century commercial paper rates were
frequently much higher than any level reached subsequently. For
example, in October 1857, the commercial paper rate averaged 24
percent and in October 1873, it averaged 16.5 percent. In post—
1879 data, the monthly average is always below 11 percent.
22Descriptions of the various commercial paper securities can be found
in Myers (1931) and James (1978). Essentially, single—name paper
is the liability of an individual borrowing to secure working
capital. Double—name paper is usually the liability of both
parties involved in a commercial transaction for which trade credit
is needed.

also experimented with two other Interest—rate spreads — between
"single—name, good" and "double—name, choice" commercial paper of
4—6 months maturity and between bank time loans of 60—days maturity
and "double—name, choice" conimercial paper. As the results were
similar In character to those discussed in the text, we did not
report them here.
24We also experimented with the differential between the commercial
paper rate and the railroad bond yield as an indicator of the
shadow price of credit. While this is admittedly a rough measure
of loan scarcity, it captures a key feature of credit rationing due
to asymmetric information. Riskiess (demandable) loans would not
be rationed as term loans would be during credit crunches; thus the
interest rate differential reflects, in part, the extent of
rationing in the term loan market. The results were not promining,
possibly because the interest rate differential may reflect
maturity differences unrelated to rationing (although long—term
rates are smooth throughout the period).

-

— 32 —

25As a further indication of the cost of intermediation, the reserve—
loan ratio serves as a measure of credit rationing, of bankers'
desires to reduce the supply of credit given the reserves
available. The variable contains information on shocks to the
banking system; disintermediation will likely lead to an increase
in the reserve—loan ratio. In addition, the shortfall of bank
reserves relative to desired levels signals the potential for loan
contraction and liquidation. In our empirical work, we obtained
similar results using the aggregate bank reserve—loan ratio instead
of using the real flow of bank loans.

26Gorton (1984) finds the liabilities of faiied businesses to be a
significant factor in explaining the riskiness of bank deposits and
the banking system's currency—deposit ratio.

27For example, adding f to the model reported in Table 1, roughly
doubles the contribution of shocks to inflation to the explanation
of the long—run forecast variance of output.
28Reasons for nominal contracting in general include, inter alia.
transactions costs Involved with auction markets and risk aversion
on the part of one or both parties (see Canton, 1979; and Hubbard
and Weiner, 1984). In addition, institutional restrictions on
indexed contracts due to limited enforcement of negotiability under
common law may have been important (see Nussbautn, 1939).
29That nominal financial contracting may lead to large losses ex post
calls into question why borrowers and lenders did not index debt
commitments ex ante. We are pursuing this issue as a topic for
future research, and offer a couple of preliminary thoughts
below. First, within the framework of the adverse selection model
of Stigiitz and Weiss (1981), an indexed loan contract will in
general lead to increased risk taking by risk—neutral borrowers.
This is true since in "good times" (high price level realization),
net cash flow after debt service is reduced, and in "bad times"
(low price level realization), net cash flow is relatively
increased. Such increased risk taking would lead to greater credit
rationing in the Stigiitz—Weiss model, so that both borrowers and
lenders might prefer nominal contracting. A second way to think
about the choice of nominal contracting (outside of a credit—
rationing model) is in the context of its insurance value in a
world in which lenders are risk—neutral and borrowers are risk—
averse. Consider two types of uncertainty — that relating to
costs of intermediation services provided by banks and that related
to the cash flows of borrowers' projects. Under plausible
assumptions, as long as intermediation cost uncertainty Is greater
than cash flow uncertainty, nominal financial contracting is
optimal.

— 33 —

References
Bagehot, Walter. Lombard Street. London: Henry S. King, 1873.
Baily, Martin N. "Stabilization Policy and Private Economic
Behavior." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1978: 1.

Bernanke, Ben S. "Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession." American
Economic Review 71 (May 1981): 155—159.
Bernanke, Ben S. "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review

73 (June 1983): 257—276.
Blinder, Alan S. "Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failures.'
Working Paper No. 1619, National Bureau of Economic Research, May
1985.

Bordo, Michael D. "Some Historical Evidence 1870—1933 on the Impact
and International Transmission of Financial Crises." Working Paper
No. 1606, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 1985.
Brown, Harry G. "Commercial Banking and the Rate of Interest.'
Quarterly Journal of Economics 24 (August 1910): 743—749.

Burns, Arthur. "Progress Toward Economic Stabiiity." American
Economic Review 50 (March 1960).
Cagan, Phillip. Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of
Money. New York: Columbia University Press, 1965.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Hubbard, R. Glenn. "Defining Bounds for the
Law of One Price: Monthly Individual Commodity Prices for London
and New York, 1879—1914." Mimeograph, Northwestern University,
1985.

Canton, Dennis W. "Contracts, Price Rigidity, and Market
Equilibrium." Journal of Political Economy 87 (November 1979):
1034—1062.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Summers, Lawrence H. "The Changing Cyclical
Variability of Economic Activity in the United States." Working
Paper No. 1450, National Bureau of Economic Research, September
1984; forthcoming in Robert J. Gordon (ed.), The American Business
Cycle: Continuity and Change.. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Eckler, A. Ross. "A Measure of the Severity of Depressions, 1873—
1932." Review of Economics and Statistics 16 (1933): 75—81.

Fama, Eugene F. "Banking in the Theory of Finance." Journal of
Monetary Economics 6 (January 1q80): 39—57.

— 34 —

Fischer,

Stanley. "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
Optimal Money Supply Rule.' Journal of Political Economy 85
(February 1977): 191—205.

Fisher, Irving. "The Debt—Deflation Theory of Great Depressions."
Econometrica 1 (October 1933): 337—357.
Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Relative Stability of Money and Credit
'Velocities' in the United States: Evidence and Some
Speculations." Working Paper No. 645, National Bureau of Economic
Research, November 1981.
Friedman, Milton and Schwartz, Anna. A Monetary History of the United
States. PrInceton: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Gordon, Robert J. "A Consistent Characterization of a Near Century of
Price Behavior." American Economic Review 70 (May 1980): 243—
249.

Gordon, Robert J. "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price
Adjustment." Journal of Economic Literature 19 (June 1981):
493—530.

Gorton, Gary. "Banking Panics and Business Cycles." Mimeograph,
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, August 1984.
Greenbaum, Stuart I., Ranatas, George, and Sudhakar D. Deshmukh.
"Credit Rationing and Small Business Financing." In Problems in
Financing Small Businesses, edited by Paul M. Horvitz and R.
Richardson Pettit. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press Inc., 1984.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Weiner, Robert J. "Nominal Contracting and Price
Flexibility in Product Markets." Mimeograph, Northwestern
University, 1984.
James, John A. Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.
James, John A. "Shifts in the Nineteenth—Century Phillips Curve
Relationship." Working Paper No. 1587, National Bureau of Economic
Research, March 1985.

Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money. London: Macmillan, 1936.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises. New York: Basic Books, 1978.
Klein, Benjamin. "Our New Monetary Standard: The Measurement and
Effects of Price Uncertainty, 1880—1973." Economic Inquiry 13
(December 1975): 461—483.
Layer, Robert G. The Earnings of Cotton Textile Workers, 1824—1914.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1955.

— 35 —

Lebergott,

Stanley. "Comment on Romer and Weir Papers." Annual
Meeting of the Economic History Association, September 1985.

Lucas, Robert E. "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation
Tradeoffs."
American Economic Review 63 (June 1973): 326—334.
Macaulay, Frederick. The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields,and
Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1938.

Mills, Frederick C. The Behavior of Prices. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1927.

Minsky, Hyman P. John Maynard Keynes. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1975.

Minsky; Hyman P. "A Theory of Systemic Fragility." In E. J. Altman
and A. W. Sametz (eds.). Financial Crises: Institutions and
Market in a Fragile Environment. New York: Wiley, 1977.

Mitchell, Wesley C. Business Cycles. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1913.

Myers, Margaret G. The New York Money Market, Volume I: Origins and
Development. New York: Columbia University Press, 1931.
National Monetary Commission. Statistics for the United States,
1867—1909. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1910.

Nussbaum, Arthur. Money in the Law. Chicago: The Foundation Press,
1939.

Okun, Arthur N. Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.
Persons, Warren M. "A Nontechnical Explanation of the Index of General
Business Conditions," Review of Economics and Statistics 3
(1920): 39—55.

Persons., Warren N. Forecasting Business Cycles. New York: Wiley,
1931.

Phelps, Edmund (ed.). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
Inflation Theory. New York: W. W. Norton, 1970.
Romer, Christina. "New Estimates of Unemployment and Gross National
Product for the U.S. Before 1929: Assumptions and Implications."
Annual Meeting of the Economic History Association, September,
1985.
Sachs, Jeffrey. "The Changing Cyclical Behavior of Wages and Prices:
1890—1976."
American Economic Review 70 (March 1980): 78—90

— 36 —

Sprague, 0. M. W. History of Crises Under the National Banking
System. National Monetary Commission, Senate Document No. 538,
61st Congress, 2d session, 1910.
Standard Statistics Company. Base Book of the Standard Statistical
Bulletin. New York: January 1932.
Stevens, Albert C. "Analysis of the Phenomena of the Panic in the U.S.
in 1893." Quarterly Journal of Economics 9 (January 1894): 117—
145.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew. "Credit Rationing in Markets
with Imperfect Information." American Economic Review 71 (June
1981): 393—410.

Taylor, John B. "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model." American
Economic Review 69 (May 1979): 108—113.
Taylor, John B. "Improvements in Macroeconomic Stability: The Role of
Wages and Prices." Working Paper No. 1491, National Bureau of
Economic Research, November 1984.
Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New
York: W, W. Norton, 1976.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Historical
Statistics of the United States, 1789—1945. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949.
Weir, David R. "Okun's Law and the Curious Stability of Historical
Unemployment Estimates." Annual Meeting of the Economic History
Association, September 1985.
Zarnowitz, Victor. "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical
Perspective: Review of Theories and Evidence." Journal of
Economic Literature 23 (June 1985): 523—580.

PRICE FLEXIBILITY, CREDIT RATIONING, AND ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S., 1879—1914

DATA APPENDIX

In

order to capture short—run intertemporal linkages among credit,

deflation, and output, it is necesary to employ fairly high—frequency
data, but the shortage of comprehensive data on output and bank balance

sheets requires the use of rough proxies. For output we use pig iron
production; data are obtained from Historical Statistics of the United

States, 1789—1945. We construct a single index of wholesale prices by
splicing the Warren—Pearson index (for 1879—1890) and the Bureau of

Labor Statistics index (for 1890—1914). In Calomiris and Hubbard
(1985), we discuss results using more disaggregated data.

Our quarterly wage data over the 1879—1914 period are from those

collected for cotton textile workers by Layer (1955). Quarterly factory
employment data are drawn from Historical Statistics of the United
States, 1789—1945.

We construct monthly loans and reserves data from the weekly
reports of the Commercial and Fthanciai. Chronicle for banks in New York

City, Phithdelphia, and Boston. Though these series represent only part
of the banking system, they are the only available monthly data of their
kind of which we are aware.

The commercial paper rate series used in Tables 1A and lB is taken

from Macaulay (1938), and are monthly averages for 1879—1914. End—of—
month interest rates used in Tables 3A and 3B for 1894—1909 — on (1)
60—90 day average of high and low for double—name choice commerical
paper (analogous to Macaulay's measure), (ii) single—name, good
commercial paper of 4—6 months maturity, (iii) single—name prime

commerical paper of 4—6 months maturity, and (iv) bank time loans of 60—

days maturity — are from Statistics for the United States, 1867—1909
published by the National Monetary Commission in 1910.

Dun's series on the liabilities of business failures is from
Base Book of Standard Statistical Bulletin, January 1932.

TABLE lÀ

VAR ESTIMATION RESULTS: INTEREST RATES, INFLATION, AND OUTPUT GROWTH
(MONTHLY, 1879:10—1914:12)

F—Tests: Significance Levels

Contemporaneous

i

Lagged

p

Y

IC

.000

.032

.000

2.

.268

.000

.029

.498

.780

.000

p

1
y

.ic =

.2.

=

commercial paper rate

rate

of change in wholesale prices

percentage growth in pig iron production

TABLE lB

VAR ESTIMATION RESULTS: INTEREST RATES, INFLATION, AND OUTPUT GROWTH
(MONTHLY, 1879:10—1914:12)

Decomposition of Long—Run Forecast Variance (40 months)
Contemporaneous

Lagged

p

y

jC

.2.

p

y

88.73

6.69

12.38

9.33

92.01

6.11

1.94

1.30

81.51

Correlation Matrix of Residuals

Contemporaneous
Lagged
IC

y

Note:

1.00

—0.04

1.00

—0.10

0.08

For definitions of the variables, see Table 1A.

1.00

TABLE 2
COMPARISON OF WAGE AND PRICE FLEXIBILITY
(1889—1914 AND 1953—1984 PERIODS)

MODERN DATA (1953—1984)

HISTORICAL DATA (1889—1914)

F—Tests: Significance Levels

F—Tests: Significance Levels

.
P/P

Contemporaneous
Lagged

N

•

W/P

P/P

P/P

0.036

0.691

0.024

0.417

N

0.093

0.000

0.026

w/P

0.000

0.674

0.000

N

W/P

0.653

0.082

0.406

0.000.

0.336

0.789

0.007

0.000

•

Forecast Variance Decompositions

N
W/P

72.08

13.82

42.46

87.36

13.37

31.29

18.48

82.89

56.33

9.78

56.55

23.66

9.45

3.29

1.22

2.85

30.08

45.05

Correlation Matrix of Residuals

•P/P

I
W/P

1

1

0.13

P

N
w

P

0.03

= rate
=

0.28

1

—0.87

P

Correlation Matrix of Residuals

1

—0.73

of change of wholesale price index

Index of factory employment
real wage rate

1

—0.38

1

TABLE 3A

VAR ESTIMATION RESULTS: INTEREST RATES, INFLATION, OUTPUT GROWTH,

BANK LOANS, INTEREST DIFFERENTIALS, AND LIABILITIES OF FAILURES
(MONTHLY, 1894:10—1909:12)

F—Tests: Significance Levels
Contemporaneous
Lagged

L—L
IC

1cg — 1cp
p

y

L—L
1

P
IC

jcg

—

1q

L = stock

.611

.293

.927

.568

.091

.079

.115

.000

.095

.159

.102

.012

.888

.023

.000

.269

.838

.089

.939

.803

.017

.669

.033

.213

.840

.350

.494

.181

.000

.394

.742

.230

.074

.528

.078

.000

of loans outstanding in major Cities

IC =

commercial paper rate ("double—name, choice")

1cg

commercial paper rate ("single—name, good")

jCP =

commercial paper rate ("single—name, prime")

=
=

rate
rate

of change in the wholesale price index
of growth of pig iron production

TABLE 3B
VAR ESTIMATION RESULTS: INTEREST RATES, INFLATION, OUTPUT GROWTH
BANK LOANS, INTEREST DIFFERENTIALS, AND LIABILITIES OF FAILURES
(MONTHLY,

Decomposition

of Long—Run

Contemporaneous
Lagged

Forecast

L—L1

1894:10—1909:12)

Variance
c

P

(40 months)

cg cp

2.

p

L-L
P_i

jcg_jcp

p

y

77.25

22.43

10.88

7.39

10.98

5.38

7.60

58.89

8.46

6.49

16.40

5.05

3.27

2.08

63.57

5.51

0.82

5.90

2.24

1.45

6.24

72.10

10.65

9.63

4.65

12.20

5.03

4.54

53.53

3.23

5.00

2.97

5.82

3.97

7.62

70.82

Correlation Matrix of Residuals
Contemporaneous
Lagged
L—L
1

1.00

jcgjcp

—0.41

1.00

—0.07

0.16

—0.07

0.003

1.00

—0,12

1.00

0.17

—0.33

0.01

0.22

1.00

—0.07

0.14

0.13

—0.16

—0.20

1.00

TABLE 3C
CUMULATIVE IMPULSE RESPONSES
OF OUTPUT TO A REAL LOANS SHOCK

0.047

CUMULATIVE
RESPONSES

OF OUTPUT

0.008

MONTHS

TABLE 3D
CUMULATIVE IMPULSE RESPONSES
OF THE LIABILITES OF FAILED BUSINESSES
TO A COMMERCIAL PAPER RATE SHOCK

0.083

CUMULATIVE
RESPONSES

OF THE LIABILITIES
OF FAILED BUSINESSES

0.021

0

10

20
MONTHS

30

40

TA&E 3E
CtJMUIAT1VE I1PULSE RESPONSES
OF OUTPUT TO A COfIIIERCIAL PAPER RATE SHOOZ

-0.013

CUMULATIVE

RESPONSES
OF OUTPUT

-0.074
MONTH3

TA8LE 3F
CUMULATiVE IMPULSE RESPONSES
OF REAL LOANS TO AN INTEREST DIFFERENTIAL SHOCK

22640

CUMULATIVE
RESPONSES

OF REAL LOANS

0

-21172
0

10

20

30

40

TA8LE 36
CLJIILJLATJVE IMPULSE RESPONSES
OF OUTPUT TO AN INFLATiON SHOCT

0.037

CUMULATIVE
PESPONSES

OF OUTPUT

0.010
MONTHS

EXHBT 1
Credit Rationing During the Panic of 1907

&3I3 Ito. 29.—LOAN AND DISCOUNT RATZS IN T NIEW YO1K MAB.KT, WEEY, 1890-4909--Continued.

17.

cod.-

3to. Zanp.

occur.

1u—

1).

.4ver- 03ou(W103

2.30

U

2 —13

534.5'

18
Fob.

1

$
13
28

MI.

828m).

13

5

2-4' 235

25.51

134— 4
6

3

2

214

2346

23.4-. 4

4*

3
4

3

1

134— 3

4
6
3
2
23

4
0
3
2
3
2
5

134—29

3 — 8344

1344-23

13
28
28

234.14

1-43.5
12
19

134. 29
j

26

ay 3
10

17

U

Y6s 7
14
21
28

34.

10

2—4

J

1351

244
2

1%— 23.

234
234

134— 23.

134

144— 234

2

134— 334

23.

2

3

234
334

334-' 16

23.4. 3

0
6

234. 4

333

2-3

34
2345

16
28
30

234

2 — 63.

2344

2 —5

4

21'

1—6
3—10

$

133_75

30

—4

4 —26

21

13
28
26

2344

5 —13

10

3%— 15

10

8

44—2

13

28
27

3if...1

• P3

1

134434

34-14413-121

34-15446-231
tJ.4'54 5 —26

28

1')
('3

17

C')

12

cot In the mart, io

co001.t9' uom0nL

4 NgicL acot 80

30 buass.

4'

6

8

4 - 4344

444"4454

33

334

34l
4
4

334— 4

4-—

33

— 344 3 —344
3414 344

3*4

434

4.

4..

61

445-3

534
54-54

33-4 54—4

446--444

544

444

4*44

43.4-4

I

5454

44-54

3%-3444

334.3054

54-6

434—3

4444

454—3

5
5

534$

53.44454

5444-44

344.444

3.1,1

334—7.

81.4—7

344

644-ã44j

444-7.

644-7

544:

6 ,.

4
534334—8
335—616—334 8-6644
0 4151 84.4.7
6444
8

034

6434. 3

d434.
12 —46

3

,34

.

—35

,

32 —63

12 —15

12 -63

13 -55

834-7

4
4
8

4
6
8

8,
3-46.44
4
6

3

6
6

,

8

7. —7%

434.7

7 .734

84.7

6

'6

74obu1... spectoi iecot.
7. 4

7.

3.4

7.

7

.3'

.3'

17

6
4

7 7 —7344
.1 —7344

—344

.744+

•7 —73.44

obus50sS.
.

7

I

Nobuognau.

12 —53

83.4—7

7.1

Nobud.0.

4o re**r i; 84 ug

444.
444
3444 644

434—7 '

7'

'6

634+
836+

-644

8 —434

844
644.7
334.7

0-434

7.rob.
o

6

4 -6444
6 —644•

4'

'3

4854.7.

12 —56

344-7

8 -445
6 -645

6
3 -834
6
634
4
854
4 -4444
4444.

544-6
34—6

.5'4'

6 .44

6

44

534-4
534-6
344-4

544 544 3 -434
54-6

4 -4546

-6% 3 .444
4.
4'

3354 ,

334 5344
5 -534
534
3 .43.4

534
544

534-4

5

34.30.4

6

50.51

534-544

344

534. 6
5%'

4-4

544-34-4

5

5344.54-4

351 _ -

654

434
455-444

3%
0

53(4

57,44

4544

545-3444

53.

534-6
534-6

444"4454

534-344

S

034
6 —634

-54-44454

5
3

6 - 84-51

535—6

434

445-444 44.4-4*44
434- 464$ 434-444
534-534

—6.

6

534—6

4344

344

S

3-644344—7
6 .444 644-7

6

445-4341

544

.5

8 -64.4

534$

4444

444-3

41

8*65.4

444.3.

464

4444

5

4.664 4-4444*4—7

3
534
5
5

5444

.44

4
3444
334 544-6

4

4

4 - 444

44

—334

'

0'

.

—734

.7344 7 .744
0

sublect to

I

8 —10

15 —63 ,

'

.

12
0.2

12

too low.

6
3

8 —60
.

10,

8 t.o.to.s b14he0n173 82coboornpco*oubstn
put out co rn7 IS 00*60688..
• 4uottcco

0-434644-7

33

C')
C')

1$

3..4446

61.4

31

,

11-1942-23
34.144 8 .17

44:

6 -444: 434-7

4 .45.44

('4

C')
C')

635

5 —6446

5344

4 — 4441

8

('4

544—6

I

334- 4

3

3

344.344

344$6.

6

334.4

234
3
3

7

544—534

385-6
345-4

5

244$

3 —13

545-6

5444

54-4
5'..4$44j

0,

234
03

13
30

2C0,.1

64

544

4444454

4444

3

54443.4

3]

23.4$

S — .oo

334434

544-534

534
544

5

62.53.51

3

234-' 8
234.10

534,

444— 4454

34

13

434

344.534

6441 6—83.4

4344 464— 444$

23.4$

U

544-434,

53.5—

13.4$

3

544-6546

5444

2'

3

Oct.

534.33.4

43.4— 43.

3

234— 4

1

646

344*50.4

5344

134 234-5

4

3*4-634-

344-51
344534

5

464— 434

23.4$

3

6 —64.4 43.4.7
5*4-634
445

344.4344

6

S - 5344

2 ' -334 335-

3

1*3

Sept. 6

Di..

23.

2 - 33

Ao(. 3

544-6644

4444

I

8 •444

2,4

63..

1351

6-4343-4.'
6-464 644404-7

33.4-544

434-3

334

420
820050i..

3744

534
544

6

-

54.344,

5344

54

4444

23.

3

4

3_43.4

8
8

0

3, 7.735 434-7.]

13.

12
19
26

3

5844

4

2—3
S—3

Suty 3

4 454 6'
0-434

434•

44-444 434S

.. ...

I—4

234-29
2—12

6:
53.4-334 534- 344

4

mgcthg. 6 rnoctha. 7.820000.1..
.

2446

—

606851, 4 820030.1. 5

606851.

30.5859.

3:.

6
4

2 — 344

ar 1

,

31o44.

Drubl.

-

npe.

Sic. 4

CommL

a. o6 tOrn. louco.

C&Lllaeoa *6—

10

10 —52

8 —7.

"

—

'6
'8

'8

.4

7.'4-8

6

10

I

'8 ...

6'

3

Bcoó and trust sornp.niec out of the 08080.0.

I Co.orc bndnm for tact two day, ot 7118.

• The

Prtum oncu82.ocyprootOcaUy4SappoozId 44th60.

tact dÀy sf00. y8.

Source: National Monetary Commission, Stat!stics of the
United States, 1867—1909, January 1932.

