                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FAMILY PROXIMITY, CHILDCARE, AND WOMEN'S LABOR FORCE ATTACHMENT

                                         Janice Compton
                                         Robert A. Pollak

                                       Working Paper 17678
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17678


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2011




We thank Sarah MacPhee, Karl Scholz, Betsey Stevenson, Christopher Taber, Jeffrey Wooldridge,
and participants at the CNISS workshop at Washington University in St. Louis, the Michigan Retirement
Research Center workshop, the NBER Cohort Studies Conference, the University of Wisconsin, the
Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, and the NBER Labor Studies Conference for helpful
comments. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the American Economic Association meetings
in Atlanta and the International Association for Time Use Research in Paris. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Janice Compton and Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Family Proximity, Childcare, and Women's Labor Force Attachment
Janice Compton and Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 17678
December 2011
JEL No. J13,J20

                                             ABSTRACT

We show that close geographical proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law has a substantial positive
effect on the labor supply of married women with young children. We argue that the mechanism through
which proximity increases labor supply is the availability of childcare. We interpret availability broadly
enough to include not only regular scheduled childcare during work hours but also an insurance aspect
of proximity (e.g., a mother or mother-in-law who can provide irregular or unanticipated childcare).
Using two large datasets, the National Survey of Families and Households and the public use files
of the U.S. Census, we find that the predicted probability of employment and labor force participation
is 4-10 percentage points higher for married women with young children living in close proximity
to their mothers or their mothers-in-law compared with those living further away.


Janice Compton
Department of Economics
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB, R3R 5V5
CANADA
comptonj@cc.umanitoba.ca

Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
                                                                                                            3



1. Introduction
           In this paper we show that close geographical proximity to mothers or mothers-
in-law has a substantial positive effect on the labor supply of married women with young
children. 1 Using two large datasets, the National Survey of Families and Households
(NSFH) and the public use files of the U.S. Census, we find that the predicted probability
of employment and labor force participation is 4-10 percentage points higher for married
women with young children living close to their mothers or their mothers-in-law
compared with those living further away. We argue that the availability of childcare is the
mechanism linking proximity and labor supply. We interpret availability broadly enough
to include not only regular scheduled childcare during work hours but also an insurance
aspect of proximity (e.g., a mother or mother-in-law who can provide irregular or
unanticipated childcare).
           Two endogeneity issues complicate estimation. The first complication arises
because childcare decisions and labor supply decisions are often made simultaneously.
We deal with this endogeneity issue by using proximity as an instrument for childcare
transfers from mother or mother-in-law. This IV approach assumes that proximity is
exogenous, an assumption often made in the literature.
           The second complication arises because of the potential endogeneity of
proximity. If proximity is not exogenous but is related to variables that affect labor
supply and childcare decisions (e.g., both proximity and labor supply may be influenced
by human capital investment, fertility and the marriage market), then the IV results are
misleading. To deal with the potential endogeneity of proximity, we use census data to
analyze the relationship between labor force attachment and proximity using a sample of
“military wives,” civilian women with husbands serving in the U.S. military. Economists
have generally viewed the endogeneity of proximity as less serious than those posed by
the childcare-labor supply relationship, as evidenced by several recent papers that use
proximity to mothers as an instrument for family-provided childcare (e.g., Dimova and
Wolff (2008), Dimova and Wolff (2011), Zamarro (2009)). Estimates based on census

1
 We use “mothers” to refer to the older generation, “women” to refer to the middle generation (i.e., the
adult daughters of the mothers) and “children” to refer to the youngest generation (i.e., grandchildren of the
mothers). By "young children" we mean children 12 and under.
                                                                                                          4


data support our conclusion that proximity has a substantial positive effect on the labor
force attachment of married women with young children and that the mechanism is the
availability of childcare.
           Using proximity as an instrument for childcare transfers from mothers or
mothers-in-law, we find that married women who receive childcare transfers from their
mothers or mothers-in-law are 5.1 to 6.2 percentage points more likely to work in the
paid labor force than those who do not receive childcare transfers. These estimates are
based on predicted transfer of childcare in the previous month and may underestimate the
full effect of geographic proximity. Proximity to a mother or mother-in-law who can
respond to irregular or unanticipated childcare needs constitutes a kind of insurance the
importance of which may be greater than the number of actual or predicted childcare
hours would suggest. Market-based childcare may be a good substitute for care provided
by a grandmother when the need for childcare is regular and anticipated. But market-
based childcare is less able to meet irregular or unanticipated childcare needs. Hence, the
proximity of a grandmother who can pick up a sick child from school, take a child to after
school sports practice, or care for a child whose parents are traveling on business may
affect women's labor market choices, even if such childcare needs seldom arise.
           To allay concerns that proximity affects labor force attachment through
channels other than childcare, we show that proximity has no discernable effect on the
labor force behavior of married women without childcare needs: those without young
children. Although unmarried women with children are more likely than married women
with children to benefit from work-related childcare by their mothers, we do not find a
relationship between proximity and labor force attachment for unmarried women. This
lack of effect is consistent with a more inelastic labor supply of unmarried women with
children, making them less responsive to the availability of childcare. 2
           Using micro-data from the census, we find additional evidence that proximity to
mothers or mothers-in-law increases the labor force attachment of married women with

2
  Kimmel (1998) finds that the labor supply of unmarried mothers is less responsive to childcare prices than
the labor supply of married mothers. Bishop et al (2009) estimate labor supply elasticities for single
women and show that participation wage elasticities for single mothers have declined dramatically between
1980 and 2004, and are much lower than those for married mothers. They estimate a participation wage
elasticity for single mothers of 0.68 in 1979, dropping to 0.25 by 2004. In contrast, Blau and Kahn (2007)
estimate wage elasticities for married mothers at 0.98-1.04 in 1979-1981 and 0.48-0.54 in 1999-2001.
                                                                                                           5


young children and that the likely mechanism is childcare. Because the census does not
ask about proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law, we use living in one's birth state as a
proxy for proximity. Because the census does not ask about childcare, we estimate the
relationship between labor force attachment and birth state residence. We report three
separate analyses. First, we proceed as we did with the NSFH reduced form equations,
assuming proximity is exogenous and investigating the effect on the labor force
attachment of married women with young children of living in her birth state or her
husband's birth state. Second, we consider a sample of military wives. The military wives
provide an endogeneity control because their husbands' locations are determined by the
military. For the military wives, we find that living in the birth state of both spouses
increases the labor force attachment of married women with young children. Third, we
consider a subsample of migrants -- individuals who, five years prior to the census, were
not living in either their birth state or their current state. We find that married women
with young children who returned to their birth states or to their husbands' birth states
have substantially higher labor force participation than women who moved to a non-birth
state.
           Geographical proximity of adult children and their parents has only recently
garnered attention in the economic literature. 3 Konrad et al. (2002) model the proximity
of adult children to their parents as the outcome of a noncooperative game, but they do




3
  Klerman and Leibowitz (1990) find a non-significant effect of the availability of relative care on the
probability of returning to work within 3 months (and also within 24 months) following the birth of a child.
Their analyses, however, focus on coresident grandmothers rather than grandmothers in close proximity.
Declining rates of coresidence (Costa, 1999; Ruggles, 2007) and the likelihood that coresident
grandmothers may themselves need care (Compton and Pollak, 2009) suggest that the focus on coresidence
rather than proximity fails to capture the roles of mothers and mothers-in-law. Several recent theoretical
papers consider the effect of intergenerational transfers of time on the labor force behavior of daughters.
Pezzin and Schone (1999) develop a model in which the labor force participation of daughters and the
provision of long-term care to mothers are jointly determined; they focus on the care of frail elderly
mothers and do not consider childcare.
                                                                                                         6


not consider childcare or labor supply. 4 Rainer and Siedler (2009) develop and estimate
a similar model but, unlike Konrad et al., they discuss labor market effects; they find that
adult children without siblings are more likely to remain in their parents’ locations and
have worse labor market outcomes. These findings are strongest when comparing only
children and adults with siblings who grew up in economically depressed regions: the
earnings of adults with siblings are ten percent higher on average, and adults with
siblings are ten percent more likely to be working full time, compared to only children.
They do not investigate the effect of the availability or receipt of childcare on women’s
labor supply. 5
           Three recent studies consider the effect of childcare by mothers (but not by
mothers-in-law) on the labor force behavior of women in Europe, using proximity as an
instrument for childcare transfers. Using SHARE data, Dimova and Wolff (2011) use a
simultaneous recursive model to estimate the effect of both time and money transfers
from mothers on the labor force participation of their daughters in 10 European
countries. 6 They include distance between mothers and daughters as well as mothers’
demographic characteristics in their childcare equation. They find that regular (weekly or
daily) transfers of childcare have a small positive effect on daughter’s labor force
participation, but do not affect whether their labor force participation is full-time or part-
time. Using the same data and a recursive simultaneous equations model, Zamarro (2009)
considers the country-specific impact of regular childcare transfers on the labor supply of
both mothers and daughters. She finds that regular childcare transfers affect the
daughters' labor supply for Greece and the Netherlands, but are insignificant for the other
8 countries. Finally, using French data Dimova and Wolff (2008) find that daughters of
first-generation immigrant women at or near retirement age are more likely to participate
in the labor force if they receive regular (i.e., weekly) childcare from their mothers.


4
  In their model, the eldest sibling has the first mover advantage and moves away from the parents to shift
the burden of providing long-term care for elderly parents to younger siblings.
5
   Cardia and Ng (2003) calibrate an overlapping generations model that allows intergenerational transfers
of both time and money; they show that time transfers involving childcare have substantial positive effects
on the labor supply of the middle generation. Belan, Messe and Wolff (2009) develop and analyze an
overlapping generations model with intergenerational transfers of care and show that changes in the
mandatory retirement age affect the employment rates of both generations.
6
   SHARE, the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe, is a large multi-country panel covering
more than 45,000 individuals over the age of 50.
                                                                                           7


         Arpino, Pronzato and Tavares (2011) do not consider proximity, but estimate
the effect of grandparent-provided childcare on the labor force attachment of women in
Italy using the number of living grandparents as an instrument for childcare transfers.
They find a very large (30 percentage point) positive effect of grandparent care on the
probability that a woman is working. Finally, Compton (2011) estimates the direct effect
of proximity to mother on the labor force attachment of women in Canada. She finds a
substantial positive effect of proximity on the probability of work (11 percentage points),
only for married women with young children.
         We argue that the empirical strategy used in the majority of these studies
underestimates the effect of childcare availability for two reasons. First, with the
exception of Compton (2011), they focus on regular childcare, ignoring the insurance
aspect of childcare to meet irregular or unanticipated needs. Second, with the exception
of Arpino, Pronzato and Tavares (2011), they consider only childcare transfers from
mothers to daughters because the data sets they use do not include information on
mothers-in-law. We find that the effect of proximity on labor force attachment is
strongest for those women living near both mothers (in the NSFH data) or living in the
birth state of both spouses (in the census data). "Living near neither mother" has a strong
negative effect on labor force attachment. The effect of close proximity to only her
mother or only his mother is positive, but not robust across samples. In the NSFH, the
effect of close proximity to only his mother is positive and significant, while the effect of
close proximity to only her mother is insignificant. In the census data, living in the birth
state of either spouse has a significant positive effect on labor force attachment and the
magnitudes are about the same. For the military wives sample, we find significant effects
on labor force attachment only for couples that live in the birth states of both spouses.
Thus, having data on proximity to both mothers and mothers-in-law or on the birth states
of both spouses is crucial to understanding the effect of proximity on labor force
attachment.
         Our finding that family proximity increases the labor force attachment and
employment of married women with young children has implications for policy. The
magnitude of the effect of proximity, 5.2 to 10.4 percentage points, is similar to that
found for MSA status, race. and ethnicity. For example, our results suggest that married
                                                                                            8


women are 3.8 percentage points more likely to work if they live in an MSA, 6.9
percentage points more likely to work if they are Black, and 8.2 percentage points less
likely to work if they are Hispanic. The magnitudes are also similar to those found for
education: women are 6.0 percentage points more likely to work if they are in a power
couple (both spouses have a college degree), 15 percentage points more likely to work if
they have a college degree but their husband does not, compared to a woman in a low-
power couple (neither spouse has a college degree). 7 Our analysis suggests that policies
that increase the availability of childcare to meet irregular or unanticipated child care
needs, including care for sick children, might substantially increase the labor supply of
married women with young children. Our analysis also suggests that increases in the
retirement age which reduce the ability of the older generation to provide childcare may
reduce the labor force attachment of daughters in the younger generation. Discussing
recent trends in labor force participation in the U.S., Mosisa and Hipple (2006) note that
while participation rates have decreased in the past decade for women aged 25 to 54, they
have increased for women aged 55 and older. The behavior of these cohorts is usually
analyzed separately, with little or no recognition that geographical proximity and
childcare may provide a link between them.
          This paper proceeds as follows. Section two describes the NSFH and uses it to
analyze the relationship between childcare, proximity and women's labor force
attachment. Results from IV and reduced form probit regressions on the probability of
being employed support the hypothesis that proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law has a
substantial positive effect on the labor force attachment of married women with young
children, but not on that of any other demographic group. Tobit and selection correction
models on hours of work tell a similar story. We conclude section two by discussing three
alternatives to our childcare explanation of the positive association between proximity
and the labor force attachment of married women with young children: differences in
husbands’ incomes, informal job-search networks, and extended childcare networks. We
discuss a fourth alternative explanation, tied mover effects, at the end of section three
          In section three we turn to census data. Because the census does not ask about
proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law, as a proxy we investigate the effect of living in

7
    We have borrowed the "power couples" terminology from Costa and Kahn (2000).
                                                                                                           9


one’s birth state. The results for married women with young children and for military
wives reinforce our conclusion that proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law increases the
labor force attachment of married women with young children. We also compare the
labor force attachment of a subsample of recent migrants: individuals who, five years
before the census, were not living in either their birth state or their current state.
Comparing those who returned to their birth states with those who moved on to another
state, we find that those who returned to their birth states have higher labor force
attachment. This finding provides additional support for our inference that proximity
increases the labor force attachment of married women with young children. In section
four we summarize our findings and conclude.


2. NSFH: Proximity and Labor Force Attachment
         We use data from the first two waves of the National Survey of Families and
Households (NSFH) described in Sweet and Bumpass (1996). The first wave (1987-
1988) consisted of 13,007 households, and oversampled blacks, Puerto Ricans, Mexican
Americans, single-parent families, families with stepchildren, cohabiting couples, and
recently married couples. The second wave (1992-1994) was a five-year follow-up.
Using the first and second waves of the NSFH enables us to control for recent migration
(i.e., living in a different location in the second wave than in the first.). 8, 9 The primary
respondent was randomly chosen from the adults in the household, but both the
respondent and the respondent's spouse or partner were asked to complete the entire
survey. The data include information on distance (in miles), health, marital status,
education, and transfers given and received by both the respondent’s mother and mother-
in-law. 10 We limit our sample to those women (respondent or spouse) who are aged 25
to
60 and whose mothers (and mothers-in-law where applicable) are Alive and Living in the
United States (ALUS). Thus, we exclude individuals whose mothers or mothers-in-law


8
  The NSFH does not provide information that would enable us to control for migration prior to wave 1.
9
  The third wave of the NSFH sample was reduced to include only households with children. Because this
sample restriction limits our ability to compare across groups, we use only the first and second waves.
10
   We use the information collected from the respondent; if this information is missing, we use the spouse’s
record.
                                                                                                           10


are deceased or live outside the U.S. 11 For our analysis, a major advantage of the NSFH
is that it provides information on proximity not only to mothers but also to mothers-in-
law. Although few data sets include information about family proximity, our results
suggest a high scientific payoff to collecting and analyzing information about proximity
to both mothers and mothers-in-law.


2.1. Description
         Most Americans live very close to their mothers. Using data from the NSFH,
Compton and Pollak (2009) report that the median distance between married women and
their mothers is 20 miles, with one-quarter living within 5 miles of their mothers.
Unmarried women live even closer: the median distance is 8 miles when coresidents are
included in the distance calculation and 15 miles when they are excluded. 12 We define
‘close proximity’ or ‘living near’ as a distance of twenty-five miles or less. 13 Close
proximity is strongly correlated with education: 46 percent of low-power couples
(couples in which neither spouse has a college degree) live within 25 miles of both
mothers, whereas only 17 percent of power couples (couples in which both spouses have
college degrees) live within 25 miles of both mothers.
         The NSFH provides information on time transfers between individuals and their
mothers and mothers-in-law. Respondents were asked whether, in the previous month,
they provided or received general help (shopping, errands, transportation, housework,
yard work, car repairs and other help around the house) to or from their parents or
parents-in-law. Those with children 12 and under were asked whether they received
childcare from their parents or parents-in-law while working or childcare at other times



11
   Although the data are fifteen years old, patterns of migration and proximity appear to be quite stable. For
example, the percentages of individuals living in their birth state (our proxy for proximity when using
census data) has remained fairly constant over the past three decades.
12
   In the NSFH analysis, unmarried women include those who are never married, divorced, widowed or
separated. We include cohabitors with married individuals.
13
   The results of the analyses are very similar if cutoffs of 20 miles or 30 miles are used. Unless noted
otherwise, we include couples who coreside with either her mother or his mother in the ‘close’ category.
Although these couples are qualitatively different from those not coresiding (see Compton and Pollak,
2009), they are a small proportion of the population (2.4 percent of the sample) and sample sizes are too
small to justify a separate category. If we exclude coresidents from the sample of married women, the
results are indistinguishable. We treat unmarried women who coreside with their mothers as a separate
category because the sample size is larger; 22 percent of unmarried women live with their mothers.
                                                                                       11


(table 1). The likelihood of time transfers is strongly associated with proximity to both
mother and mother-in-law. Of married women with young children living within 25 miles
of their mothers, 24-27 percent received work-related childcare while 31-37 percent
received non-work-related childcare from their mothers; of married women with young
children living within 25 miles of their mothers-in-law, 18-19 percent received work-
related childcare and 25 percent received non-work-related childcare from their mothers-
in-law. Unmarried women with young children were slightly more likely to receive
transfers of work-related childcare from her mother: 28 percent of unmarried women
young in close proximity to their mothers received work-related childcare and almost
one-half received non-work related childcare in the past month. Those living further than
25 miles were much less likely to receive childcare: only 4.2 percent (2.7 percent) of
married women with young children who did not live close to either mother received
work-related childcare from her (his) mother.
       Employment is also correlated with proximity. Table 2 shows the labor force
attachment of married and unmarried women by proximity to their mothers or mothers-
in-law. For unmarried women there is a positive relationship between distance category
(coresidence, 25 miles or less, more than 25 miles) and full-time work, but an inverted U-
shaped relationship between distance category and out of the workforce (the sample size
here is a concern, however). This pattern is observed both for unmarried women with
young children, and those without young children. For married women, there are four
categories of proximity: a couple can live close to neither mother, to his mother only, to
her mother only, or to both mothers. The raw data show the importance of including both
mothers and mothers-in-law when considering the relationship between proximity and
labor force attachment. If we exclude information on mothers-in-law, we are in effect
combining the first two categories into a single category ("not close to her mother") and
the last two categories into a single category ("close to her mother"). Yet, married
women, especially those with children, who live near only their mothers-in-law have a
much different pattern of labor force attachment than married women who do not live
near either mother. Married women who live near only their mothers have a much
different pattern of labor force attachment than married women who live near both
mothers. For example, restricting our attention to married women with young children,
                                                                                                        12


we find a substantially higher percentage working full-time when living near only their
mothers-in-law (45 percent) than living near neither mother (33 percent). By recognizing
four proximity categories, we are able to estimate more precisely the effect of proximity
on labor force attachment.
         Demographic factors correlated with close proximity are typically factors
correlated with lower labor force attachment. Means and standard deviations for the
married women's sample are presented in Appendix 1. Compared with women who do
not live within 25 miles of either mother or mother-in-law, those who live close to both
live in areas of higher unemployment, are younger, are more likely to have young
children, are less educated, have less educated mothers and spouses, are more likely to be
black or Hispanic, and are less likely to live in an MSA. Yet despite these correlates of
close proximity, women living in close proximity to their mothers or mothers-in-law are
more likely to be working and work more hours. In the next sub-section, we show that the
proximity effect observed in the raw data holds under regression analysis.


2.2. Analysis: Childcare and Labor Force Attachment
         We begin by estimating the effect of predicted transfers of childcare on the labor
force behavior of adult women, similar to the type of analysis performed on the European
data by Dimova and Wolf (2008, 2011) and by Zamarro (2009). The sample is restricted
to women with young children whose mothers are ALUS. 14 We estimate the impact of
both work-related and non-work related childcare, using the following bivariate probit
model:

                          Y1*i = Χ i β + Ζ i λ + Y2*iϕ 2 + U 1i            (1)
                          Y2*i = Χ i β + Λ i γ 2 + Y1*i ϕ1 + U 2i          ( 2)


                          Yki = 1 if Yki* > 0
                                              , k = 1,2
                          Yki = 0 if Yki* ≤ 0



14
  Women coresiding with their mothers are excluded from the childcare regression samples as transfers
between coresidents are not included in the data.
                                                                                                            13


where Y1i is an observed dichotomous variable equal to 1 if the daughter works positive

hours, (i.e., if the latent variable Y1i* >0); Y2i is an observed dichotomous variable equal to
1 if the daughter receives childcare (either work related or non-work related) from her
mother or her mother-in-law (i.e., if the latent variable Y2i* >0). The vector X includes
exogenous control variables common to both regressions (age, age squared, whether
husband works and his hours of work, husband’s income, whether self or husband
currently has medical problems, race (black, Hispanic, white (omitted)), education
categories (both spouses have college degrees, only she has a college degree, only he has
a college degree, neither has a college degree (omitted)), age of youngest child, whether
mother has a college degree). The vector Z includes the instruments for work (region
(Midwest, South, West, Northeast (omitted)), average commuting time in the county (to
account for place-to-place differences in the amount of time it takes to travel), whether
residing in an MSA, 1990 county level unemployment rate, and whether the respondent

lived in a different city in the first wave of the data). The vector                       Λ    includes the
instruments for childcare (age categories of mother(s) (less than 60, 60-69, 70 and over
(omitted)), whether mother(s) are in poor health, whether mother(s) are married and
whether mother(s) live in close proximity). Error terms are assumed to be iid normal. The

variables included in      Λ    are assumed to affect the likelihood of childcare, but not labor
market behavior directly, while variables included in Z are assumed to affect the
likelihood of working, but not childcare. The model is estimated using the two-step
procedure outlined in Maddala (1983) and Greene (1998). 15

         The parameter of interest is ϕ 2 , the coefficient on predicted childcare in equation
(1). This is presented in Table 3. 16 We analyze the relationship between proximity and
childcare using three definitions of childcare – work-related childcare, non-work-related
childcare, and either type of childcare. In the top panel, we show the results for unmarried
women. For this sample, transfers of childcare have no discernable effect on the


15
   While this procedure gives consistent estimators, it is not efficient. We use the econometrics software
Stata for this analysis, and this software does not allow for a simultaneous bivariate probit estimator with
two endogenous variables. Standard errors are estimated using a bootstrap procedure.
16
   In all regressions, coefficients are presented with standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects on the
predicted probability are shown in italics.
                                                                                                       14


probability of work. For the sample of married women, we first estimate the effect of
transfers to and from her mother (ignoring mother-in-law information). In these

regressions, the variables in Λ include only those that pertain to her mother, including
whether the woman lives in close proximity to her mother. The results show positive, but
insignificant coefficients on predicted childcare. The bottom panel adds the information

on mother-in-law. 17 Here, the variables in Λ include the age, marital status and health of
both mothers and the proximity categories are close proximity to his mother, close
proximity to her mother and close proximity to both. The results show that married
women who receive transfers of childcare from either their mother or mother-in-law are
more likely to work in the paid labor force than those who do not receive such transfers.
Marginal effects are significant, ranging from 5.1 to 6.2 percentage points, depending on
the definition of childcare. The effect is significant for both work-related and non-work
related childcare. 18     We interpret the significance of non-work-related transfers as
suggesting an insurance effect of proximity – the availability of family members to
provide childcare in unanticipated situations alters the labor supply of married women.
        We next investigate the reduced form relationship between proximity to mothers
and mothers-in-law and the labor force behavior of women, maintaining the assumption
that proximity is exogenous. We highlight the reduced form analysis for two reasons.
First, the childcare variable in the NSFH indicates only whether a woman received
childcare from her mother or mother-in-law in the previous month. The IV analysis will
underestimate the insurance aspect of childcare if the mother or mother-in-law is
available for childcare, but no transfers were received during the survey month. Second,
applying the reduced form equation to demographic groups without childcare needs




17
   There is no econometric procedure to allow for a two-step IV approach with a multinomial endogenous
variable (childcare from her mother only, from his mother only, from both).
18
   The categories of childcare (columns A and B) are not mutually exclusive. For unmarried women, 63
percent of those who received work-related childcare also received non-work related childcare; 40 percent
of those who received non-work related childcare also received work-related childcare. For married
women, 77 percent of those who received work-related childcare from either mother or mother-in-law also
received non-work related childcare; 58 percent of those who received non-work related childcare from
either mother or mother-in-law also received work related childcare.
                                                                                                    15


allows us to test our hypothesis that the availability of childcare is the mechanism that
links proximity and labor force attachment.
        Using the notation above, we estimate

        Y1*i = Χ i β + Ζ i λ + Λ i γ + U i           (3)
as a reduced form probit regression on employment. We also estimate Tobit regressions

with Y1i denoting hours of work.
        We now expand our sample to include all women, not only those with children
under the age of 12. For married women, we focus on the effect of three categorical
variables: close proximity (i.e., within 25 miles) of mothers only, of mothers-in-law only,
and of both mothers and mothers-in-law. For unmarried women, we consider the effect of
coresidence and of close proximity to mothers. To simplify the interpretation, we limit
the sample to those with mothers (and mothers-in-law for the married sample) ALUS. 19
Control variables indicating the presence of children (children 12 and under, only
children older than 12, no children (omitted)) are added to vector X. 20
        Probit results are shown in table 4. In columns (1) and (3) we estimate the effect
of living near own mother, ignoring the location of mother-in-law. As with the IV
regressions, we find positive but insignificant effects of proximity when the comparison
group contains both those living near neither mother and those living near their mother-
in-law only. When mother-in-law information is added in columns (2) and (4), the
comparison group becomes those living away from both mothers and we now see a
statistically significant and relatively strong effect of proximity to mothers-in-law and to
both mothers. For unmarried women with young children, we find no effect of proximity,
and a negative effect of coresidence, on work force attachment. We replicated these
regressions for married and unmarried men with young children and found no significant
effect of close proximity on men's labor force attachment.



19
   By excluding those whose mothers are not ALUS, our sample under-represents migrants to the U.S. and
those whose mothers die young.
20
   These are mutually exclusive categories. The category “only children older than 12” includes women
with older children at home, and those who have older children living elsewhere. These groups are
combined for sample size. The category “no children” includes only those women who have never had
children.
                                                                                                          16


          In table 5 we consider different subsamples of married women to determine the
subgroups for which the relationship between proximity and labor supply is strongest. 21
The first column presents the full sample results from the regression in table 4, column 2.
In columns (2) – (4), we report the regressions separately by presence of child categories:
column (2) includes only those with young children; column (3) includes only mothers
without young children; and column (4) includes only non-mothers. 22 Proximity is
significant only for those with young children and the effect is large; close proximity to
mother-in-law or to both mother and mother-in-law increases the predicted probability of
employment by 10 percentage points. The coefficient on close proximity to only her
mother is positive, but insignificant.
          In columns (5) and (6) we limit the sample to those whose mothers or mothers-in-
law are in poor health and thus are more likely to need care themselves and less likely to
provide care for their grandchildren. We find no effect of proximity on the labor force
attachment of these women. The absence of an effect of proximity on the labor supply of
women whose mothers or mothers-in-law are in poor health is further evidence that the
availability of childcare is probably the mechanism through which proximity affects labor
supply.
          Proximity to mother-in-law and proximity to both mothers have similar effects:
proximity to only one’s own mother has a smaller and statistically insignificant effect.
This result is unexpected, as women are more likely to receive childcare transfers from
their mothers than from their mothers-in-law. In section 5, using census data and birth
state residence as a proxy for proximity, we find that proximity to mother and proximity
to mother-in-law are statistically significant and that the effect sizes are about the same.
          The effect of nearby siblings suggests that strategic behavior may explain why
proximity to mother-in-law has a stronger estimated effect than proximity to mother.
Consider first the mother-in-law. Because mothers-in-law are more likely to provide


21
   We found similar results when we included interaction terms between proximity and children or health
of mother or mother-in-law in the regression.
22
   The results are qualitatively the same if we consider those with children under the age of 6. We chose the
12 year old cut-off for two reasons. First, this cut-off corresponds to the NSFH childcare transfer questions
– only those with children 12 and under were asked about childcare. Second, our hypothesis is that the
availability of family to aid with irregular or unanticipated childcare needs is important for labor market
decisions. This type of childcare may be especially important when children are school-age.
                                                                                         17


childcare for the children of their own daughters than for those of their daughters-in-law,
the presence of the mothers-in-law's other children may reduce her willingness to provide
childcare. On the other hand, if there are no siblings in close proximity, mothers-in-law
may have a stronger incentive to provide childcare transfers than mothers. Because
altruistic motives for providing eldercare are presumably weaker among daughters-in-law
than daughters, mothers-in-law may be more willing to provide childcare to daughters-in-
law in the hope of increasing the probability of receiving eldercare in the future. In the
first column we find a positive effect of living close to one’s mother-in-law but a
negative effect of close proximity to husband's siblings. 23 The negative effect of nearby
siblings is also seen for the subgroup with young children, although these coefficients just
fail to meet standard levels of significance. Strategic behavior may also explain the
insignificant effect of close proximity to only her mother. Compared with couples
residing in close proximity to both mothers, those residing in close proximity to only her
mother may be more likely to move away in the future, thus reducing the incentives of
mothers to provide childcare. The close proximity of a woman’s own siblings has a
negative but non-significant effect on the labor force attachment of women with young
children, and a positive effect on the labor force attachment of those without children.
These results suggest a relationship between labor force attachment and sibling
competition in care transfers, but we do not have sufficient data to investigate this
possibility more thoroughly.
           The results on hours of work from Tobit regressions and models using a Heckman
correction for sample selection indicate that the effect of proximity is primarily on the
extensive margin (i.e., whether the woman works or not) rather than on the intensive
margin (i.e., the number of hours worked). These results (not shown) are consistent with
the probit results: we find proximity effects only for married women with young children.
           We consider four alternatives to the childcare explanations of the positive
association between proximity and the labor force attachment of married women with
young children: differences in husbands’ incomes, informal job-search networks,
extended childcare networks, and tied mover effects. We discuss husbands’ incomes,



23
     We do not know whether siblings in close proximity are brothers or sisters.
                                                                                          18


informal job search networks, and extended child care networks in this section and tied
mover effects in section 3.2
       We discount the husbands' incomes as an explanation of our proximity results
because we have included husbands’ incomes, hours of work, work status and education
as control variables in all of our regressions. The raw data show that married women
who live in close proximity to their mothers or mothers-in-law have husbands with lower
incomes than those who live far from both. Husbands are also more likely to work and
work more hours when the couple lives far from both mothers, compared to those living
close to either mother or mother-in-law. A joint model of household labor force
attachment would predict, based on this information, that married women living away
from both their mothers and their mothers-in-law would have lower labor force
attachment than those living close. But the fact that this relationship persists after
controlling for husbands' incomes, hours of work, work status and education makes this
an unlikely alternative to the child care explanation.
       We discount the informal job-search networks explanation of our proximity
results because we find an effect of proximity only for married women with young
children. We do not find a proximity effect for men, for unmarried women, or for married
women without young children. Even if we postulate that the labor force attachment of
unmarried women with young children is more sensitive than that of other demographic
to the presence of a more extensive job search network, we would expect to find some job
search network effect for other groups. The absence of such effects argues against the job
search network explanation.
       We are skeptical of the extended child care network explanation of our proximity
results, but we cannot rule out the possibility that proximity to mother and mother-in-law
is a proxy for extended childcare networks involving siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, and
friends. Three points need to be made. First, after controlling for a woman’s proximity to
her mother, proximity to her siblings has no effect on her labor force attachment, while
proximity to her husband’s siblings has a negative effect. This suggests that there is no
additional increase in labor force attachment associated with living in close proximity to
other family members. Second, the connection between proximity and labor force
attachment is not observed when mothers are in poor health. Finally, using data from the
                                                                                                         19


Survey of Income and Program Population (SIPP), Laughlin (2010) shows that
grandparent-provided childcare is three times more prevalent than care provided by other
relatives -- that is, grandparents provide a disproportionate share of nonparental
childcare. However, the "insurance" story (e.g., having someone to pick up a sick child at
school) could be told about siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins and friends, and we have
argued that the importance of such insurance is not necessarily reflected in the number of
hours of child care provided. Hence, although we are skeptical of the extended child care
network story, we cannot rule it out.
         Overall, our findings from the NSFH indicate that proximity to mothers or
mothers-in-law has a large positive effect on the labor force attachment of married
women with young children. The IV analysis suggests that the mechanism through which
proximity and labor force attachment are linked is childcare; the lack of a proximity
effect for married women without childcare needs reinforces this result. Our estimation
of the marginal effect of the availability of childcare is higher than the European results
of Dimova and Wolff (2008, 2011) and Zamarro (2009). We attribute this to our ability
to distinguish both proximity to mother and proximity to mother-in-law, and the focus of
the European studies on regular childcare transfers. Our marginal effects are just slightly
smaller than the Canadian findings (Compton, 2011). 24
         Two caveats are required. The first is sample size: perhaps the insignificant
results for married women with older children and for married women with no children
are due to the small sub-samples. The second is the potential endogeneity of proximity.
Endogeneity problems arise if women who have preferences for both children and labor
force attachment are more likely to reside near family, compared with women who have
preferences for one or the other. 25 Unfortunately, we have no convincing way to deal
with




24
   Although the Canadian study uses a similar methodology in focusing on proximity rather than childcare
transfers, mother-in-law location is not available in the Canadian data. As noted earlier, this exclusion is
likely to cause an underestimation of the proximity effect. Still, Compton (2011) finds that married women
with children who live in close proximity to their mothers are 11 percentage points more likely to work
than those who live more than half a day away.
25
   Endogeneity problems also arise if marriage market choices reflect underlying preferences for
work/children combinations.
                                                                                                        20


this endogeneity problem using the NSFH data. 26 Nevertheless, our empirical results
from the NSFH provide strong evidence that proximity is related to the labor force
attachment of married women with young children, and that the mechanism is the
availability of childcare. In section three we address the sample size and endogeneity
concerns using census data.


3. Census Data: Birth State and Labor Force Attachment
        Although the U.S. Census does not ask respondents the distance to their mothers,
it does ask whether the respondent resides in his or her birth state. We use this variable as
a proxy for close proximity. Data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID)
provides some support for the validity of this proxy. 27                  The PSID reports grouped
distance to mother in one year (1988) and the “State where the Head (Spouse) grew
up.” 28 Although the state where one grows up need not coincide with birth state, there is
a strong link between proximity and residing in one's childhood state: in the PSID, more
than 90 percent of heads currently living in their childhood state are living in the same
state as their mothers; over half live within 10 miles, and less than 15 percent live more
than 100 miles away. On the other hand, of those heads not living in their childhood state,
only 27 percent currently live in the same state as their mothers; 16 percent live within 10
miles, and more than 70 percent live more than 100 miles away.
        Using census data we estimate the effect of birth state residence on the probability
of employment and labor force participation as well as on usual weekly hours. More
specifically, using the 2000 public use microdata files of the 2000 U.S. Census, we
construct a dataset that includes all women aged 25-45 who were born in the U.S.


26
  We attempted a bivariate probit model as outlined above in equations (1) and (2) , but defining Y2i as an
observed dichotomous variable equal to 1 if the daughter lives in close proximity to his mother or to her
mother (i.e., if the latent variable Y2i* >0). The instruments included were mother’s marital status and
indicators for only and eldest child. We do not present the results for two reasons. First, the results are
insignificant and sensitive to control inclusion, which may reflect the use of a binary proximity category
that ignores the location of mothers-in-law. Second, although mother’s marital status and birth order are
strong predictors of proximity in previous work (e.g., Konrad et al. (2002), Rainer and Siedler (2009),
Compton and Pollak (2009)), we found them to be borderline weak instruments, especially in sub-samples.
27
   The NSFH does not include state of birth.
28
   The PSID did not ask state of birth until 1993, and then only to new heads or spouses. The distance
groups in the PSID are (1) less than one mile; (2) 1 to 10 miles; (3) 11 to 100 miles; and (4) more than 100
miles.
                                                                                                          21


(Ruggles et al., 2009). For married women, we define three mutually exclusive indicator
variables: (1) whether the couple lives in the birth state of both spouses; (2) whether the
couple lives in only her birth state and (3) whether the couple lives in only his birth state.
To control for migration effects, we include a dummy variable for whether the woman
was in the same state five years previously. We also include controls for the geographic
size of the current state; we do this because those living in large birth states (e.g., Texas,
California) may well have moved within the state and, hence, living in a large birth state
is likely to be a weaker proxy for proximity to mother than living in a small birth state
(e.g., Rhode Island, Delaware). In contrast, those living in small birth states, even if they
have moved within the state, are more likely to live in close proximity to mother.
Because the census provides no information on mothers who do not reside with their
adult children, we limit the sample to those aged 25-45 (in the NSFH analysis we used
those aged 25-60) to increase the likelihood that the mothers of those in our census
sample are still alive. 29
         We replicate the analysis using a large sample of military wives – civilian women
with husbands serving in the U.S. military. 30 Our military wives sample includes 14,833
married women, of whom 10.2 percent live in only her birth state, 5.1 percent live in only
his birth state, and 8.7 percent live in the birth state of both spouses. The military wives
provide a control for endogeneity because their husbands' locations are determined by the
military. 31


3.1. Interaction of Birth State and Young Children
         We consider the impact of birth state residence for three samples – married




29
   Summary statistics for the Census data are presented in Appendices 2 and 3.
30
   Excluded from the sample are those for whom spouse is absent. In particular, this excludes military
wives whose husbands are serving overseas. To increase the size of the military wives sample, we have
increased the age range to 18-45. We find similar results when we omit the 18-23 age category.
31
   The probability that they live near only her mother is twice the probability of living near his mother,
presumably because it is the husbands' locations that are determined by the military. In particular, if the
wife met her husband while he was in the military and stationed in her birth state, then the couple is more
likely to live near her mother than near his mother. Unfortunately, the census does not ask how long
couples have been married.
                                                                                                        22


women, military wives, and never-married women. 32 Table 6 presents summary statistics
for the samples. The data indicate that, for married women with young children, there is
an increasing attachment to the work force as we move from residing in the birth state of
neither spouse to residing in the birth state of both spouses. We find no discernable
pattern for married women with only older children or no children. We find a similar
pattern for military wives with young children, although the patterns for military wives
with older or no children are less clear. For never married women with young children,
we find a negative relationship between birth state residence and labor force attachment.
        In table 7 we present regressions analogous to equation (3). 33 That is, we estimate
the effect of birth state residence (our proxy for family proximity) on labor force
attachment – whether the woman is currently in the labor force and whether she is
currently employed. 34 For married women with no young children, we find a small
negative effect of birth state residence, but for married women with young children, we
find a positive effect. Proximity has a small, negative effect on the labor force attachment
of never married women regardless of whether they have young children. The marginal
effects are smaller in the census than in the NSFH sample but the effect remains
substantial: birth state residence increases the probability of labor force participation and
employment of married women with young children by 2.6 – 3.9 percentage points. In
table 8, we expand the birth state categories to account for residence in his and her birth
state separately. Results for the full sample of married women are consistent – a small,
negative effect of living in the birth state of one or both spouses for those without young
children, but a strong positive effect of living in the birth state of either or both spouses
for those with young children.
        The results from the military sample are weaker: the results in table 7 indicate a
positive effect of birth state residence for those with young children, although the



32
   In the NSFH sample we included all unmarried women with controls for divorced, separated and
widowed. With the large sample size available in the IPUMS data, we are able to consider separately those
previously married and those never married. The results for those previously married are more difficult to
interpret since the women may still reside near their mothers-in-law and receive childcare from them.
33
   Due to computing demand, a random 10 percent sample was drawn for the regressions.
34
   Regression results from Tobit and Heckman corrected models on usual weekly hours again suggest that
the impact of proximity is on the extensive margin. The results of these regressions are not presented but
are consistent with the probit results.
                                                                                                           23


significance levels are relatively low. 35 In table 8, with expanded birth state categories,
the interaction between children and birth state residence is positive and significant only
for those residing in the birth state of both spouses. We expect weaker results in the
military wives sample for two reasons. First, birth state residence is a weaker proxy for
family proximity when the husband is in the military because military personnel assigned
to their birth states are likely to be further from their mothers than civilians who live in
their birth states. Second, the strategic motivation for mothers and mothers-in-law to
provide childcare in anticipation of reciprocity when they are elderly and disabled is
reduced because daughters and daughters-in-law are likely to move when their husbands
are assigned to a different location.


3.2. Migration: Origin/ Destination Effects
           In this section we investigation origin/ destination effects for migrants. We
consider a subsample of "recent migrants" by which we mean individuals who, five years
prior to the census, were not living in either their birth state or their current state. We
find that those who returned to their birth states have substantially higher labor force
attachment than those who moved to another state.
           Although the "tied mover" hypothesis described by Sjaastad (1962) Mincer
(1978), Lichter (1983) and Greenwood (1985) does not explain our proximity results, our
results imply the need to disentangle proximity effects and tied mover effects. The tied
mover hypothesis postulates that the costs of migration are higher if both spouses are
attached to the labor force, and concludes that single-earner couples are more likely to
migrate than two-earner couples. The tied mover hypothesis implies that secondary
earners (read: married women) who migrate will have less labor force attachment, at least
in the short run, than secondary earners who do not migrate.
           In table 9 we show the employment and labor force attachment rates for
migrants and non-migrants. We limit our sample of migrants to those who were not living
in their birth state five years earlier because we want to distinguish between the labor
force attachment of those who returned to their birth states (return migrants) and those


35
  For the labor force and employment participation probits, the coefficients on the interaction term are
significant at the 89 percent and 78 percent confidence levels, respectively.
                                                                                                 24


who moved to a state other than their birth state (onward migrants). 36 For married
women with young children, non-migrants have higher labor force attachment rates and
higher employment rates than migrants, which is consistent with the tied mover
hypothesis. Within the group of migrants, however, the participation and employment
rates of married women with young children who return to their birth state are 5.5
percentage points higher than that of their counterparts who migrate to another state. For
the other samples – unmarried women, married women with no children, and married
women with only older children – return migrants have lower labor force participation
and employment rates than onward migrants.
          In table 10 we use regression analysis to further investigate these origin/
destination effects. We present the results for probit regressions on labor force
participation of women who did not reside in their birth state five years prior (regressions
on employment and hours yield similar results). The results confirm the patterns observed
in the raw data: labor force participation of married women is negatively related to
migration, but destination is also important. For married women with young children, the
negative effect of migration on labor force participation is substantially less for those
who move back to their birth state (i.e., return migrants) than for those who move to a
different another state (i.e., onward migrants). For married women with no children or
those with only older children, the tied mover effect is smaller and there is no discernable
difference between the two migration coefficients: the effect of returning to one's birth
state is the same as the effect of moving elsewhere.
          Five points about the relationship between the tied mover hypothesis and our
proximity results deserve attention. First, the tied mover hypothesis, as its name suggests,
applies only to those who moved as a couple; our analysis, on the other hand, focuses on
the proximity of a couple to his mother or her mother, regardless of whether they moved




36
  We cannot identify individuals who moved between states within the five year window and then
returned, nor can we identify those who moved within state.
                                                                                                        25


as a couple or as unmarried individuals. 37,38              Second, we find a positive effect of
proximity only for married women with young children, while the tied mover hypothesis
applies to all secondary earners who migrated as part of a couple. Third, we include
controls for recent migration in all regressions. Although this does not capture long-run
effects of migration, a number of studies indicate that the disruptions to wives’ labor
force participation are relatively short-lived (e.g., Clark and Withers (2002), LeClere and
McLaughlin (1997), Marr and Millerd (1988), Spitze (1984)). Fourth, for married women
with young children, we find a positive effect of close proximity to mothers-in-law even
for those women who do not live in close proximity to their own mothers. Because
women living near their mothers-in-law but not near their own mothers are more likely to
be tied movers than those living near their own mothers but not their mothers-in-law, the
tied mover hypothesis predicts a more negative effect of close proximity to mothers-in-
law only. This is not what we find in NSFH or in the census. Finally, using census data,
we find that for married women with young children, the effect of moving back to their
birth state has a less negative effect on labor force participation than moving elsewhere.
           These origin/destination results imply that the tied mover hypothesis cannot
explain the proximity effects that we have found. They also imply that tied mover effects
and proximity effects interact: the effect of migration on labor force attachment depends
on the presence or absence of young children and on the destination of the migrant.

4. Conclusion

        Using two large U.S. data sets, the NSFH and the census, we find that living close
to mothers or mothers-in-law has a strong positive effect on the labor force attachment of
married women with young children. More specifically, we find that proximity increases
the labor force attachment of married women with young children by 4-10 percentage


37
   The census does not provide information on whether they moved as unmarried individuals or as a couple.
Many migrants are never married individuals. The 2001 Current Population Survey data show that while
never married individuals comprise 28 percent of the population over the age of 15, 40 percent of inter-
county migrants and 41 percent of inter-state migrants are never married. (Calculations by authors from the
2001 Current Population Survey data found
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/migrate/cps2001.html)
38
   The migration of unmarried individuals, especially unmarried women, is driven by both marriage market
and labor market considerations. For interesting discussions, see Edlund (2005) and Gautier, Svarer and
Teulings (2010).
                                                                                       26


points. We argue that the mechanism through which proximity affects labor supply is the
availability of childcare. We interpret availability broadly enough to include not only
regular, scheduled childcare but also the insurance provided by the proximity of mothers
or mothers-in-law for irregular or unanticipated childcare needs.
   Two endogeneity issues require attention. The first involves labor force participation
and childcare, and would arise even if proximity were exogenous. We address this by
using an IV approach, with proximity serving as an instrument for childcare. The second
is the potential endogeneity of proximity. Recent research on childcare and labor force
attachment has assumed exogeneity of proximity, suggesting that many economists view
this endogeneity as less serious than the first. It is also more difficult to address. We
address it by analyzing a subsample of military wives – civilian women with husbands
serving in the U.S. military – arguing that, compared with the general population, their
locations are more likely to be exogenous because their husbands' locations are primarily
determined by military needs.
   Analysis of NSFH data suggests a strong relationship between proximity to mother or
mother-in-law and labor force attachment of married women with young children. Using
close proximity as an instrument for childcare hours, we find that both work-related and
non-work-related childcare by mothers or mothers-in-law increases the labor supply of
married women with young children. We interpret the significance of non-work-related
childcare as suggesting the insurance effect of proximity – the availability of family
members to provide irregular or unanticipated childcare increases the labor supply of
married women with young children.
   We then turn to reduced form estimates of the relationship between labor supply and
proximity. We do this for two reasons. First, reduced form estimates for demographic
groups that do not benefit from the availability of childcare (e.g., married women without
young children) provide further evidence that proximity affects labor supply through the
availability of childcare. Second, the IV estimates using predicted childcare will
underestimate the insurance effect of close proximity if there are women for whom
childcare was available but not needed in the previous month.
   We find that close proximity itself has a substantial, robust, and statistically
significant effect on labor force attachment for married women with young children. We
                                                                                          27


find no proximity effect for those demographic groups that would not benefit from the
availability of childcare: married women whose mothers or mothers-in-law are in poor
health, and women with only older children or no children. We find no proximity effect
for unmarried women with young children, a non-result we attribute to the inelastic labor
supply of unmarried women with children which makes them unresponsive to the
availability of childcare.
        Census data provide further evidence. Using living in one's birth state as a proxy
for proximity to mother, we find that for married women with young children, birth state
residence increases the probability of labor force participation and employment by 4.0 -
6.1 percentage points. For married women without children and for never-married
women, we find a small, negative effect of living in the birth state of one or both spouses.
To control for the endogeneity of proximity, we consider the effects of proximity on
labor force attachment for a sample of military wives. We find that for military wives
with young children, living in the birth state of both spouses has a positive effect on labor
force attachment; we find no effect of birth state residence on military wives with young
children living only in his birth state or only in her birth state, and we find no effect of
birth state residence on military wives without young children.
        This constellation of findings cannot be explained by either the network job
search hypothesis or by the tied mover hypothesis -- the proximity effects are too tightly
concentrated in a single demographic group -- married women with young children.
Because we have neither a natural experiment nor a structural model of proximity, we
cannot conclusively rule out selection. The military wives sample is as close as we come
to a natural experiment, but a skeptic could fairly point out that men self-select into the
military and women self-select into becoming and remaining military wives. Our
interstate movers sample is similarly open to the objection that individuals self-select into
return migration to his or her birth state.
        The effects of close proximity on the labor supply of married women with young
children are substantial and robust. We find clear and convincing evidence that proximity
affects the labor force attachment of married women with young children, and that the
underlying mechanism is the availability of family members to meet childcare needs.
                                                                                             28


References

Arpino, Bruno, Chiara Pronzato and Lara Tavares, ``All in the Family: Informal Childcare and
Mothers`Labour Market Participation.` ISER Working Paper Series, No. 2010-24, (July 9, 2010).

Belan, Pascal, Pierre-Jean Messe, and François-Charles Wolff, "Postponing Retirement Age and
Labor Force Participation: The Role of Family Transfers," Manuscript. March 2007.

Bishop, Kelly, Bradley Heim, and Kata Mihaly, “Single Women’s Labor Supply Elasticities:
Trends and Policy Implications,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 63, No. 1 (October
2009), 146-168.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married
Women: 1980-2000,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 25, No. 3 (July 2007), 393-438.

Cardia, Emanuela and Serena Ng, “Intergenerational Time Transfers and Childcare,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, Vol. 6, No. 2, (April 2003), 431-454.

Clark, William A.V. and Suzanne Davies Withers, “Disentangling the Interaction of Migration,
Mobility and Labor-Force Participation,” Environment and Planning A, Vol. 34, No. 5, (May 2002),
923-945.

Compton, Janice, "The Mom Effect: Family Proximity and the Labour Force Attachment of Women
in Canada," Canadian Labour Market and Skills Researcher Network (CLSRN) Working Paper No.
87 (November 2011).

Compton, Janice and Robert A. Pollak, "Why Are Power Couples Increasingly Concentrated in
Large Metropolitan Areas?" Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 25, No. 3, (July 2007), 475-512.

Compton, Janice and Robert A. Pollak, "Proximity and Coresidence of Adult Children and their
Parents: Description and Correlates," University of Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working
Paper 2009-215, October 2009.

Costa, Dora, "A House of Her Own: Old Age Assistance and the Living Arrangements of Older
Nonmarried Women," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 72, No. 1, (April 1999), 39-59.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn, "Power Couples: Changes in the Locational Choice of the
College Educated, 1940-1990," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115, No. 4, (November
2000), 1287-1315.

Dimova, Ralitza and François-Charles Wolff, “Grandchild Care Transfers by Ageing Immigrants
in France: Intra-household Allocation and Labour Market Implications,” European Journal of
Population , Vol. 24, No. 3, (September, 2008), 315-340.

Dimova, Ralitza and François-Charles Wolff, “Do Downward Private Transfers Enhance
Maternal Labor Supply? Evidence from Around Europe,” Journal of Population Economics,
Vol. 24, No. 3 (July, 2011), 911-933.

Edlund, Lena, "Sex and the City," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1, (March
2005), 25-44.
                                                                                             29

Gautier, Peter A., Michael Svarer, and Coen N. Teulings, "Marriage and the City: Search
Frictions and the Sorting of Singles," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 67, No. 2, (March 2010),
206-218.

Greene, William H. “Economics Courses in Liberal Arts Colleges: Further Results,” The Journal
of Economic Education, Vol. 29, No. 4 (Autumn, 1998), 291-300.

Greenwood, Michael J., “Human Migration: Theory, Models, and Empirical Studies,” Journal of
Regional Science, Vol. 25, No. 4, (September 1985), 521-544.

Jürges, Hendrik, “Gender Ideology, Division of Housework, and the Geographic Mobility of
Families,” Review of Economics of the Household, Vol. 4, No. 4, (December 2006), 299-323.

Kimmel, Jean, “Child Care Costs as a Barrier to Employment for Single and Married Mothers,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80, No. 2, (May 1998), 287-299.

Klerman, Jacob Alex and Arleen Leibowitz, "Child Care and Women's Return to Work after
Childbirth," American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2, (May 1990), 284-288.

Konrad, Kai, Harald Künemund, Kjell Erik Lommerud, and Julio R. Robledo, “Geography of the
Family,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4, (September 2002), 981-998.

Laughlin, Lynda, “Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 2005/Summer
2006.” Current Population Reports, P70-121. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC, 2010.

LeClere, Felicia B. and Diane K. McLaughlin, “Family Migration and Changes in Women’s
Earnings: A Decomposition Analysis,” Population Research and Policy Review, Vol. 16, No. 4,
(August 1997), 315-335.

Lichter, Daniel T., “Socioeconomic Returns to Migration among Married Women,” Social
Forces, Vol. 62, No. 2, (December 1983), 487-503.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Efficiency in Marriage," Review of Economics of the
Household, Vol. 1, No. 3, (September 2003), 153-168.

Marr, William L. and Frank W. Millerd, “Migration and the Employment Status of Married
Women,” Canadian Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 11, No. 1, (Spring 1988), 119-132.

McKinnish, Terra, “Spousal Mobility and Earnings,” Demography, Vol. 45, No. 4, (November
2008), 829-849.

Mincer, Jacob, “Family Migration Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 5,
(October 1978), 749-773.

Mosisa, Abraham and Steven Hipple, “Trends in Labor Force Participation in the United States,”
Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 129, No. 10, (October 2006), 35-57.

Pezzin, Lilliana and Barbara Steinberg Schone, “Intergenerational Household Formation, Female
Labor Supply and Informal Caregiving,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 34, No. 3, (Summer
1999), 475-503.
                                                                                                30

Rabe, Birgitta, “Dual-Earner Migration, Earnings Gains, Employment and Self-Selection,”
Journal of Population Economic., Vol 24, No. 2 (April, 2011), 477-497.

Rainer, Helmut and Thomas Siedler, “O Brother, Where Art Thou? The Effects of Having a
Sibling on Geographic Mobility and Labor Market Outcomes,” Economica, Vol. 76, No. 303,
(July 2009), 528-556.

Ruggles, Steven, "The Decline of Intergenerational Coresidence in the United States, 1850 to 2000,"
American Sociological Review, Vol. 72, No. 6, (December 2007), 964-989

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
Kelly Hall, Miriam King and Chad Ronnander, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: version
4.0 [Machine-readable database], Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
distributor], 2009.

Schwartz, Aba, “Interpreting the Effect of Distance on Migration,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol, 81, No. 5, (September/October 1973), 1153-1169.

Sjaastad, Larry A., “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration.” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 70, No. 5, pt. 2, (October 1962), 80-93.

Shields, Michael P. and Gail M. Shields, “A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Family
Migration and Household Production: U. S. 1980-1985,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 59,
No. 4, (April 1993), 768-782.

Spitze, Glenna, “The Effect of Family Migration on Wives Employment: How Long Does it
Last?” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 65, No.1, (March 1984), 21-36.

Sweet, James A. and Larry L. Bumpass, The National Survey of Families and Households –
Waves 1 and 2: Data Description and Documentation. Center for Demography and Ecology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison (http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm), 1996.

Zamarro, Gema, “Family Labor Participation and Childcare Decisions: The Role of Grannies,”
Unpublished Manuscript, RAND Corporation. (November 2009).
                                                                        31


Table 1: Childcare Received by Proximity
                                     Work      Not           Sample
                                    Related    Work           Size
                                   Childcare   Related
                                               Childcare
MARRIED WOMEN
From Her Mother
 Near Neither Mother                  4.2          8.6         924
 Near Only Hers                      23.7         31.1         506
 Near Only His                        7.0         13.4         497
 Near Both                           26.8         36.8        1125

From His Mother
 Near Neither Mother                  2.7          7.4         924
 Near Only Hers                       2.9          5.7         506
 Near Only His                       19.4         25.4         497
 Near Both                           18.4         25.0        1125

UNMARRIED WOMEN
From Her Mother
  Not Near Mother                    13.5         14.7         144
  Near Mother                        28.6         47.7         274


NSFH Wave II. Weighted percentages. Sample includes all women
with children 12 years and under, not coresiding with their mothers,
over the age of 24, with mother and mother-in-law alive and living in
the United States (ALUS). Respondents are asked whether they
received work-related or non-work-related childcare in the past 12
months, and if yes, from whom. Work status is current. “Near” is 25
miles or less.
                                                                                     32

Table 2: Married Women’s Labor Force Attachment by Proximity
                             Does not      Lives near    Coresides
                             live near      mother      with mother
                               mother
Non Married Women
No Children 12 and under
  Does not Work                19.9           24.2          19.1
  Works Part-time              16.8           15.6          21.6
  Works Full-Time              63.3           60.3          59.3
  Sample Size                  303            348            92

Children 12 and under
  Does not Work                33.5           41.8          30.4
  Works Part-time              16.0            9.6          23.4
  Works Full-Time              50.5           48.5          35.2
  Sample Size                  144            274            46

                            Lives near     Lives near    Lives near     Lives near
                             neither       his mother    her mother        both
                             mother           only          only         mothers
Married Women
No Children 12 and under
  Does not Work                23.3           28.6          22.0          20.8
  Works Part-time              17.4           17.1          16.4          16.0
  Works Full-Time              59.4           54.3          61.6          63.3
  Sample Size                  351            216           221           376

Children 12 and under
  Does not Work                 43.9          33.7           41.1          35.9
  Works Part-time               23.2          20.7           18.5          22.4
  Works Full-Time               32.9          45.7           40.4          41.8
  Sample Size                   498           314            317            759
NSFH Wave II. Weighted percentages. Sample includes all women aged 25-60 whose
mother is ALUS. The sample of married women includes only those for whom both
mothers are ALUS. "Near" is 25 miles or less.
                                                                                                33


Table 3: Bivariate Probit Model:
         The Impact of Childcare on Positive Hours of Work

                                 (A) Received            (B) Received       (C) Received
                                 work-related          non-work related      either work-
                                   childcare               childcare       related or non-
                                                                            work related
                                                                               childcare
 Unmarried women with children 12 and under (367 observations)
 Childcare from her mother
                  Coefficient        0.068                 -0.019              -0.007
   Bootstrapped standard error      (0.182)                (0.073)             (0.140)
  Bootstrapped Marginal effect       0.024                 -0.007              -0.002
     Confidence interval (95%)   (-0.318,     0.334)   (-0.155,   0.312)   (-0.322,    0.266)
       Bootstrapped Wald coef        1.287                 -0.133              -0.055


 Married women with children 12 and under (1567 observations)
 Childcare from her mother
                  Coefficient        0.079                  0.080              0.071
   Bootstrapped standard error      (0.052)                (0.050)             (0.042)
  Bootstrapped Marginal effect       -0.012                -0.007              -0.011
     Confidence interval (95%)   (-0.019,     0.178)   (-0.025,   0.159)   (-0.027,    0.143)
       Bootstrapped Wald coef        1.565                  1.604              1.646


 Childcare from either mother
                   Coefficient       0.165                  0.165              0.136
   Bootstrapped standard error      (0.057)                (0.061)             (0.047)
               Marginal effect       0.062                  0.062              0.051
     Confidence interval (95%)   (0.066,      0.273)    (0.068,   0.319)   (0.063,     0.253)
        Bootstrapped Wald coef          2.92                 2.953                 2.908
NSFH Wave II. The sample includes all married and unmarried women, aged 25-60 inclusive, with
children 12 and under, for whom both mother (and mother-in-law if applicable) are ALUS.
                                                                                                          34

Table 4: Probit and Tobit Regression Results
                                             Married Women                         Unmarried Women
                             Probit: Positive Hours   Tobit: Usual Weekly          Probit:     Tobit:
                                    of Work             Hours of Work             Positive     Usual
                                                                                  Hours of   Weekly
                                                                                   Work      Hours of
                                                                                               Work
                                (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)
 Coreside with Mother           ---           ---          ---         ---        -0.228*    -4.103*
                                                                                  (0.120)     (2.203)
                                                                                   -0.073

 Lives Near Own                0.046                      0.183                    -0.096        -2.013
 Mother                       (0.075)                    (1.630)                  (0.106)       (1.321)
                                 ---                                                 ---

 Lives Near Own                             0.008                     -1.076
 Mother Only                               (0.081)                   (1.752)
                                             ---

 Lives Near Spouse's                       0.151*                    3.519*
 Mother Only                               (0.098)                   (2.045)
                                            0.052

 Lives Near Both                           0.211**                   3.429*
 Mothers                                   (0.092)                   (1.897)
                                            0.073

 Pr(Y=1|X)                      0.685         0.685                                  0.770
 Y (fitted values)                                          19.32        19.29                    28.14
 Observations                    2521         2513          2517         2509        1637         1637
 Wald chi2                      407.33       380.05        1124.14      1947.90      190.8        243.0
 (DF)                            (30)          (38)          (30)         (38)        (24)         (24)
 Pseudo R2                      0.082         0.087         0.017        0.018       0.081        0.013
NSFH Wave II. Coefficients are presented, with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Marginal
effects are in italics, presented if the coefficient is significant at the 80 percent confidence level. The
sample includes all individuals in the marriage category, aged 25-60 inclusive, for whom both mother
(and mother-in-law if applicable) are ALUS. The unmarried sample includes all individuals who are
currently divorced, separated, widowed or never married. Control variables included in the regressions,
but not presented here for space considerations include age, age squared, whether spouse works and
his/her hours of work, whether self or spouse currently has medical problems, spouse’s income, race
(Black, Hispanic, White (omitted)), education categories (both spouses have college degrees, only she
has a college degree, only he has a college degree, neither has a college degree (omitted)), children 12
and under present in the household, only children over 12 present in the household, children outside the
household, whether mother has a college degree, region (Midwest, South, West, Northeast (omitted)),
average commuting time in the county, whether residing in an MSA, 1990 county level unemployment
rate, whether coresides with mother or mother-in-law, age categories of mother(s) (less than 60, 60-69,
70 and over (omitted)), whether mother (or mother-in-law) is in poor health, whether siblings live within
25 miles.
                                                                                                               35

Table 5: Probit Regressions, Dependent Variable: Positive Hours of Work
Sample: Married Women, with both mother and mother-in-law ALUS
                            All         Children      Mothers        Non-          Her           His
                                         12 and       without       Mothers      mother in     mother in
                                        under in       young                       poor          poor
                                       household     children in                  health        health
                                                     household
                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
 Lives near her            0.008         0.097         -0.067        -0.093         -0.090        0.081
 mother only              (0.081)       (0.132)       (0.228)       (0.370)        (0.406)       (0.309)
                            ---           ---            ---           ---            ---          ---

 Lives near his           0.151*       0.280***        -0.190        0.224          -0.034        0.004
 mother only              (0.098)       (0.094)       (0.229)       (0.308)        (0.466)       (0.316)
                           0.052         0.104           ---          ---             ---          ---

 Lives near both          0.211**       0.266**        0.118         -0.020         0.085         0.077
 mothers                  (0.092)       (0.110)       (0.247)       (0.407)        (0.454)       (0.372)
                           0.073         0.101          ---            ---           ---           ---

 Children 12 and        -0.548***                                                 -0.588*         -0.547
 under                    (0.082)                                                 (0.311)        (0.463)
                           -0.186                                                  -0.188         -0.182
 Her siblings within        0.055          -0.014       0.063      0.572**          0.131         -0.069
 25 miles                 (0.082)         (0.102)     (0.148)      (0.266)        (0.338)        (0.377)
                             ---             ---          ---        0.147            ---            ---
 His siblings within      -0.161*          -0.144      -0.082       -0.349         -0.181          0.121
 25 miles                 (0.068)         (0.091)     (0.132)      (0.375)        (0.242)        (0.310)
                           -0.057          -0.055         ---          ---            ---            ---
 Pr(Y=1|X)                  0.685           0.609       0.713        0.831          0.719          0.699
 Observations               2,513           1564         589          356            318            286
 Pseudo R2                 0.087            0.066       0.139        0.188          0.165         -0.206
NSFH Wave II. Coefficients are presented, with standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects on the
predicted probability are italicized and listed for those coefficients that are statistically significant at
the 80 percent confidence level. The sample includes all individuals in the marriage category, aged 25-
60 inclusive, for whom both mother are ALUS. Full control variables are included in all regressions,
see footnote from table 4 for the list of controls.
Table 6: Summary Statistics for Three U.S. Census Samples.
                                                   Married                             Military Wives                           Never Married

                                         With      With          No           With        With       No Children       With         With      No Children
                                       Children    Only      Children in    Children      Only          in the       Children       Only         in the
                                        12 and     Older         the         12 and       Older      Household        12 and       Older      Household
                                        under     Children   Household       under       Children                     under       Children
 Sample Size                           675,850    172,114     204.058        10.578       1,120          3,135        73,813       16,336       226,000
 In Birth State                        63.84%     66.96%      59.94%        18.95%       20.54%         19.40%       75.61%       74.54%        71.49%

 In Only Her Birth State               15.44%     14.11%      15.69%        10.24%        9.29%         10.85%
 In Only His Birth State               12.86%     12.61%      13.29%         5.08%        5.71%          5.39%
 In Both Birth States                  48.40%     52.85%      44.25%         8.71%       11.25%          8.55%

 In the Labor Force
        Not Residing in Birth State      0.64       0.79        0.85          0.53         0.75          0.79          0.78         0.77          0.87
        Residing in His Birth State      0.70       0.80        0.85          0.57         0.80          0.85
        Residing in Her Birth State      0.69       0.80        0.85          0.60         0.81          0.84          0.74         0.72          0.81
        Residing in Both Birth State     0.71       0.80        0.83          0.62         0.83          0.79

 Employed
      Not Residing in Birth State        0.62       0.76        0.82          0.49         0.71          0.72          0.70         0.70          0.83
      Residing in His Birth State        0.68       0.78        0.82          0.54         0.78          0.78
      Residing in Her Birth State        0.66       0.77        0.83          0.56         0.79          0.76          0.65         0.65          0.76
      Residing in Both Birth State       0.68       0.78        0.81          0.59         0.81          0.75

 Usual Weekly Hours
       Not Residing in Birth State      25.13       31.6        37.2         22.50        30.34         34.59         32.44        32.89          37.76
       Residing in His Birth State      27.08       32.0        36.3         24.11        30.25         34.96
       Residing in Her Birth State      26.73       31.9        36.5         25.36        29.32         33.81         30.45        29.90          33.82
       Residing in Both Birth State     26.91       31.4        35.1         25.55        31.93         34.28

U.S. Census 2000. The samples includes all married and single never married women aged 25-45, born in the U.S., non-students. The military wives sample
includes all women aged 18-45, non-students, born in the U.S. whose husbands are employed in the U.S. military.
Table 7: Probit Regressions: Impact of Birth State on Labor Force Attachment
                        MARRIED WOMEN                  MILITARY WIVES                  NEVER MARRIED
                                                                                            WOMEN
                      In Labor       Employed       In Labor       Employed       In Labor     Employed
                      Force                         Force                         Force
                            (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)
 Living in birth       -0.058***      -0.052***        -0.058         -0.026        -0.039**    -0.041**
 state                   (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.059)        (0.026)         (0.017)     (0.016)
                          -0.008         -0.009          ---            ---           -0.008      -0.014
                             -
 Children 12 and        0.615***      -0.570***      -0.827***      -0.739***        0.012        -0.056**
 under                   (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.033)        (0.032)       (0.028)        (0.027)
                          -0.159         -0.155         -0.277         -0.266      -0.008**         -0.011

 Birth state X         0.128***       0.122***         0.990          0.070          0.030          0.013
 Children 12 and        (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.066)        (0.064)        (0.032)        (0.030)
 under                   0.039          0.039          0.032          0.026            ---            ---
 Prob(Y=1|X)             0.751          0.728          0.633          0.582          0.841
 Observations           210004         210004          14833          14833          63182         63182
 LRchi2                17887.84       18428.96        1955.10        1968.20        9035.17       10939.58
 (DF)                     (33)           (33)           (33)           (33)           (28)          (28)
 Pseudo R2               0.074          0.073          0.099          0.097          0.146         0.155
U.S. Census 2000. Coefficients presented with standard error in parentheses and marginal effect on the
predicted probability in parentheses. The sample includes all married and never married women aged 25-
45, born in the U.S., non-students. The regressions use a random 10 percent sample. The military wives
sample includes all women aged 18-45, non-students, born in the U.S. whose husbands are employed in the
U.S. military. The full set of controls are included in each regression. These include age, age squared,
children (children 12 and under, only children over 12 in the household, no children in the household
(omitted)), education (less than high school, high school diploma (omitted), more than high school,
bachelor’s degree, more than bachelor’s degree), spouse education (groups same), disability, spouse
disability, race (Black, Hispanic, white (omitted)), rented accommodations, whether in a metropolitan area,
total income of spouse, whether in different state five years prior, size of current state (square miles), U.S.
region.
                                                                                  38

Table 8: Probit Regressions: Impact of Birth State on Labor Force Attachment
                            MARRIED WOMEN             MILITARY WIVES
                         In Labor   Employed       In Labor   Employed
                         Force                     Force
                               (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)
 Living in only her        -0.045**  -0.050***        0.023      0.020
 birth state                (0.019)    (0.018)       (0.077)    (0.783)
                             -0.012     -0.011          ---        ---

 Living in only his      -0.067***    -0.048**         0.080         0.036
 birth state               (0.019)     (0.019)        (0.104)       (0.709)
                            -0.011      -0.014           ---           ---

 Living in birth state   -0.088***    -0.069***        -0.140        -0.075
 of both                   (0.015)      (0.014)       (0.080)       (0.078)
                            -0.013       -0.016          ---           ---

 Children 12 and         -0.668***    -0.131***     -0.821***     -0.735***
 under                     (0.015)      (0.021)       (0.034)       (0.033)
                            -0.158       -0.155        -0.277        -0.266

 Her Birth State X        0.128***    0.131***         0.018         0.018
 Children 12 and           (0.022)     (0.021)        (0.087)       (0.083)
 under                      0.040       0.042            ---           ---

 His Birth State X        0.160***    0.141***         -0.102        -0.056
 Children 12 and           (0.023)     (0.022)        (0.119)       (0.113)
 under                      0.049       0.046            ---           ---

 Both Birth State X       0.202***    0.184***       0.176**         0.122
 Children 12 and           (0.017)     (0.016)       (0.091)        (0.088)
 under                      0.061       0.060         0.053          0.042

 Prob(Y=1|X)                0.751       0.728         0.633         0.582
 Observations              210004      210004         14833         14833
 LRchi2                   17967.33    18499.93       1958.33       1969.41
 (DF)                        (37)        (37)          (37)          (37)
 Pseudo R2                  0.074       0.074         0.099         0.097
U.S. Census 2000. Coefficients presented with standard error in parentheses and
marginal effect on the predicted probability in parentheses. Sample and control
variables are as described in table 8.
                                                                                                          39

Table 9: Employment and Labor Force Participation by State of Residence 5 Years Prior
                                             Non-Migrants                             Migrants
                                    (A)          (B)         (C)            (D)         (E)            (F)
                                  In Birth     Not in    Difference      Into Birth   Not Into     Difference
                                   State        Birth     for Non-         State       Birth           for
                                                State     Migrants                     State       Migrants
                                                          (A) – (B)                                (D) – (E)
Married with Children 12 and
under
   Employed                        0.683        0.671      0.013***        0.581        0.535       0.054***
   In Labor Force                  0.704        0.689      0.016***        0.608        0.552       0.055***

Married with Children over
12 Only
   Employed                        0.780        0.778        0.002         0.688        0.712       -0.024**
   In Labor Force                  0.801        0.799        0.001         0.723        0.749       -0.025**

Married with no Children in
Household
  Employed                         0.815        0.825      -0.010***       0.803        0.816       -0.013**
  In Labor Force                   0.838        0.847      -0.009***       0.837        0.849        -0.012*

Single never married (SNM)
with Children 12 and under
   Employed                        0.652        0.696      -0.044***       0.666        0.722      -0.056***
   In Labor Force                  0.743        0.775      -0.032***       0.776        0.801       -0.025*

SNM with Children over 12
only
   Employed                        0.652        0.697      -0.045***       0.622        0.724       -0.103**
   In Labor Force                  0.721        0.761      -0.040***       0.703        0.823      -0.121***

SNM with no Children in
Household
   Employed                       0.762       0.815       -0.053***         0.807         0.869      -0.062***
   In Labor Force                 0.804       0.851       -0.046***         0.858         0.905      -0.047***
U.S. Census 2000 unweighted IPUMS sample. Includes all women aged 25-45 and born in the U.S. The
sample of migrants includes those who lived outside their birth state five years prior to the census, and have
since migrated across states.
Table 10: Probit Regressions: Labor Force Participation
Sample: Women who did not reside in their birth state five years prior to the census.
                                           MARRIED WOMEN                                     NEVER MARRIED WOMEN
                                          Children  Only           No Children                 Children  Only    No Children
                                           12 and  Children           in the                    12 and  Children    in the
                                All        under   over 12         Household         All        under   over 12  Household
                                (1)          (2)     (3)                (4)          (5)          (6)     (7)         (8)
 Omitted Case: (A) Non-migrant
 (B) Return migrant:       -0.189***      -0.183***   -0.179***     -0.166***        0.014     0.164*        -0.353         -0.028
 Moved into birth state      (0.021)        (0.025)     (0.069)       (0.054)      (0.042)     (0.084)      (0.236)        (0.050)
                              -0.061         -0.066      -0.049        -0.036          ---      0.164        -0.100           ---
 (C) Onward Migrant:       -0.291***      -0.332***   -0.201***     -0.200***        0.012      -0.008       -0.153         0.011
 Moved into another state.   (0.015)        (0.018)     (0.049)       (0.036)      (0.037)     (0.084)      (0.235)        (0.042)
                              -0.095         -0.119      -0.055        -0.043          ---        ---          ---            ---
 Children 12 and under     -0.574***                                               -0.054*
                             (0.014)                                               (0.031)
                              -0.187                                                -0.011
 Only Children over 12 in  -0.154***                                                0.100*
 the household               (0.019)                                               (0.056)
                              -0.050                                                 0.020
 Chi2 : Test (C) = (E)         17.46        26.81         0.07         0.32           0.00       2.38         0.39          0.43
 Prob>chi2                     0.000        0.000        0.788        0.574          0.959      0.123        0.531          0511
 Pr(Y=1|X)                     0.739        0.676        0.806        0.866          0.880      0.790        0.796         0.901
 Observations                74,036        47,592       11,233     15,211           19,306      3,520         796          14,990
 Pseudo R2                     0.080        0.633        0.645        0.103          0.158      0.078        0.103         0.180
U.S. Census 2000. Coefficients are presented with standard errors in parentheses, marginal effects in italics if p-value is less than 0.2.
Sample: A twenty percent random sample of all women aged 25-45, born in the U.S. who were not living in their birth state five years prior to the
census. The full set of controls, as described in table 8, is included in each regression.
Appendix 1: Means and Standard Deviations, NSFH Married Women
Sample
                                   Live near   Live Near     Live near   Live near
                                    Neither    His Mother   Her Mother     Both
                                    Mother        Only         Only      Mothers
Currently Working                    0.648        0.627        0.689       0.693
                                    (0.478)      (0.484)      (0.463)     (0.461)
Usual Weekly Hours (incl. 0)        23.893       22.993       26.577      25.261
                                   (20.402)     (19.693)     (20.946)    (19.484)
Usual Weekly Hours (excl. 0)        36.906       36.690       38.642      36.166
                                   (12.755)     (10.783)     (13.104)     (7.746)

Coreside with Her Mother                                      0.017        0.022
                                                             (0.130)      (0.145)
Coreside with His Mother                         0.041                     0.029
                                                (0.198)                   (0.168)
Different City Prior Wave            0.420       0.283        0.308        0.211
                                    (0.494)     (0.450)      (0.462)      (0.408)
Her Siblings within 25 miles         0.145       0.709        0.333        0.820
                                    (0.352)     (0.454)      (0.471)      (0.385)
His Siblings within 25 miles         0.165       0.319        0.725        0.824
                                    (0.371)     (0.466)      (0.447)      (0.381)

Children 12 and under                0.546       0.562        0.559        0.635
                                    (0.498)     (0.496)      (0.496)      (0.481)
Age                                 38.706      37.451       37.027       36.166
                                    (8.124)     (7.297)      (7.586)      (7.746)
Medical Problems                     0.205       0.246        0.245        0.197
                                    (0.404)     (0.431)      (0.430)      (0.398)
Black                                0.037       0.061        0.043        0.080
                                    (0.188)     (0.240)      (0.203)      (0.272)
Hispanic                             0.053       0.061        0.055        0.083
                                    (0.223)     (0.239)      (0.229)      (0.276)
Mother has college degree            0.331       0.260        0.280        0.180
                                    (0.471)     (0.439)      (0.449)      (0.384)
Half Power - He has College          0.202       0.115        0.111        0.103
                                    (0.402)     (0.319)      (0.314)      (0.303)
Half Power - She has College         0.081       0.080        0.089        0.071
                                    (0.273)     (0.271)      (0.284)      (0.257)
Power - Both have college            0.358       0.206        0.247        0.095
                                    (0.480)     (0.405)      (0.431)      (0.294)

Spouse’s Income                     43,442       36,394       33,619      32,632
                                   (47,041)     (32,548)     (29,254)    (23,819)
He is not working                    0.089        0.120        0.119       0.111
                                    (0.285)      (0.325)      (0.323)     (0.314)
His usual weekly hours (incl. 0)    42.522       41.571       41.148      41.706
                                   (16.577)     (18.765)     (18.372)    (18.214)
He has Medical Problems              0.246        0.262        0.217       0.289
                                    (0.431)      (0.440)      (0.412)     (0.453)

                                                                                     …
                                        Live near     Live Near       Live near     Live near
                                         Neither      His Mother     Her Mother       Both
                                         Mother          Only           Only        Mothers

Midwest                                   0.264          0.221          0.352         0.275
                                         (0.441)        (0.415)        (0.478)       (0.447)
South                                     0.361          0.337          0.302         0.359
                                         (0.480)        (0.473)        (0.459)       (0.480)
West                                      0.249          0.249          0.197         0.145
                                         (0.433)        (0.433)        (0.398)       (0.352)
Average Commuting Time                   22.101         22.266         21.928        21.780
                                         (4.040)        (3.812)        (4.554)       (4.100)
Resides in MSA                            0.856          0.824          0.819         0.766
                                         (0.351)        (0.381)        (0.385)       (0.423)
MSA Unemployment Rate                     5.970          6.353          6.145         6.637
                                         (1.678)        (1.742)        (1.866)       (2.248)

Her Mother Aged Less than 60              0.291          0.305          0.344         0.377
                                         (0.454)        (0.460)        (0.475)       (0.485)
Her Mother Aged 60-69                     0.332          0.345          0.354         0.342
                                         (0.471)        (0.475)        (0.478)       (0.474)
Her Mother Widowed/Divorced               0.266          0.305          0.218         0.257
                                         (0.442)        (0.460)        (0.413)       (0.437)
Her Mother in Poor Health                 0.142          0.132          0.122         0.134
                                         (0.349)        (0.338)        (0.328)       (0.340)

His Mother Aged Less than 60               0.206          0.229           0.319       0.320
                                          (0.404)        (0.420)         (0.466)     (0.466)
His Mother Aged 60-69                      0.349          0.350           0.336       0.340
                                          (0.477)        (0.477)         (0.472)     (0.474)
His Mother Widowed/Divorced                0.291          0.311           0.273       0.298
                                          (0.454)        (0.463)         (0.446)     (0.457)
His Mother in Poor Health                  0.102          0.168           0.093       0.120
                                          (0.303)        (0.373)         (0.291)     (0.325)
NSFH Wave II. Weighted percentages. Sample includes all married women aged 25-60,
non-students, whose mother and mother-in-law is ALUS. "Near" is 25 miles or less.




                                                                                                42
Appendix 2: Means and Standard Deviations, 2000 Census Data, Married
Women Sample
                               Live in         Live in                     Live in
                               birth state   birth state      Live in     birth state
                               of neither    of husband     birth state    of both
                               spouse           only       of wife only    spouses
Employed                           0.685        0.719          0.714         0.723
                                 (-0.465)     (-0.450)       (-0.452)      (-0.448)
In the Labor Force                 0.708        0.739          0.737         0.744
                                 (-0.455)     (-0.439)       (-0.440)      (-0.436)
Age                               36.636       36.254         36.103        36.177
                                 (-5.590)     (-5.662)       (-5.717)      (-5.705)
Less than High School              0.064        0.076          0.086         0.092
                                 (-0.245)     (-0.266)       (-0.281)      (-0.289)
More than High School              0.335        0.353          0.346         0.337
                                 (-0.472)     (-0.478)       (-0.476)      (-0.473)
Bachelors                          0.259        0.219          0.205         0.160
                                 (-0.438)     (-0.414)       (-0.403)      (-0.367)
More than Bachelor                 0.117        0.080          0.080         0.055
                                 (-0.321)     (-0.271)       (-0.271)      (-0.229)
Spouse less than high school       0.080        0.097          0.119         0.119
                                 (-0.272)     (-0.296)       (-0.324)      (-0.324)
Spouse more than high school       0.299        0.319          0.318         0.305
                                 (-0.458)     (-0.466)       (-0.466)      (-0.460)
Spouse bachelors                   0.247        0.197          0.194         0.148
                                 (-0.431)     (-0.398)       (-0.395)      (-0.356)
Spouse more than bachelors         0.165        0.089          0.101         0.055
                                 (-0.371)     (-0.285)       (-0.301)      (-0.228)
Spouse work disability             0.084        0.097          0.096         0.102
                                 (-0.277)     (-0.296)       (-0.294)      (-0.302)
Work disability                    0.068        0.078          0.075         0.078
                                 (-0.253)     (-0.268)       (-0.264)      (-0.269)
Black                              0.060        0.053          0.063         0.071
                                 (-0.237)     (-0.224)       (-0.243)      (-0.257)
Hispanic                           0.043        0.033          0.081         0.047
                                 (-0.203)     (-0.179)       (-0.273)      (-0.212)
Renter (free rent)                 0.023        0.017          0.015         0.016
                                 (-0.150)     (-0.129)       (-0.121)      (-0.127)
Renter                             0.198        0.164          0.185         0.147
                                 (-0.398)     (-0.370)       (-0.389)      (-0.354)




                                                                                        43
                                       Live in           Live in                     Live in
                                       birth state     birth state      Live in     birth state
                                       of neither      of husband     birth state    of both
                                       spouse             only       of wife only    spouses
 Metropolitan Area                          0.745          0.639          0.697        0.616
                                          (-0.436)       (-0.480)       (-0.460)     (-0.486)
 Spouse's total income                     60,539         50,786         51,392       45,894
                                         (-65,287)      (-54,755)      (-55,358)    (-46,326)
 Migrant                                    0.292          0.095          0.069        0.023
                                          (-0.455)       (-0.293)       (-0.254)     (-0.149)
 Children less than 12                      0.641          0.640          0.649        0.644
                                          (-0.480)       (-0.480)       (-0.477)     (-0.479)
 Children over 12                           0.142          0.158          0.151        0.178
                                          (-0.349)       (-0.365)       (-0.358)     (-0.383)
 No Children                                0.218          0.202          0.200        0.178
                                          (-0.413)       (-0.401)       (-0.400)     (-0.382)
 Mid-Atlantic region                        0.071          0.109          0.116        0.180
                                          (-0.256)       (-0.312)       (-0.320)     (-0.384)
 East North Central region                  0.292          0.181          0.173        0.128
                                          (-0.455)       (-0.385)       (-0.378)     (-0.334)
 West North Central region                  0.061          0.079          0.068        0.074
                                          (-0.240)       (-0.270)       (-0.251)     (-0.263)
 South Atlantic Region                      0.101          0.126          0.129        0.116
                                          (-0.302)       (-0.332)       (-0.335)     (-0.320)
 East South Central Region                  0.094          0.168          0.163        0.236
                                          (-0.291)       (-0.374)       (-0.369)     (-0.425)
 West South Central Region                  0.060          0.094          0.077        0.092
                                          (-0.238)       (-0.292)       (-0.266)     (-0.289)
 Mountain                                   0.135          0.070          0.065        0.032
                                          (-0.342)       (-0.255)       (-0.247)     (-0.176)
 Pacific                                    0.131          0.121          0.160        0.092
                                          (-0.338)       (-0.327)       (-0.367)     (-0.289)
US Census 2000. Sample includes all married women aged 25-45, non-students.




                                                                                                  44
Appendix 3: Means and Standard Deviations, 2000 Census Data, Military
Wives Sample
                               Live in          Live in                     Live in
                               birth state    birth state      Live in     birth state
                               of neither     of husband     birth state    of both
                               spouse            only       of wife only    spouses
Employed                              0.556         0.613          0.621         0.643
                                   (-0.497)      (-0.487)       (-0.485)      (-0.479)
In the Labor Force                    0.603         0.653          0.663         0.675
                                   (-0.489)      (-0.476)       (-0.473)      (-0.469)
Age                                  31.398        32.316         31.046        31.873
                                   (-6.710)      (-6.703)       (-6.848)      (-6.940)
Less than High School                 0.046         0.035          0.042         0.062
                                   (-0.209)      (-0.184)       (-0.200)      (-0.241)
More than High School                 0.426         0.473          0.481         0.408
                                   (-0.494)      (-0.500)       (-0.500)      (-0.492)
Bachelors                             0.202         0.191          0.167         0.147
                                   (-0.401)      (-0.393)       (-0.373)      (-0.354)
More than Bachelor                    0.057         0.061          0.040         0.049
                                   (-0.231)      (-0.240)       (-0.196)      (-0.215)
Spouse less than high school          0.010         0.013          0.008         0.022
                                   (-0.097)      (-0.113)       (-0.088)      (-0.147)
Spouse more than high school          0.471         0.482          0.516         0.505
                                   (-0.499)      (-0.500)       (-0.500)      (-0.500)
Spouse bachelors                      0.165         0.179          0.139         0.138
                                   (-0.371)      (-0.384)       (-0.346)      (-0.345)
Spouse more than bachelors            0.134         0.105          0.081         0.055
                                   (-0.341)      (-0.307)       (-0.272)      (-0.228)
Spouse work disability                0.060         0.045          0.062         0.091
                                   (-0.237)      (-0.208)       (-0.242)      (-0.288)
Work disability                       0.047         0.065          0.053         0.062
                                   (-0.211)      (-0.247)       (-0.224)      (-0.242)
Black                                 0.125         0.118          0.116         0.129
                                   (-0.330)      (-0.323)       (-0.320)      (-0.336)
Hispanic                              0.063         0.062          0.092         0.111
                                   (-0.243)      (-0.242)       (-0.290)      (-0.314)
Renter (free rent)                    0.299         0.178          0.188         0.133
                                   (-0.458)      (-0.383)       (-0.391)      (-0.340)
Renter                                0.364         0.294          0.348         0.272
                                   (-0.481)      (-0.456)       (-0.476)      (-0.445)




                                                                                         45
                                         Live in           Live in                        Live in
                                         birth state     birth state        Live in      birth state
                                         of neither      of husband       birth state     of both
                                         spouse             only         of wife only     spouses
 Metropolitan Area                               0.771           0.778           0.772         0.673
                                              (-0.420)        (-0.416)        (-0.420)      (-0.469)
 Spouse's total income                          36,979          37,746          35,162        34,950
                                            (-23,823)       (-18,813)       (-20,921)     (-19,832)
 Migrant                                         0.756           0.521           0.312         0.230
                                              (-0.430)        (-0.500)        (-0.464)      (-0.421)
 Children less than 12                           0.716           0.697           0.709         0.700
                                              (-0.451)        (-0.460)        (-0.454)      (-0.458)
 Children over 12                                0.074           0.083           0.068         0.096
                                              (-0.261)        (-0.276)        (-0.252)      (-0.294)
 No Children                                     0.210           0.219           0.223         0.204
                                              (-0.407)        (-0.414)        (-0.416)      (-0.403)
 Mid-Atlantic region                             0.035           0.071           0.045         0.092
                                              (-0.184)        (-0.258)        (-0.208)      (-0.289)
 East North Central region                       0.414           0.323           0.291         0.219
                                              (-0.493)        (-0.468)        (-0.454)      (-0.414)
 West North Central region                       0.074           0.058           0.048         0.083
                                              (-0.262)        (-0.235)        (-0.215)      (-0.276)
 South Atlantic Region                           0.108           0.144           0.163         0.134
                                              (-0.310)        (-0.351)        (-0.370)      (-0.341)
 East South Central Region                       0.026           0.065           0.048         0.112
                                              (-0.158)        (-0.247)        (-0.213)      (-0.315)
 West South Central Region                       0.045           0.036           0.043         0.079
                                              (-0.208)        (-0.187)        (-0.202)      (-0.270)
 Mountain                                        0.087           0.056           0.063         0.041
                                              (-0.282)        (-0.230)        (-0.243)      (-0.199)
 Pacific                                         0.189           0.208           0.270         0.203
                                              (-0.392)        (-0.406)        (-0.444)      (-0.402)
US Census 2000. Sample includes all civilian women married to active federal military
employees, aged 18-45, non-students.




                                                                                                       46
