                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A THEORY OF CAPITAL CONTROLS AS DYNAMIC TERMS-OF-TRADE MANIPULATION

                                        Arnaud Costinot
                                        Guido Lorenzoni
                                         Iván Werning

                                       Working Paper 17680
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17680


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank the Becker Friedman Institute and Chicago Booth
for hospitality during part of this project.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Arnaud Costinot, Guido Lorenzoni, and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Capital Controls as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation
Arnaud Costinot, Guido Lorenzoni, and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 17680
December 2011
JEL No. F13,F32,F33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper develops a simple theory of capital controls as dynamic terms-of-trade manipulation. We
study an infinite horizon endowment economy with two countries. One country chooses taxes on international
capital flows in order to maximize the welfare of its representative agent, while the other country is
passive. We show that capital controls are not guided by the absolute desire to alter the intertemporal
price of the goods produced in any given period, but rather by the relative strength of this desire between
two consecutive periods. Specifically, it is optimal for the strategic country to tax capital inflows (or
subsidize capital outflows) if it grows faster than the rest of the world and to tax capital outflows (or
subsidize capital inflows) if it grows more slowly. In the long-run, if relative endowments converge
to a steady state, taxes on international capital flows converge to zero. Although our theory emphasizes
interest rate manipulation, the country's net financial position per se is irrelevant.


Arnaud Costinot                                      Iván Werning
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
MIT                                                  MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-243B                          50 Memorial Drive, E51-251a
Cambridge MA 02142-1347                              Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER                                             and NBER
costinot@mit.edu                                     iwerning@mit.edu

Guido Lorenzoni
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-251C
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Since the end of World War II, bilateral and multilateral trade agreements have led to dra-
matic tariff reductions around the world, contributing to a spectacular increase in world
trade; see Subramanian and Wei (2007) and Baier and Bergstrand (2007). Starting in the
mid-1980s, the world has also experienced a dramatic increase in capital markets inte-
gration, with increased cross-border flows both across industrial countries and between
industrial and developing countries; see Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009). In sum,
the world has experienced a dramatic increase in intratemporal and intertemporal trade,
as Figure 1 illustrates.
     The multilateral institutions that promote both types of trade, however, have followed
two very different approaches. The primary goal of the World Trade Organization (WTO),
and its predecessor the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade, has been to reduce
relative price distortions in intratemporal trade. The focus on relative price distortions
and their associated terms-of-trade implications in static environments has a long and
distinguished history in the international trade literature, going back to Torrens (1844)
and Mill (1844). This rich history is echoed by recent theoretical and empirical work
emphasizing the role of terms-of-trade manipulation in the analysis of optimal tariffs and
its implication for the WTO; see Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2011) and Broda, Limao, and
Weinstein (2008).
     By contrast, international efforts toward increased capital openness have emphasized
the effects of capital controls on macroeconomic and financial stability. Consequently, the
multilateral institutions that promote capital market integration, like the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), have taken a different, more nuanced, approach to intertempo-
ral trade, as exemplified in the recent IMF recommendations on the appropriate use of
capital controls; see Ostry, Ghosh, Habermeier, Chamon, Qureshi, and Reinhardt (2010).
Although the terms-of-trade effects emphasized in the international trade literature have
natural implications for the analysis of optimal capital controls, these effects play little
role in the existing international macro literature.
     The objective of this paper is to bridge the gap between the trade approach to tariffs
and the macroeconomic approach to capital controls. The basic idea is to use standard op-
timal tariff arguments to study taxes on international capital flows. Our objective is not to
argue that the only motive for observed capital controls is the distortion of relative prices
or that the removal of such distortions should be the only goal of international policy co-
ordination. Rather, we want to develop some basic tools to think about capital controls
as a form of intertemporal trade policy. For pedagogical purposes, we will develop these


                                             2
                   0.7	                                                                                                      4	  


                   0.6	                                                                                                      3.5	  

                                                                                                                              3	  
                   0.5	  

                                                                                                                              2.5	  
                   0.4	  
                                                                                                                              2	  
                   0.3	  
                                                                                                                              1.5	  

                   0.2	  
                                                                                                                              1	  

                   0.1	                                                           Trade/GDP(Le8	  Axis)	  
                                                                                                                              0.5	  
                                                                                   Assets+LiabiliBes/GDP(Right	  Axis)	  

                      0	                                                                                                     0	  
                              1980	     1985	     1990	         1995	     2000	                           2005	  




                  Figure 1: International Trade and Financial Integration

Note: The blue line represents the sum of world export and imports over world GDP (source:
IMF World Economic Outlook). The purple line represents the sum of world assets and world
liabilities over world GDP (source: updated and extended version of dataset constructed by Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2007))


tools in a simple economic environment where other effects of capital controls are muted:
namely, there are no effects on output levels, nominal prices and nominal exchange rates,
and no effects on financial stability. Our hope is that the tools developed here can be in-
corporated in richer models where these other channels are active and that our analysis
will help shed light on their interactions.
    The starting point of our paper is that in an Arrow-Debreu economy there is no differ-
ence between intertemporal trade and intratemporal trade. In such an environment, one
only needs to relabel goods by time period and the same approach used to study static
terms-of-trade manipulation can be used to analyze dynamic terms-of-trade manipula-
tion. Our results will build on this simple observation together with the time-separable
structure of preferences typically used in macro applications. The only precedent that we
know of our approach to intertemporal trade policy is the textbook treatment of a two-
period, two-country, one-good endowment economy in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996). By
considering a richer economic environment, our analysis will not only provide more gen-
eral results, but also allow us to uncover one key principle: unilaterally optimal capital
controls are not guided by the absolute desire to alter the intertemporal price of goods
produced in a given period, but rather by the relative strength of this desire between
two consecutive periods. If a country is a net seller of goods dated t and t + 1 in equal
amounts, and faces equal elasticities in both periods, there is no incentive for the country
to distort the saving decisions of its consumers at date t. It is the time variation in the
incentive to distort intertemporal prices that leads to non-zero capital controls.
    Specifically, we consider an infinite horizon, two-country, one-good endowment econ-
omy. In this model the only relative prices are real interest rates. We solve for the uni-


                                                               3
laterally optimal taxes on international capital flows in one country, Home, under the
assumption that the other country, Foreign, is passive.1 In this environment, the principle
described above has sharp implications for the direction of optimal capital flow taxes. In
particular, it is optimal for Home to tax capital inflows (or subsidize capital outflows) in
periods in which Home is growing faster than the rest of the world and to tax capital
outflows (or subsidize capital inflows) in periods in which it is growing more slowly. Ac-
cordingly, if relative endowments converge to a steady state, then taxes on international
capital flows converge to zero. Although our theory of capital controls emphasizes inter-
est rate manipulation, the net financial position of Home per se, which might appear to
be central in a two-period model, is shown to be irrelevant.
    The intuition for our results is as follows. Consider Home’s incentives to distort do-
mestic consumption in each period. In periods of larger trade deficits, it has a stronger
incentive, as a buyer, to distort prices downward by lowering domestic consumption.
Similarly, in periods of larger trade surpluses, it has a stronger incentive, as a seller, to
distort prices upward by raising domestic consumption. Since periods of faster growth
at home tend to be associated with either lower future trade deficits or larger future trade
surpluses, Home always has an incentive to raise future consumption relative to current
consumption in such periods. This is exactly what taxes on capital inflows or subsidies on
capital outflows accomplish through their effects on relative distortions across periods.
    The next step in our paper is to extend the analysis to the case of multiple goods,
thereby allowing for both intertemporal and intratemporal trade. In order to maintain
the focus of our analysis on capital controls, we assume that Home can still choose its
taxes on capital flows unilaterally, but that it is constrained by a free-trade agreement that
prohibits good-specific taxes/subsidies in all periods. In this environment, we show that
the incentive to distort trade over time does not depend only on the overall growth of
the country’s output relative to the world, but also on its composition. We do so in two
ways. First, we establish a general formula that relates intertemporal distortions to the
covariance between the price elasticities of different goods and the change in the value of
home endowments. Ceteris paribus, we show that Home is more likely to raise aggregate
consumption if a change in the value of home endowments is tilted towards goods whose
prices are more manipulable. Second, we illustrate through a simple analytical example
how such compositional issues relate to cross-country differences in demand. In a multi
good world in which countries have different preferences, a change in the time profile of
   1 Throughout  our analysis, we assume that the home government can freely commit at date 0 to a se-
quence of taxes. In the economic environment considered in this paper, this is a fairly mild assumption. As
we formally establish in Section 3.4, if the home government can enter debt commitments at all maturities,
as in Lucas and Stokey (1983), the optimal sequence of taxes under commitment is time-consistent.


                                                    4
consumption not only affects the interest rate but also the relative prices of consumption
goods in each given period. This is an effect familiar from the literature on the transfer
problem, which goes back to the debate between Keynes (1929) and Ohlin (1929). In
our context this means that by distorting its consumers’ decision to allocate spending
between different periods a country also affects its static terms of trade. Even if all static
trade distortions are banned by a free-trade agreement, our analysis demonstrates that
intratemporal prices may not be at their undistorted levels if capital controls are allowed.
    We conclude by considering the case of capital control wars in which the two coun-
tries simultaneously set taxes on capital flows optimally at date 0, taking as given the
sequence of taxes chosen by the other country. In this situation, we show that results
derived in the one-good case are affected in two ways. First, unlike in the case in which
capital controls are set unilaterally, domestic consumption may decrease with domestic
endowments, even though both countries would have liked domestic consumption to in-
crease in the absence of policy response from the other country. Second, even if domestic
consumption is increasing in domestic endowments, as in our earlier analysis, one can
only relate periods of growth in one country to its taxes on capital flows relative to the
other country, not their absolute level. In the simple quantitative example that we con-
sider, we find that the net distortion on capital flows in the Nash equilibrium is larger
than in the unilateral case: far from canceling each other out, capital flow taxes imposed
by both countries make both countries worse off.
    Our paper attacks an international macroeconomic question following a classical ap-
proach from the international trade literature and using tools from the dynamic public
finance literature. In international macro, the closest literature is a growing theoretical
literature demonstrating, among other things, how restrictions on international capital
flows may be welfare-enhancing in the presence of various credit market imperfections;
see e.g. Calvo and Mendoza (2000), Caballero and Lorenzoni (2007), Aoki, Benigno, and
Kiyotaki (2010), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), and Martin and Taddei (2010). In addition
to these second-best arguments, there also exists an older literature emphasizing the so-
called “trilemma”: one cannot have a fixed exchange rate, an independent monetary pol-
icy and free capital mobility; see e.g. McKinnon and Oates (1966), or more recently, Ob-
stfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010). To the extent that having fixed exchange and an
independent monetary policy may be welfare-enhancing, such papers offer a distinct ra-
tionale for capital controls.
    On the international trade side, the literature on optimal taxes in open economies
is large and varied; see Dixit (1985) for an overview. The common starting point of
most trade policy papers, however, is that international trade is balanced. They there-


                                              5
fore abstract from intertemporal considerations.2 While one could, in principle, go from
intratemporal to intertemporal trade policy by relabeling goods in an abstract Arrow-
Debreu economy, existing trade policy papers typically focus on low-dimensional gen-
eral equilibrium models, i.e., with only two goods. Exceptions featuring more than two
goods only offer: (i ) partial equilibrium results under the assumption of quasi-linear pref-
erences; (ii ) sufficient conditions under which seemingly paradoxical results may arise,
see e.g. Feenstra (1986) and Itoh and Kiyono (1987); or (iii ) fairly weak restriction on the
structure of optimal trade policy, see e.g. Bond (1990). Thus there are no ‘off-the-shelf’
results from the existing trade literature that directly apply to the dynamic environment
considered in our paper.
    In terms of methodology, we follow the dynamic public finance literature and use the
primal approach to characterize first optimal wedges rather than explicit policy instru-
ments; see e.g. Lucas and Stokey (1983). Since there are typically many ways to imple-
ment the optimal allocation in an intertemporal context, this approach will help us clarify
the equivalence between capital controls and other policy instruments. Finally, since our
theory of capital controls models one of the two governments as a dynamic monopolist
optimally choosing the pattern of consumption over time, our analysis bears some resem-
blance to the problem of a dynamic monopolist optimally choosing the rate of extraction
of some exhaustible resources; see Stiglitz (1976).
    The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a simple one-good
economy. Section 3 characterizes the structure of optimal capital controls in this environ-
ment. Section 4 extends our results to the case of many goods. Section 5 considers the
case of capital control wars. Section 6 offers some concluding remarks.


2        Basic Environment

2.1      A Dynamic Endowment Economy
There are two countries, Home and Foreign. Time is discrete and infinite, t = 0, 1, ...
and there is no uncertainty. The preferences of the representative consumer at home are
represented by the additively separable utility function:

                                               ∞
                                               ∑ β t u ( c t ),
                                               t =0
    2Anotable exception is Bagwell and Staiger (1990), though their focus is on self-enforcing trade agree-
ments. See Staiger (1995) for an overview of that literature.



                                                      6
where ct denotes consumption, u is an increasing, concave function, and β ∈ (0, 1) is the
discount factor. The preferences of the representative consumer abroad have a similar
form, with asterisks denoting foreign variables.
    Both domestic and foreign consumers receive an endowment sequence denoted by
{yt } and {y∗t }, respectively. We make two simplifying assumptions: world endowments
are fixed across periods, yt + y∗t = Y, and the home and foreign consumer have the same
discount factor, β = β∗ . Accordingly, in the absence of distortions, there should be perfect
consumption smoothing across time in both countries.
    We assume that both countries begin with zero assets at date 0. Let pt be the price of a
unit of consumption in period t on the world capital markets. In the absence of taxes, the
intertemporal budget constraint of the home consumer is

                                        ∞
                                        ∑ pt (ct − yt ) ≤ 0.
                                        t =0

The budget constraint of of the foreign consumer is the same expression with asterisks on
ct and yt .


2.2   A Dynamic Monopolist
For most of the paper, we will focus on the case in which the home government sets taxes
on capital flows in order to maximize domestic welfare, assuming the foreign government
is passive: it does not have any tax policy in place and does not respond to variations in
the home policy. We will look at the case where both governments set taxes strategically
in Section 5.
    In order to characterize the optimal policy of the home government, we follow the
dynamic public finance literature and use the primal approach. That is, we approach
the optimal policy problem of the home government by studying a planning problem in
which equilibrium quantities are chosen directly and address implementation issues later.
    Formally, we assume that the objective of the home government is to maximize the
lifetime utility of the representative domestic consumer subject to (i ) utility maximization
by the foreign consumer at (undistorted) world prices pt , and (ii ) market clearing in each
period. The foreign consumer first-order conditions are given by

                                            βt u∗0 (c∗t ) = λ∗ pt ,                       (1)
                                  ∞
                                 ∑ pt (c∗t − y∗t )      = 0,                              (2)
                                 t =0



                                                   7
where λ∗ is the Lagrange multiplier on the foreign consumer’s budget constraint. More-
over, goods market clearing requires

                                          ct + c∗t = Y.                                (3)

Combining equations (1)-(3), we can express the planning problem of the home govern-
ment as
                                                ∞
                                       max
                                        {ct }
                                                ∑ βt u(ct )                           (P)
                                                t =0

subject to
                                ∞
                               ∑ βt u∗0 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) = 0.                       (4)
                               t =0

Equation (4) is an implementability constraint, familiar from the optimal taxation litera-
ture. Note that given a sequence of domestic consumption, condition (4) is also sufficient
to ensure the existence of a feasible, utility-maximizing consumption sequence for For-
eign. The argument is constructive: given {ct }, the proposed sequence {c∗t } is obtained
from market clearing (3) and the sequence of prices is computed from (1), so that (2) is
implied by (4), ensuring that the foreign consumer’s sufficient conditions for optimality
are met.


3     Optimal Capital Controls

3.1   Optimal Allocation
We first describe how home consumption {ct } fluctuates with home endowments {yt }
along the optimal path. Next we will show how the optimal allocation can be imple-
mented using taxes on international capital flows.
   The first-order condition associated with Home’s planning problem is given by

                     u0 (ct ) = µ u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) ,           (5)
                                                                         


where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the implementability constraint. This condition
immediately leads to our first observation. Although the entire sequence {yt } affects
the level of current consumption through their effects on the Lagrange multiplier µ, we
see that variations in current consumption ct along the optimal path only depend on
variations in the current value of yt .
   The next proposition shows that, whatever the shape of the utility functions u and u∗ ,

                                                  8
                         u0 (c)




                      µu∗0 (Y − c)
      µ[u∗0 (Y − c) − u∗00 (Y − c)(c − yt )]

                   µ[u∗0 (Y − c) − u∗00 (Y − c)(c − ys )]




               0                                            ct   yt   cs   ys   Y   c



                   Figure 2: Consumption is Procyclical Along the Optimal Path

there is a monotonic relationship between domestic consumption and domestic endow-
ments along the optimal path.

Proposition 1 (Procyclical consumption) For any two periods t and s, if the home endowment is
larger in s, ys > yt , then the home consumption is also higher, cs > ct .

    Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of Home’s planning problem. On the x-
axis we have domestic consumption c, which determines foreign consumption, Y − c, by
market clearing. The decreasing blue curve labeled u0 (c) represents the marginal utility of
the home consumer. The increasing red curve represents the marginal revenue associated
with reducing consumption at home by a small amount and thus (i ) increasing net sales,
and (ii ) decreasing the intertemporal price of the t-dated good. The optimal consumption
choice at t corresponds to the point where the two curves meet, that is, where marginal
revenue is equalized with the marginal cost of reducing home consumption, which is just
u0 (c). The same reasoning applies in period s, but with the marginal revenue represented
by the light blue dashed curve.


                                                            9
     Figure 2 gives an intuition for Proposition 1. As the endowment increases from yt to
ys , the curve u0 (c) does not move. At the same time, the marginal revenue curve shifts
down, as the price decrease associated to a reduction in c applies to a larger amount
of inframarginal units sold. This induces Home to consume more, explaining why con-
sumption is procyclical along the optimal path.
     As a preliminary step in the analysis of optimal capital flow taxes, we conclude this
section by describing how the “wedge” between the marginal utility of domestic and
foreign consumption varies along the optimal path. Formally, define

                                                     u0 (ct )
                                             τt ≡               − 1.                                         (6)
                                                    µu∗0 (c∗t )

By market clearing, we know that c∗t = Y − ct . Thus combining the definition of τt with
the strict concavity of u and u∗ , we obtain the following corollary to Proposition 1.

Corollary 1 (Countercyclical wedges) For any two periods t and s, if the home endowment is
larger in s, ys > yt , then the wedge is lower, τs < τt .

   The existing trade policy literature provides a useful way to interpret Corollary 1. By
equations (5) and (6), we have

                                                u∗00 (Y − ct )
                                       τt = −                  ( c t − y t ).                                (7)
                                                u∗0 (Y − ct )

Condition (7) is closely related to the well-known optimal tariff formula involving the
elasticity of the foreign export supply curve in static trade models with two goods and/or
quasi-linear preferences. This should not be too surprising since τt measures the differ-
ence between the marginal utility of domestic and foreign consumption. According to
equation (7), the wedge τt is positive in periods of trade deficit and negative in periods
of trade surplus. This captures the idea that if (time-varying) trade taxes were available,
Home would like to tax imports if ct − yt > 0 and tax exports if ct − yt < 0. Corollary 1,
however, goes beyond this simple observation by establishing a monotonic relationship
between τt and yt . This insight will play a key role in our analysis of optimal capital
controls, to which we now turn.3
   3A  natural question is whether the same logic implies a monotonic relationship between τt and net
imports, ct − yt . Perhaps surprisingly, this is not necessarily the case. While the sign of the slopes of u0 (c)
and µu∗0 (Y − c) is unambiguous (by concavity) the sign of the slope of the marginal return curve could
in general be positive or negative. This opens up the possibility that a positive output shock may lead
to an increase in import volumes, and so by Proposition 1, that an increase in import volumes may be
accompanied by a decrease in τt along the optimal path.


                                                       10
3.2    Optimal Taxes on International Capital Flows
It is well-known from the Ramsey taxation literature that there are typically many com-
binations of taxes that can implement the optimal allocation; see e.g. Chari and Kehoe
(1999). Here, we focus on the tax instrument most directly related to world interest rate
manipulation: taxes on international capital flows.4
     For expositional purposes, we assume that consumers can only trade one-period bonds
on international capital markets, with the home government imposing a proportional tax
θt on the gross return on net asset position in international bond markets. Standard ar-
guments show that any competitive equilibrium supported by intertemporal trading of
consumption claims at date 0 can be supported by trading of one-period bonds. As we
discuss later in Section 3.4, none of the results presented here depend on the assumption
that one-period bonds are the only assets available.
     With only one-period bonds, the per-period budget constraint of the home consumer
takes the form
                               q t a t +1 + c t = y t + (1 − θ t ) a t − l t ,         (8)

where at denotes the current bond holdings, lt is a lump sum tax, and qt ≡ pt+1 /pt is
the price of one-period bonds at date t. In addition, consumers are subject to a standard
no-Ponzi condition, limt→∞ pt at ≥ 0. In this environment the home consumer’s Euler
equation takes the form

                                u0 (ct ) = β(1 − θt )(1 + rt )u0 (ct+1 ).                           (9)

where rt ≡ 1/qt − 1 is the world interest rate. Given a solution {ct } to Home’s planning
problem (P), the world interest rate is uniquely determined as

                                             u∗0 (Y − ct )
                                     rt =                    − 1,
                                            βu∗0 (Y − ct+1 )

by equations (1) and (3). Thus, given {ct }, we can use (9) to construct a unique sequence
of taxes {θt }. We can then set the sequence of assets positions and lump-sum transfers

                                             ∞
                                   at =     ∑ ( ps /pt ) (cs − ys ) ,
                                            s=t
                                    lt = − θt at ,
   4 Othertax instruments that could be used to implement the optimal allocation include time-varying
trade and consumption taxes (possibly accompanied by production taxes in more general environments).
See Jeanne (2011) for a detailed discussion of the equivalence between capital controls and trade taxes.



                                                   11
which ensures that the per-period budget constraint (8) and the no-Ponzi condition are
satisfied. Since (8), (9), and the no-Ponzi condition are sufficient for optimality it follows
that given prices and taxes, {ct } is optimal for the home consumer. This establishes that
any solution {ct } of (P) can be decentralized as a competitive equilibrium with taxes.
    A positive θt can be interpreted as imposing simultaneously a tax θt on capital out-
flows and a subsidy θt to capital inflows. Obviously, since there is a representative con-
sumer, only one of the two is active in equilibrium: the outflow tax if the country is a net
lender, at > 0, and the inflow subsidy if it is a net borrower, at < 0. Similarly, a negative
θt can be interpreted as a subsidy on capital outflows plus a tax on capital inflows. The
bottom line is that θt > 0 discourages domestic savings while θt < 0 encourages them.
    In Foreign, since there are no capital flow taxes, the Euler equation takes the form

                                  u∗0 (c∗t ) = β(1 + rt )u0 (c∗t+1 ).                    (10)

Combining the definition of the wedge (6) with the Euler equations at home and abroad
(9) and (10), we obtain the following relationship between wedges and taxes on capital
flows:
                                              1 + τt
                                    θt = 1 −          .                           (11)
                                             1 + τt+1
The previous subsection has already established that variations in domestic consumption
ct along the optimal path are only a function of the current endowment yt . Since τt is
only a function of ct , equation (11) implies that variations in θt are only a function of yt
and yt+1 . Combining equation (11) with Corollary 1, we then obtain the following result
about the structure of optimal capital controls.

Proposition 2 (Optimal capital flow taxes) Suppose that the optimal policy is implemented with
capital flows taxes. Then it is optimal:

  1. to tax capital inflows/subsidize capital outflows (θt < 0) if yt+1 > yt ;

  2. to tax capital outflows/subsidize capital inflows (θt > 0) if yt+1 < yt ;

  3. not to distort capital flows (θt = 0) if yt+1 = yt .

   Proposition 2 builds on the same logic as Proposition 1. Suppose, for instance, that
Home is running a trade deficit in periods t and t + 1. In this case, the home govern-
ment wants to exercise its monopsony power by lowering domestic consumption in both
periods. But if Home grows between these two periods, yt+1 > yt , the number of units


                                                  12
imported from abroad is lower in period t + 1. Thus the home government has less in-
centive to lower consumption in that period. This explains why a tax on capital inflows is
optimal in period t: it reduces borrowing in period t, thereby shifting consumption from
period t to period t + 1. The other results follow a similar logic.
    It is worth emphasizing that, although the only motive for capital controls in our
model is interest rate manipulation, the net financial position of Home in any particu-
lar period, debtor or creditor, is not the relevant variable to look at to sign the optimal
direction of the tax. This is because the effect of a capital flow tax is to affect the relative
distortion in consumption decisions between two consecutive periods. Therefore, what
matters is whether the monopolistic/monopsonistic incentives to restrict domestic con-
sumption are stronger in period t or t + 1. In our simple endowment economy, these
incentives are purely captured by the growth rate of the endowment, but the same broad
principle would extend to more general environments.
    Proposition 2 has a number of interesting implications. Consider first an economy that
is catching up with the rest of the world in the sense that yt+1 > yt for all t. According to
our analysis, it is optimal for this country to tax capital inflows and to subsidize capital
outflows. The basic intuition is that a growing country will export more tomorrow than
today. Thus it has more incentive to increase export prices in the future, which it can
achieve by raising future consumption through a subsidy on capital outflows. For an
economy catching up with the rest of the world, larger benefits from future terms-of-trade
manipulation are associated with taxes and subsidies that encourage domestic savings.
    Consider instead a country that at time t borrows from abroad in anticipation of a
temporary boom. In particular, suppose that yt+1 > yt and ys = yt for all s > t + 1. In
this situation, the logic of Proposition 2 implies that, at time t, at the onset of the boom, it
is optimal to impose restrictions on short-term capital inflows, i.e., to tax bonds with one-
period maturity and leave long-term capital inflows unrestricted.5 This example provides
a different perspective on why governments may try to alter the composition of capital
flows in favor of longer maturity flows in practice; see Magud, Reinhart, and Rogoff
(2011). In our model, incentives to alter the composition of capital flows do not come
from the fear of “hot money” but from larger benefits of terms-of-trade manipulation in
the short run.
    Finally, Proposition 2 has sharp implications for the structure of optimal capital con-
trols in the long-run.

   5 The  tax on two period bonds is easily shown to be (1 − θt )(1 − θt+1 ) − 1 and Proposition 1 implies that
it is zero in our example.



                                                      13
Corollary 2 (No tax in steady state) In the long run, if endowments converge to a steady state,
yt → y, then taxes on international capital flows converge to zero, θt → 0.

    Corollary 2 is reminiscent of the Chamley-Judd result (Judd, 1985; Chamley, 1986) of
zero capital income tax in the long-run. Intuitively, the home government would like
to use its monopoly power to influence intertemporal prices to favor the present value
of its income. However, at a steady state all periods are symmetric, so it is not optimal
to manipulate relative prices. Note that a steady state may be reached with trade bal-
ance, trade deficit or trade surplus. Which of these cases applies depends on the entire
sequence {yt }. Our analysis demonstrates that taxes on international capital flows are
unaffected by these long-run relative wealth dynamics. For instance, even if Home, say,
becomes heavily indebted, it is not optimal to lower long run interest rates. In our model,
even away from a steady state, taxes on international capital flows are determined by the
endowments at t and t + 1 only.


3.3   An Example with CRRA Utility and Aggregate Fluctuations
Up to now we have focused on the case of a fixed world endowment. Thus we have
looked at how optimal capital controls respond to a reallocation of resources between
countries, keeping the total pie fixed. This provides a useful benchmark in which all fluc-
tuations in consumption reflect the incentives of the home government to manipulate the
world interest rate. Here we show that if domestic and foreign consumers have identi-
cal CRRA utility functions, then our results extend to economies with aggregate fluctua-
tions. We also take advantage of this example for a simple exploration of the magnitudes
involved with optimal capital controls in terms of quantities and welfare.
    Our characterization of the optimal policy of the home government extends immedi-
ately to the case of a time-varying world endowment: one just needs to replace Y with
Yt in equation (5). Under the assumption of identical CRRA utility functions, u(c) =
u∗ (c) = c1−γ / (1 − γ) with γ ≥ 0, this leads to a simple relationship between the home
share of world endowments, yt /Yt , and the home share of world consumption, ct /Yt :
                                       −γ
                            ct /Yt                          ct /Yt − yt /Yt
                                                                           
                                             = µ 1+γ                               .
                          1 − ct /Yt                           1 − ct /Yt

The left-hand side is decreasing in ct /Yt , whereas the right-hand side is increasing in
ct /Yt and decreasing in yt /Yt . Thus the implicit function theorem implies that, along
the optimal path, the home share of world consumption, c/Y, is strictly increasing in


                                                   14
                        output and consumption                     capital flows tax and net assets
                 0.35                                              0                             0

                  0.3                                       -0.002
     y/Y, c/Y


                                                            -0.004




                                                                                                      a/Y
                 0.25                                                                            -1




                                                        θ
                                                            -0.006
                  0.2                                       -0.008
                 0.15                                         -0.01                              -2
                        0      20    40           60                  0          20   40       60

                  Figure 3: Optimal Allocation and Taxes for the Country Catching Up

Note: In the left panel, the red line is the exogenous path for the endowment, the blue line is
consumption at the optimal policy of the home government, and the dashed line is the efficient
no-tax benchmark. In the right panel, the blue line is the capital flow tax and the green line the
home assets-to-world-GDP ratio.

the home share of world endowments, y/Y. Put simply, if utility functions are CRRA,
Proposition 1 generalizes to environments with aggregate fluctuations.
   Now consider the wedge τt between the marginal utility of domestic and foreign con-
sumption in period t. Under the assumption of CRRA utility functions we have
                                                                   −γ
                                           1            ct /Yt
                                                  
                                      τt =                                − 1.
                                           µ          1 − ct /Yt

According to this expression, if c/Y is strictly increasing in y/Y along the optimal path,
then τ is strictly decreasing. The same logic as in Section 3.2 therefore implies that optimal
taxes on capital flows must be such that θt < 0 if and only if yt+1 /Yt+1 > yt /Yt . In other
words, if utility functions are CRRA, Proposition 2 also generalizes to environments with
aggregate fluctuations.
    As a quantitative illustration of our theory of capital controls as dynamic terms-of-
trade manipulation, suppose that foreign endowments {y∗t } are growing at the constant
rate g = 3% per year and that Home is catching up with the rest of the world. To be more
specific, suppose that the home endowment is 20% of world endowments at date 0 and
that it is converging towards being 50% in the long run, with the ratio yt /y∗t converging
to its long run value at a constant speed η = 0.05.6
   6 That       is, we assume that
                                          yt /y∗t − a = (y0 /y0∗ − a) e−ηt ,
with a = 0.5/0.5 = 1 > y0 /y0∗ = 0.2/0.8 = 0.25.


                                                         15
                      output and consumption                capital flows tax and net assets
                0.9                                      0.04                             1

                                                         0.03
     y/Y, c/Y


                0.8




                                                                                                  a/Y
                                                         0.02                               0.5




                                                    θ
                0.7                                     0.010

                                                           0                               0
                      0      20       40       60               0    20        40        60

                      Figure 4: Optimal Allocation and Taxes for the Rest of the World

Note: In the left panel, the red line is the exogenous path for the endowment, the blue line is
consumption at the foreign optimal policy, and the dashed line is the efficient no-tax benchmark.
In the right panel, the blue line is the capital flow tax and the green line the foreign assets-to-
world-GDP ratio.

    Figure 3 shows the path of the home share of world endowments and consumption,
assuming a unit elasticity of intertemporal substitution, γ = 1. For comparison, we also
plot the path for consumption in the benchmark case with no capital controls. In this
case, consistently with consumption smoothing, Home consumes a fixed fraction of the
world endowment in all periods. Although optimal capital controls reduce consumption
smoothing, intertemporal trade flows are several times larger than domestic output. The
optimal tax on capital inflows is less than 1% at date 0 and vanishing in the long run, fol-
lowing the same logic as for Corollary 2. Perhaps surprisingly, the optimal tax on capital
inflows decreases as the value of the home debt increases. Compared to the benchmark
with no capital controls, optimal taxes are associated with an increase in domestic con-
sumption of 0.12% and a decrease in foreign consumption of 0.07%. Though the welfare
impact of optimal capital controls is admittedly not large in this particular example, it is
not much smaller than either the estimated gains of international trade or financial inte-
gration.7
    Figure 4 considers the same exogenous path for endowments, but assumes that it is
the foreign country, instead of the home country, that is imposing capital flow taxes op-
timally. Formally, the home share of world endowments is now 80% at date 0 and is
   7 According  to a fairly large class of trade models, the welfare gains from international trade in the
United States are between 0.7% and 1.4% of real GDP; see Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2009).
Similarly, the welfare gains from switching from financial autarky to perfect capital mobility is roughly
equivalent to a 1% permanent increase in consumption for the typical non-OECD country; see Gourinchas
and Jeanne (2006).


                                                    16
converging towards being 50% in the long-run. In this situation, we see that optimal
taxes on international capital flows are about three times as large as in the previous case,
reflecting the greater size of the rest of the world, and hence its greater ability to manipu-
late world interest rates. The impact on welfare is larger as well. In this second example,
domestic consumption increases by 0.27% compared to the benchmark with no capital
controls, whereas foreign consumption decreases by 1.27%. With higher values of γ, i.e.
lower intertemporal elasticity of substitution, we obtain similar though slightly higher
numbers. For instance, for γ = 2, the increase in domestic consumption is equal to 0.48%
and the decrease in foreign consumption to 2.5%.8


3.4       Initial Assets, Debt Maturity, and Time-Consistency
So far, we have focused on environments in which: (i ) there are no initial assets at date
0 and (ii ) one-period bonds are the only assets available. We now briefly discuss how
relaxing both assumptions affects our results. We also show that if more debt instruments
are available, the optimal allocation is time-consistent: a future government free to choose
future consumption, but forced to fulfill previous debt obligations would not want to
deviate from the consumption path chosen by its predecessors.
    Let at,s represents holdings at time t of bonds maturing at time s. Suppose the home
consumer enters date 0 with initial asset holdings { a0,t }∞
                                                           t=0 . The asset holdings now enter
the intertemporal budget constraints of the home and foreign consumers. In particular,
the budget constraint of the foreign consumer generalizes to

                                       ∞
                                       ∑ pt (c∗t − y∗t − a0,t
                                                          ∗
                                                              ) = 0,
                                       t =0

       ∗ = − a denotes initial asset holdings abroad. The other equilibrium conditions
where a0,t     0,t
are unchanged, so Home’s planning problem becomes

                                                      ∞
                                              max
                                              {ct }
                                                      ∑ βt u(ct )                                    (P0 )
                                                      t =0

subject to
                                 ∞
                                ∑ βt u∗0 (Y − ct )(ct − yt + a0,t
                                                              ∗
                                                                  ) = 0.                             (12)
                                t =0
   8 In general, changing γ has non-monotonic effects on the welfare impact of optimal capital controls.
Intuitively, since Home and Foreign have the same intertemporal elasticity of substitution, changing γ
affects both the marginal revenue and the marginal cost of a dynamic monopolist, as described in Figure 2.



                                                       17
Compared to the case without initial assets, the only difference is the new implementabil-
                                             ∗ } rather than { y }. Accordingly, Proposition
ity constraint (12) that depends on {yt − a0,t                    t
1 and Corollary 1 simply generalize to environments with initial assets { a0,t ∗ }∞ provided
                                                                                  t =0
                                                      ∗
that they are restated in terms of changes in yt − a0,t rather than changes in yt .
    Throughout our analysis, we have assumed that the home government can freely com-
mit at date 0 to a consumption path {ct }. Now that we have recognized the role of the
initial asset positions, this assumption may seem uncomfortably restrictive. After all,
along the optimal path, the debt obligations { a∗t,s }∞s=t held at date t will typically be dif-
                                 ∗   ∞
ferent from the obligations { a0,s }s=t held at date 0. Accordingly, a government at later
dates may benefit from deviating from the consumption chosen at date 0.
    We now demonstrate that this is not the case if the government has access to bonds
of arbitrary maturity. The basic idea builds on the original insight of Lucas and Stokey
(1983). At any date t, the foreign consumer is indifferent between many future asset
holdings { a∗t+1,s }∞                                           ∗
                    s=t+1 . Given a consumption sequence { ct } that maximizes her utility
subject to her budget constraint, she is indifferent between any bond holdings satisfying

                                     ∞
                                     ∑        ps (c∗s − y∗s − a∗t+1,s ) = 0.               (13)
                                   s = t +1

As we show in the appendix, this degree of freedom is sufficient for the home government
at date 0 to construct sequences of debt obligations { a∗t,s }∞
                                                              s=t for all t ≥ 1 such that the
solution of
                                                       ∞
                                               max
                                               {cs }
                                                       ∑ βs u(cs )
                                                       s=t

subject to
                              ∞
                             ∑ βs u∗0 (Y − cs )(cs − ys + a∗t,s ) = 0                      (14)
                             s=t

coincides with the solution of (P0 ) at all dates t ≥ 0. In short, if the home government can
enter debt commitments at all maturities, the optimal allocation derived in Section 3.1 is
time-consistent.


4    Intertemporal and Intratemporal Trade
How do the incentives to tax capital flows change in a world with many goods? In a one-
good economy, the only form of terms-of-trade manipulation achieved by taxing capital
flows is to manipulate the world interest rate. In a world with many goods, distorting the
borrowing and lending decisions of domestic consumers also affects the relative prices

                                                        18
of the different goods traded in each period. In this section, we explore how these new
intratemporal considerations change optimal capital flow distortions.
     In order to maintain the focus of our analysis on optimal capital controls, we proceed
under the assumption that Home is constrained by an international free-trade agreement
that prohibits good specific taxes/subsidies in all periods. As in the previous section,
Home is still allowed to impose taxes on capital flows that distort intertemporal decisions.
This means that while Home cannot control the path of consumption of each specific good
i, it can still control the path of aggregate consumption. As we shall see, in general, the
path of aggregate consumption can affect relative prices at any point in time, thus creating
additional room for terms-of-trade manipulation.


4.1   The Monopolist Problem Revisited
The basic environment is the same as in Section 2.1, except that there are n > 1 goods.
Thus domestic consumption and output, ct and yt , are now vectors in Rn+ . We assume
that the domestic consumer has additively separable preferences represented by

                                           ∞
                                           ∑ βt U (Ct ) ,
                                           t =0

where U is increasing and strictly concave, Ct ≡ g (ct ) is aggregate domestic consump-
tion at date t, and g is increasing, concave, and homogeneous of degree one. Analogous
definitions apply to U ∗ and Ct∗ ≡ g∗ (c∗t ).
    In the absence of taxes, the intertemporal budget constraint of the home consumer is
now given by
                                     ∞
                                    ∑ pt · (ct − yt ) ≤ 0,
                                    t =0

where pt ∈ Rn+ denotes the intertemporal price vector for period-t goods and · is the inner
product. A similar budget constraint applies in Foreign.
   As in Section 2.2, we use the primal approach to characterize the optimal policy of the
home government. In this new environment, the home government’s objective is to set
consumption {ct } in order to maximize the lifetime utility of its representative consumer
subject to (i ) utility maximization by the foreign representative consumer at (undistorted)
world prices pt ; (ii ) market clearing in each period; and (iii ) a free trade agreement that
rules out good specific taxes or subsidies.
   Constraint (i ) can be dealt with as we did in the one-good case. In vector notation,
the first-order conditions associated with utility maximization by the foreign consumer


                                                  19
generalize to

                                   βt U ∗0 (Ct∗ ) gc∗ (c∗t ) = λ∗ pt ,                           (15)
                                       ∞
                                      ∑ pt · (c∗t − y∗t )   = 0.                                 (16)
                                      t =0

Next, note that if Home cannot impose good specific taxes or subsidies, the relative price
of any two goods i and j in period t, pit /p jt , must be equal in the two countries and equal
to the marginal rates of substitution gi (ct ) /g j (ct ) and gi∗ (c∗t ) /g∗j (c∗t ). Accordingly, the
consumption allocation (ct , c∗t ) in any period t is Pareto efficient and solves

             C ∗ (Ct ) = max { g∗ (c∗ )        subject to   c + c∗ = Y and g(c) ≥ Ct }           (17)
                           c,c
                           ∗



for some Ct . Therefore, constraints (ii ) and (iii ), can be captured by letting Home choose
an aggregate consumption level Ct , which identifies a point on the static Pareto frontier.
The consumption vectors at time t are then given by the corresponding solutions to prob-
lem (17), which we denote by c (Ct ) and c∗ (Ct ).
    We can then state Home’s planning problem in the case of many goods as

                                                   ∞
                                             max   ∑ βt U (Ct )
                                             {Ct } t=0
                                                                                                 (P’)


subject to
                                   ∞
                                  ∑ βt ρ(Ct ) · (c (Ct ) − yt ) = 0,                             (18)
                                  t =0

where ρ(Ct ) ≡ U ∗0 (C ∗ (Ct )) gc∗ (c∗ (Ct )) and equation (18) is the counterpart of the imple-
mentability constraint in Section 2.2.


4.2    Optimal Allocation
With many goods, the first-order condition associated with Home’s planning problem
generalizes to

                                          ∂c(Ct ) ∂ρ(Ct )
                                                                         
                       0
                     U (Ct ) = µ ρ(Ct ) ·        +        · (c(Ct ) − yt ) ,                     (19)
                                           ∂Ct     ∂Ct

where µ still denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the implementability constraint. Armed
with condition (19), we can now follow the same strategy as in the one-good case. First
we will characterize how {Ct } covaries with {yt } along the optimal path. Second we will

                                                    20
derive the associated implications for the structure of optimal capital controls.
   The next proposition describes the relationship between domestic consumption and
domestic endowments along the optimal path.

Proposition 3 (Procyclical aggregate consumption) Suppose that between periods t and t + 1
there is a small change in the home endowment dyt+1 = yt+1 − yt . Then the home consumption
is higher in period t + 1, Ct+1 > Ct , if and only if ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct · dyt+1 > 0.

    In the one good case, ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct simplifies to −u∗00 (Y − ct ), which is positive by the
concavity of u∗ . Therefore, whether domestic consumption grows or not only depends on
whether the level of domestic endowments is increasing or decreasing. In the multi-good
case, by contrast, this also depends on the composition of domestic endowments and on
how relative prices respond to changes in Ct .
    In order to highlight the importance of these compositional effects, in an economy
with many goods, consider the effect of a small change in domestic endowment that
leaves its market value unchanged at period t prices. That is, suppose ρ(Ct ) · dyt+1 = 0. In
the one good case this can only happen if the endowment level does not change, thereby
leading to a zero capital flow tax. In the multi-good case this is no longer true. According
to Proposition 3, consumption would grow if and only if

                                           ρi0 (Ct )
                                                                      
                                Cov                  , ρ (Ct )dyit+1       > 0.
                                           ρi (Ct ) i

Here, what matters is whether the composition of endowments tilts towards goods that
are more or less price sensitive to changes in Ct . We will come back to the role of this
compositional effects in more detail in Section 4.4.


4.3   Optimal Taxes on International Capital Flows
In line with Section 3.2, let us again assume that consumers can only trade one-period
bonds on international capital markets. But compared to Section 3.2, suppose now that
there is one bond for each good. Since the home government cannot impose good spe-
cific taxes/subsidies, it must impose the same proportional tax θt on the gross return on
net lending in all bond markets. So the per period budget constraint of the domestic
consumer takes the form

                    p t +1 · a t +1 + p t · c t = p t · y t + (1 − θ t ) ( p t · a t ) − l t ,



                                                       21
where at ∈ Rn+ now denotes the vector of current asset positions and lt is a lump sum tax.
As before, the domestic consumer is subject to the no-Ponzi condition, limt→∞ pt · at ≥ 0.
The first-order conditions associated with utility maximization at home are given by

            U 0 (Ct ) gi (ct ) = β(1 − θt )(1 + rit )U 0 (Ct+1 ) gi (ct+1 ), for all i = 1, ..., n.   (20)

where rit ≡ pit /pit+1 − 1 is a good-specific interest rate. Let Pt ≡ minc { pt · c : g (c) ≥ 1}
denote the home consumer price index at date t. Using this notation, the previous condi-
tions can be rearranged in a more compact form as

                               U 0 (Ct ) = β(1 − θt )(1 + Rt )U 0 (Ct+1 ),                            (21)

where Rt ≡ Pt /Pt+1 − 1 is the home real interest rate at date t.9 Since there are no taxes
abroad, the same logic implies

                                   U ∗0 (Ct∗ ) = β(1 + R∗t )U ∗0 (Ct∗+1 ),                            (22)

where R∗t ≡ Pt∗ /Pt∗+1 − 1 is the foreign real interest rate at date t. Equations (21) and (22)
are the counterparts of the Euler equations (9) and (10) in the one-good case. Combining
these two expressions we obtain

                                        U 0 (Ct ) U ∗0 (Ct∗+1 ) (1 + R∗t )
                               θt = 1 − ∗0 ∗                               .
                                       U (Ct ) U 0 (Ct+1 ) (1 + Rt )

If we follow the same approach as in the one-good case and let τt ≡ U 0 (Ct ) /µU ∗0 (Ct∗ ) − 1
denote the wedge between the marginal utility of domestic and foreign consumption, we
can rearrange Home’s tax on international capital flows as

                                                1 + τt         Pt+1 /Pt∗+1
                                                                          
                                θt = 1 −                                         .
                                               1 + τt+1          Pt /Pt∗

With many goods, the sign of θt depends on (i ) whether the wedge τt between the marginal
utility of domestic and foreign consumption is increasing or decreasing and (ii ) whether
Home’s real exchange rate, Pt /Pt∗ , appreciates or depreciates between t and t + 1. Like
in the one-good case, one can check that the wedge is a decreasing function of home ag-
gregate consumption Ct . In the next proposition we further demonstrate that an increase
in Ct is always associated with an appreciation of Home’s real exchange rate. Combining
     9 In the proof of Proposition 4 in the Appendix, we formally establish that P = p /g ( c ) for all i =
                                                                                   t  it i t
1, ..., n. Equation (21) directly derives from this observation and equation (20).


                                                      22
these two observations with Proposition 3, we obtain the following result.

Proposition 4 (Optimal capital flow taxes revisited) Suppose that the optimal policy is imple-
mented with capital flow taxes and that between periods t and t + 1 there is a small change in the
home endowment dyt+1 = yt+1 − yt . Then it is optimal:

   1. to tax capital inflows/subsidize capital outflows (θt < 0) if ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct · dyt+1 > 0;

   2. to tax capital outflows/subsidize capital inflows (θt > 0) if ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct · dyt+1 < 0;

   3. not to distort capital flows (θt = 0) if ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct · dyt+1 = 0.

    In order to understand better how intertemporal and intratemporal considerations
affect the structure of the optimal tax schedule, let us decompose the price vector in period
t into an intertemporal price and an intratemporal vector of relative prices: pt = Pt∗ πt ,
where πit ≡ pit /Pt∗ denotes the price of good i in terms of foreign consumption at date t.
    Using the previous decomposition, we see that the sign of the expression ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct ·
dyt+1 in Proposition 4 is the same as the sign of the following expression10

                          P∗0 (Ct )                            πi0 (Ct )
                          P∗ (Ct ) i∑ π i ( Ct ) dy it + 1 + ∑ πi (Ct ) i
                                                                         π (Ct ) dyit+1 .      (23)
                                                             i

The first term captures the intertemporal price channel and is proportional to the change
in the value of output. It is possible to show that P∗0 (Ct ) > 0. Thus an increase in
the value of home output—all else equal—pushes in the direction of a tax on capital in-
flows/subsidy to capital outflows. This follows the same logic as in the one-good case.
    The new element is the second term in (23), which captures intratemporal terms-of-
trade effects. The sign of this term depends on the elasticity of relative prices to changes
in domestic consumption. To sign this term we need to know more about preferences.
The simplest case is the case of symmetric preferences in which g and g∗ are the same.
In that case, the Pareto set in the Edgeworth box is a straight line and relative prices are
independent of the point we choose (i.e., of Ct ). Not surprisingly, in this case the analysis
boils down to the one-good case. Therefore, the interesting case is the case of asymmetric
preferences, which we now turn to.
  10 Just   notice that
                                          ρt = λ∗ β−t pt = λ∗ β−t Pt∗ πt ,
from the optimality condition of the foreign consumer and so

                                          ρi0 (Ct )  P∗0 (Ct ) πi0 (Ct )
                                                    = ∗       +          .
                                          ρi (Ct )   P (Ct )    πi (Ct )



                                                        23
4.4    An Example with CRRA and Asymmetric Cobb-Douglas Utility
In this subsection we focus on a simple example in which the effects of intratemporal
considerations can be captured analytically. There are two goods. The upper-level utility
function at home is CRRA and the lower-level utility is Cobb-Douglas:

                                               1
                                  U (C ) =        C1−γ , C = c1α c12−α ,                               (24)
                                              1−γ

where γ ≥ 0 and α > 1/2. Foreign utility functions take the same form, but the roles of
goods 1 and 2 are reversed

                                          1
                          U ∗ (C ∗ ) =       (C ∗ )1−γ , C ∗ = (c2∗ )α (c1∗ )1−α .                     (25)
                                         1−γ

Since α > 1/2, Home has a higher relative demand for good 1 in all periods. Without
risk of confusion, we now refer to good 1 and good 2 as Home’s “import-oriented” and
“export-oriented” sectors, respectively. The next proposition highlights how this distinc-
tion plays a key role in linking intertemporal and intratemporal terms-of-trade motives.11

Proposition 5 (Import- versus export-oriented growth) Suppose that equations (24)-(25) hold
with γ ≥ 0 and α > 1/2 and that between periods t and t + 1 there is a small change in the
home endowment dyt+1 = yt+1 − yt . If growth is import-oriented, dy1t+1 > 0 and dy2t+1 = 0,
it is optimal to tax capital inflows/subsidize capital outflows (θt < 0). Conversely, if growth is
export-oriented, dy1t = 0 and dy2t+1 > 0,    it is optimal    to tax capital inflows/subsidize capital
                                        2α−1         Pt∗ Ct∗
outflows (θt < 0) if and only if γ >      α       P∗ C ∗ + Pt Ct .
                                                     t    t


    The idea behind the first part of Proposition 5 is closely related to Proposition 2. In
periods in which Home controls a larger fraction of the world endowment of good 1, the
incentive to subsidize consumption C increases. Here, however, the reason is twofold.
First, a larger endowment of good 1 means that Home is running a smaller (net) trade
deficit, which reduces the incentive to depress the intertemporal price P∗ . Second, it
means that within the period the country is selling more of good 1. Since home prefer-
ences are biased towards good 1, an increase in C drives up the intratemporal price of
good 1, which further increases the incentives to subsidize aggregate consumption.
   11 Another simple example that can be solved analytically is the case of tradable and non-tradable goods.

If there only is one tradable good, then Proposition 2 applies unchanged to changes in the endowment of
the tradable good. The only difference between this case and the one-good case studied in Section 3 is
that taxes on capital inflows/subsidies on capital outflows (θt < 0) now are always accompanied by a real
exchange rate appreciation, whereas taxes on capital outflows/subsidies on capital inflows (θt > 0) now
are always accompanied by a real exchange rate depreciation


                                                     24
                                 capital flow taxes, =1                                    capital flow taxes, =0.33
                   0                                                      0.005

               −0.002                                                        0

               −0.004                                                    −0.005

               −0.006                                                     −0.01

               −0.008                                                    −0.015

                −0.01                                                     −0.02

               −0.012                                                    −0.025

               −0.014                                                     −0.03

               −0.016                                                    −0.035

               −0.018                                                     −0.04
                        0   10    20      30       40     50   60                 0   10     20       30      40       50   60




          Figure 5: Optimal Taxes under Import- and Export-Oriented Scenarios

Note: In both panels, the green line is the optimal tax on capital flows under the import-oriented
scenario (growth in sector 1) and the blue line is the optimal tax on capital flows under the export-
oriented scenario (growth in sector 2).


    By contrast, when endowment growth is export-oriented, intertemporal and intratem-
poral considerations are not aligned anymore. If the elasticity of intertemporal substi-
tution, 1/γ, is low enough, the intertemporal motive for terms-of-trade manipulation
dominates and we get the same result as in the one good economy. If instead that elas-
ticity is high enough, the result goes in the opposite direction. Namely, it is possible that
when Home receives a larger endowment of good 2, it decides to subsidize aggregate
consumption less, even though the increase in y2 is reducing its (net) trade deficit. Intu-
itively, Home now benefits from reducing its own consumption since this increases the
intratemporal price of good 2 due again to the fact that, relative to foreign preferences,
home preferences are biased towards good 1. Proposition 5 formally demonstrates that
the intratemporal terms-of-trade motive is more likely to dominate the intertemporal one
if demand differences between countries are large and/or Foreign accounts for a large
share of world consumption.
    In order to illustrate the quantitative importance of this effect, we return to the exercise
presented in Section 3.3 in which Home is catching up with the rest of the world. For
simplicity, the world endowments of both goods are assumed to be constant over time.
In the first panel of Figure 5, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is set to unity,
γ = 1, and demand differences are set such that α = 3/4. The green curve represents
the optimal tax on capital flows in the import-oriented scenario: the home endowment of
good 2 is fixed, but the home endowment of good 1 is 20% of world endowments at date
0 and is converging towards being 50% in the long run, with the ratio y1t /y1t    ∗ converging

to its long run value at a constant speed η = 0.05. The blue curve instead represents


                                                                    25
the optimal tax on capital flows in the export-oriented scenario: the home endowment of
good 1 is fixed, but the home endowment of good 2 is growing. In order to make the two
scenarios comparable, the growth rate of good 2’s endowments is chosen such that the
home share of world income in all periods is the same as in the import-oriented scenario.
In all periods we see that the optimal tax on capital inflows is lower in the export-oriented
scenario. While taxes converge to zero under both scenarios, the tax on capital inflows at
date 0 is four times larger in the import-oriented scenario than in the export-oriented one:
1.6% versus 0.4%. In the second panel of Figure 5, we repeat the same experiments under
the assumption that γ = 0.33. In this situation, the intratemporal terms-of-trade motives
now dominate the intertemporal ones under the export-oriented scenario. When there is
growth at home relative to the rest of the world, but growth is concentrated in sector 2,
Home finds it optimal to subsidize rather than tax capital inflows. At date 0, the optimal
subsidy on capital inflows is now around 0.4%.


5     Capital Control Wars
In this section we go back to the one-good case, but consider the case in which both coun-
tries set capital controls optimally, taking as given the capital controls chosen by the other
country. As before, we assume that consumers can only trade one-period bonds on inter-
national capital markets, but we now let both the home and foreign government impose
proportional taxes θt and θt∗ , respectively, on the gross return on net asset position in
international bond markets. At date 0, we assume that the two governments simultane-
ously choose the sequences {θt } and {θt∗ }, and commit to them. While this assumption is
admittedly strong in this context, it has one key benefit: it will allow us to use the same
primal approach developed in previous sections to offer a first look at the outcome of
capital control wars.


5.1   Nash Equilibrium
We look for a Nash equilibrium, so we look at each government’s optimization problem
taking the other government’s tax sequence as given. Focusing on the problem of the
home government, the optimal taxes can be characterized in terms of a planner problem
involving directly the quantities consumed, as in the unilateral case. Given the sequence
{θt∗ } the foreign consumer’s Euler equation can be written as

                           u∗0 (c∗t ) = β(1 − θt∗ )(1 + rt )u∗0 (c∗t+1 ).


                                                26
Since 1 + rt = pt /pt+1 , a standard iterative argument then implies

                                                t −1
                                        h                           i
                        pt = β      t
                                            ∏        (1 − θs∗ )          p0 u∗0 (c∗t )/u∗0 (c0∗ ) .        (26)
                                                                                                 
                                                s =0


Accordingly, Home’s planning problem is now given by

                                                                ∞
                                                    max
                                                    {ct }
                                                               ∑ βt u(ct )                                 (PN )
                                                               t =0

subject to
                      ∞
                                                              t −1
                                                     h                            i
                      ∑βu    t ∗0
                                        (Y − c t )       ∏    s =0
                                                                   (1 − θs∗ )         (ct − yt ) = 0,
                      t =0

where the new implementability constraint captures the fact that the home government
now takes foreign capital flow taxes as given. This yields the optimality condition

                                            t −1
                                h                              i
                 u0 (ct ) = µ       ∏            (1 − θs∗ )         u∗0 (c∗t ) − u∗00 (c∗t )(ct − yt ) ,   (27)
                                                                                                      
                                            s =0


which further implies

                  u0 (ct )           1            u∗0 (c∗t ) − u∗00 (c∗t )(ct − yt )
                                =                                                       .                  (28)
                 u 0 ( c t +1 )   (1 − θt∗ ) u∗0 (c∗t+1 ) − u∗00 (c∗t+1 )(ct+1 − yt+1 )

From the domestic consumer’s Euler equation, we also know that

                                u0 (ct ) = β(1 − θt )(1 + rt )u0 (ct+1 ).                                  (29)

Combining equations (28) and (29) with equation (26), we obtain after simplifications

                                                                 u∗00 (c∗t )
                                                         1−      u∗0 (c∗t ) t
                                                                             (c − yt )
                                1 − θt =                          ∗
                                                            u ( c t +1 )
                                                             ∗00                                .
                                                   1−             ∗
                                                            u ( c t +1 )
                                                             ∗0           ( c t + 1 − y t + 1 )

The planning problem of the foreign government is symmetric. So the same logic implies

                                                                   u00 (ct ) ∗
                                                         1−                 (c − y∗t )
                                                                   u0 (ct ) t
                                1 − θt∗ =                   u00 (ct+1 ) ∗
                                                                                          .
                                                    1−                    ( c   − y  ∗ )
                                                            u 0 ( c t +1 ) t +1      t +1




                                                                27
Substituting for the foreign tax on international capital flows in equation (28) and using
the good market clearing condition (3), we obtain

            u0 (ct ) + u00 (ct )(ct − yt )             u0 (ct+1 ) + u00 (ct+1 )(ct+1 − yt+1 )
                                               =                                                  ,
      u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt )   u∗0 (Y − ct+1 ) − u∗00 (Y − ct+1 )(ct+1 − yt+1 )

which can be rearranged as

                            u0 (ct ) + u00 (ct )(ct − yt )
                                                               = α, for all t ≥ 0,                    (30)
                      u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt )

where α ≡ [u0 (c0 ) + u00 (c0 )(c0 − y0 )]/[u∗0 (Y − c0 ) − u∗00 (Y − c0 )(c0 − y0 )] > 0. This is
the counterpart of equation (5) in Section 2. In particular, using equations (27) and (29)
and their counterparts in Foreign, one can check that α = λµ∗ /λ∗ µ, where λ and λ∗ are
the Lagrange multipliers associated with the intertemporal budget constraints in both
countries.


5.2    Main Results Revisited
With the analysis of Section 3 in mind, one might expect that an increase in y would
necessarily lead to an increase in c. Indeed, we have established that if Home were to
impose taxes unilaterally, it would like to increase c in response to a positive shock in
y. The same logic implies that if Foreign were to impose taxes unilaterally, it would like
to decrease c∗ , i.e., to increase c as well, in response to a positive shock in y. Thus both
unilateral responses point towards an increasing relationship between c and y. Yet, as
the next lemma demonstrates, the relationship between endowments and consumption
along the Nash equilibrium is more subtle.

Lemma 1 Along the Nash equilibrium, consumption c is increasing in y if and only if the follow-
ing condition holds:
                     (yt − ct ) ∂ [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )] /∂ct
                                                                     < 1.                  (31)
                         2          [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )]

    In addition to the effects that were present in Section 3, the change in foreign taxes may
now lead Home to operate in a region in which prices are more manipulable. Broadly
speaking, Lemma 1 states that if there is a large number of inframarginal units and if
changes in consumption have large effects on changes in the price of these inframarginal
units, then c may be decreasing in y along the Nash equilibrium. A sufficient condition
to rule out this scenario is that net exports, y − c, is not too large in equilibrium. An-


                                                   28
other sufficient condition is that utility functions are quadratic.12 In this case, changes in
consumption have no effects on changes in prices.
   Under the assumption that inequality (31) holds, we can use Lemma 1 together with
the domestic and foreign consumer’s Euler equations to characterize capital control wars
the same way we characterized optimal capital controls in Section 3. Our main result
about capital control wars can be stated as follows.

Proposition 6 (Capital control wars) Suppose that inequality (31) holds. Then along the Nash
equilibrium, the home and foreign capital flow taxes are such that:

   1. Home interest rates are higher than foreign interest rates (θt < θt∗ ) if yt+1 > yt ;

   2. Home interest rates are lower than foreign interest rates (θt > θt∗ ) if yt+1 < yt ;

   3. Home and foreign interest rates are equal (θt = θt∗ ) if yt+1 = yt .

    If there are no intertemporal distortions abroad, θt∗ = 0, then like in Section 3, an
increase in domestic endowments, yt+1 > yt , leads to a tax on capital inflows or a sub-
sidy to capital outflows, θt < 0, which is associated with higher domestic interest rates,
(1 − θt ) (1 + rt ) > 1 + rt . In general, however, we cannot sign θt and θt∗ . The intuition for
this result is a combination of the intuition for the unilateral policy of Home and Foreign.
Suppose, for instance, that Home is running a trade deficit in period t. An increase in the
home endowment reduces the trade deficit and reduces the incentives of the home gov-
ernment to repress domestic consumption. Foreign incentives are symmetric, meaning
that the foreign government has less incentives to stimulate foreign consumption. The
increase in domestic consumption and the reduction in foreign consumption between pe-
riods t and t + 1 can be achieved in two ways: by a tax on capital inflows at home, θt < 0,
or by a tax on capital outflows abroad, θt∗ > 0. Because of the general equilibrium re-
sponse of world prices, we do not necessarily need both. All we need is that θt < θt∗ , i.e.
that domestic interest rates are higher than foreign interest rates.
    To conclude, we compare the Nash equilibrium capital flow taxes to the unilaterally
optimal taxes for both countries, i.e. the best response to a zero tax, using again the pa-
rameterized example presented in Section 3.2. In Figure 6, we see that a capital control
war leads to a larger interest rate differential between the two countries (as a percentage
of the world return to net lending) than either one of the two unilateral outcomes con-
sidered in Section 3.2. Far from canceling each other out, the net distortion on capital
flows is therefore larger when both countries set capital controls optimally. Compared to
  12 This   immediately implies ∂ [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )] /∂ct = 0.

                                                           29
                       0.035
                        0.03
                       0.025
                        0.02
                       0.015
                        0.01
                       0.005
                            0
                                0    10      20        30   40      50      60

Figure 6: Interest rate differentials with capital control wars and unilaterally optimal taxes

Note: The solid line represents the Nash equilibrium interest rate differential (as a percentage of the
world return to net lending), while the dotted and dashed lines show the interest rate differentials
under the unilaterally optimal capital flow taxes considered in Figures 3 and 4, respectively.


the benchmark with no capital controls, a capital control war here decreases consumption
by 0.49% in the country catching-up and by 0.05% in the rest of the world. Interestingly,
even though the interest rate differential is close to its value when the rest of the world
sets capital controls unilaterally, both countries are worse off in the Nash equilibrium. In
this particular example, neither country wins the capital control war.


6    Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have developed a theory of capital controls as dynamic terms-of-trade
manipulation. We have studied an infinite horizon endowment economy with two coun-
tries where one country chooses taxes on international capital flows in order to maximize
the welfare of its representative agent, while the other country is passive. We have shown
that capital controls are not guided by the absolute desire to alter the intertemporal price
of the goods produced in any given period, but rather by the relative strength of this de-
sire between two consecutive periods. Specifically, it is optimal for the strategic country
to tax capital inflows (or subsidize capital outflows) if it grows faster than the rest of the
world and to tax capital outflows (or subsidize capital inflows) if it grows more slowly.
In the long-run, if relative endowments converge to a steady state, taxes on international
capital flows converge to zero. Although our theory emphasizes interest rate manipula-
tion, the country’s net financial position per se is irrelevant.
    With many goods, we have shown that optimal capital controls depend both on the

                                                  30
level and composition of growth across goods. If countries have different preferences, a
change in the time profile of consumption not only affects the interest rate but also the
relative prices of consumption goods in each given period. Accordingly, even if all static
trade distortions are banned by a free-trade agreement, intratemporal prices may not be
at their undistorted levels if capital controls are allowed. Finally we have studied capital
control wars in which the two countries simultaneously set taxes on capital flows. In the
simple quantitative example that we consider, far from canceling each other out, the net
distortion on capital flows is larger than in the unilateral case.
    In order to maintain the focus of our analysis on optimal capital controls, we have ab-
stracted from environments with intratemporal and intertemporal trade in which coun-
tries can set good-and-time specific trade taxes. An interesting question that arises once
these more general policy instruments are allowed is whether restricting static trade dis-
tortions may contribute to reduce the incentives to use capital controls. Broadly speaking,
could free-trade agreements act as a substitute for agreements on capital controls? We
hope that our analysis will provide a useful starting point for thinking about this issue
as well as other related questions at the frontier of international macro and international
trade policy.




                                            31
References
A OKI , K., G. B ENIGNO , AND N. K IYOTAKI (2010): “Adjusting to Capital Account Liber-
  alization,” C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT, AND A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2009): “New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?,” NBER Working Papers.

B AGWELL , K., AND R. W. S TAIGER (1990): “A Theory of Managed Trade,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 80(4), 779–95.

B AGWELL , K., AND R. W. S TAIGER (1999): “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American
  Economic Review, 89(1), 215–248.

       (2011): “What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About? Empirical Evidence from
  the World Trade Organization,” American Economic Review, 101(4), 1238–73.

B AIER , S. L., AND J. H. B ERGSTRAND (2007): “Do free trade agreements actually increase
  members’ international trade?,” Journal of International Economics, 71(1), 72–95.

B OND , E. W. (1990): “The Optimal Tariff Structure in Higher Dimensions,” International
  Economic Review, 31(1), 103–16.

B RODA , C., N. L IMAO , AND D. E. W EINSTEIN (2008): “Optimal Tariffs and Market
   Power: The Evidence,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 2032–65.

C ABALLERO , R. J., AND G. L ORENZONI (2007): “Persistent Appreciations and Overshoot-
  ing: A Normative Analysis,” NBER Working Papers.

C ALVO , G. A., AND E. G. M ENDOZA (2000): “Rational contagion and the globalization of
  securities markets,” Journal of International Economics, 51(1), 79–113.

C HAMLEY, C. (1986): “Optimal Taxation of Capital in General Equilibrium,” Econometrica,
  54, 607–22.

C HARI , V., AND P. J. K EHOE (1999): “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy,” in Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, pp. 1671–1745. Elsevier.

D IXIT, A. (1985): “Tax policy in open economies,” in Handbook of Public Economics, ed. by
  A. J. Auerbach, and M. Feldstein, vol. 1 of Handbook of Public Economics, chap. 6, pp.
  313–374. Elsevier.



                                           32
F EENSTRA , R. C. (1986): “Trade Policy with Several Goods and Market Linkages,” Journal
   Of International Economics, 20(3-4), 249–267.

G OURINCHAS , P.-O., AND O. J EANNE (2006): “The Elusive Gains from International Fi-
  nancial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 715–741.

I TOH , M., AND K. K IYONO (1987): “Welfare-Enhancing Export Subsidies,” Journal of Po-
   litical Economy, 95(1), 115–37.

J EANNE , O. (2011): “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate,” Mimeo Johns
   Hopkins University.

J EANNE , O., AND A. K ORINEK (2010): “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian
   Taxation Approach,” American Economic Review, 100(2), 403–407.

J UDD , K. L. (1985): “Redistributive Taxation in a Perfect Foresight Model,” Journal of
   Public Economics, 28, 59–83.

K EYNES , J. (1929): “The German transfer problem,” The Economic Journal, 39(153), 1–7.

K OSE , A., E. P RASAD , K. R OGOFF , AND S.-J. W EI (2009): “Financial Globalization: A
  Reappraisal,” IMF Staff Papers, 56(1), 8–62.

L ANE , P., AND G. M. M ILESI -F ERRETTI (2007): “The external wealth of nations mark II:
  Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of
  International Economics, 73, 223–250.

L UCAS , R., AND N. L. S TOKEY (1983): “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Econ-
  omy without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55–93.

M AGUD , N. E., C. M. R EINHART, AND K. S. R OGOFF (2011): “Capital Controls: Myth
 and Reality - A Portfolio Balance Approach,” NBER Working Papers.

M ARTIN , A., AND F. TADDEI (2010): “International Capital Flows and Credit Market Im-
 perfections: a Tale of Two Frictions,” Collegio Carlo Alberto.

M C K INNON , R. I., AND W. E. O ATES (1966): “The Implications of International Economic
 Integration for Monetary, Fiscal, and Exchange-Rate Policy,” Princeton Studies in Inter-
 national Finance.

M ILL , J. (1844): Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. London: Parker.



                                             33
O BSTFELD , M., AND K. S. R OGOFF (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics. The
  MIT Press.

O BSTFELD , M., J. C. S HAMBAUGH , AND A. M. TAYLOR (2010): “Financial Stability, the
  Trilemma, and International Reserves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  2(2), 57–94.

O HLIN , B. (1929): “The reparation problem: a discussion,” Economic Journal, 39(154), 172–
  182.

O STRY, J. D., A. R. G HOSH , K. H ABERMEIER , M. C HAMON , M. S. Q URESHI , AND D. B.
  R EINHARDT (2010): “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls,” IMF Staff Position Note.

S TAIGER , R. W. (1995): “International rules and institutions for trade policy,” in Handbook
   of International Economics, ed. by G. M. Grossman, and K. Rogoff, vol. 3. Elsevier.

S TIGLITZ , J. E. (1976): “Monopoly and the Rate of Extraction of Exhaustible Resources,”
   American Economic Review, 66(4), 655–61.

S UBRAMANIAN , A., AND S.-J. W EI (2007): “The WTO promotes trade, strongly but un-
   evenly,” Journal of International Economics, 72(1), 151–175.

T ORRENS , R. (1844): The Budget: On Commercial Policy and Colonial Policy. London: Smith,
  Elder.




7    Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. The first- and second-order conditions associated with Home’s
planning problem imply:

                      u0 (ct ) − µ u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) = 0,               (32)
                                                                          

                  ∂  0
                     u (ct ) − µ u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) < 0.                 (33)
                                                                        
                 ∂ct

Differentiating equation (32), we get after simple rearrangements

              ∂ct                             µu∗00 (Y − ct )
                  =    ∂
                                                                                        > 0,   (34)
              ∂yt     ∂ct   {u0 (ct ) − µ [u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt )]}



                                                    34
where the inequality directly derives from inequality (33) and the strict concavity of u∗ .
Inequality (34) implies that for any pair of periods, t and s, such that ys > yt , we must
have cs > ct .
Section 3.4. Let us focus on date 0 and date 1. Let {ct }∞          0 ∞
                                                         t=1 and { ct }t=1 denote the optimal
consumption paths for all dates t ≥ 1 from the point of view of the home government at
date 0 and date 1, respectively. We want show that one can construct { a1,s  ∗ }∞ satisfying
                                                                                s =1
equation (13) at t = 0 such that c0t = ct for all t ≥ 1. As in Lucas and Stokey (1983),
we focus on the first-order conditions associated with Home’s planning problem at dates
t = 0 and t = 1. In the present environment, they imply

                       u0 (ct ) = µ0 u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt + a0,t ∗
                                                                                       ) ,            (35)
                                                                                       

                       u0 (c0t ) = µ1 u∗0 (Y − c0t ) − u∗00 (Y − c0t )(c0t − yt + a1,t
                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                       ) ,            (36)
                                                                                       


where µ0 and µ1 are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the implementability con-
straints of the home government at dates 0 and 1, respectively. For a given value of µ1 , let
               ∗ ( µ ) such that
us construct a1,t   1


  µ0 u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt + a0,t
                                               ∗
                                                    
                                                   )
                                        = µ1 u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt + a1,t
                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                           (µ1 )) ,
                                                                                                


which can be rearranged as

                         u∗0 (Y − ct )                        u∗0 (Y − ct )
                                                                                       
          ∗                                           µ0 ∗
         a1,t ( µ1 )   = ∗00           − (ct − yt ) +     a −               + (ct − yt ) .            (37)
                        u (Y − c t )                  µ1 0,t u∗00 (Y − ct )

By construction, if the previous condition holds, then, for any µ1 , equation (36) holds as
well if c0t = ct for all t ≥ 1. Now let us choose µ1 such that:
                                                                        
                                      ∞     u∗00 (Y − cs ) cs − ys + a0,s
                                                                      ∗
                          µ1 = µ0 ∑ νs 1 −                                ,                         (38)
                                  s =1
                                                     u ∗0 (Y − c )
                                                                s


where
                                       [u∗0 (Y − cs )]2 /u∗00 (Y − cs )
                             νs ≡                        2
                                                                          ∈ [0, 1] .                  (39)
                                    ∑r∞=1 [u∗0 (Y − cr )] /u∗00 (Y − cr )
                                               u∗00 (Y −cs )(cs −ys + a0,s
                                                                       ∗ )
By equation (35), we know that 1 −                     u∗0 (Y −cs )
                                                                             > 0. Thus we have µ1 > 0. One




                                                        35
can check that, by construction, equations (37)-(39) further imply

                              ∞
                              ∑ u∗0 (Y − cs )                   ∗
                                                     cs − ys + a1,s (µ1 ) = 0.
                                                                        
                             s =1

Thus, equation (13) is satisfied at t = 0. Since equations (13) and (14) evaluated at t = 0
and t = 1, respectively, are identical, we have constructed { a1,s ∗ }∞ satisfying equation
                                                                      s =1
(13) at t = 0 such that c0t = ct for all t ≥ 1. The argument for other dates is similar.
Proof of Proposition 3. The basic strategy is the same as in the proof of Proposition 1.
The first- and second-order conditions associated with Home’s planning problem imply:

                                         ∂ci (Ct )      ∂ρi (Ct )
                                                                                  
                U (Ct ) − µ ∑i ρi (Ct )
                     0
                                                   + ∑i           (ci (Ct ) − yit ) = 0,                    (40)
                                            ∂Ct            ∂Ct
                                       ∂ci (Ct )      ∂ρi (Ct )
                                                                                
          ∂
               U (Ct ) − µ ∑i ρi (Ct )
                0
                                                 − ∑i           (ci (Ct ) − yit )    < 0.                   (41)
         ∂Ct                             ∂Ct            ∂Ct

Differentiating equation (40), we get after simple rearrangements

                                                     ∂ρi (Ct )
                                                       ∂Ct dyit
                                                     µ ∑i
      dCt =   −                                                                                        o.
                                           ∂ci (Ct )           ∂ρi (Ct )/∂Ct
                   n
                 ∂
                ∂Ct U (Ct ) − µ ∑i ρi (Ct ) ∂Ct − ∑i                         ρi (Ct )(ci (Ct ) − yit )
                     0
                                                                   ρi (Ct )


                                                                    t              ∂ρ (C )
By inequality (41), we therefore have dCt > 0 if and only if ∑i ∂C
                                                                i
                                                                  t
                                                                      dyit > 0.
Proof of Proposition 4. In the main text, we have already established that

                                                1 + τt           Pt+1 /Pt∗+1
                                                                            
                               θt = 1 −                                            ,                        (42)
                                               1 + τt+1            Pt /Pt∗

with the wedge τt such that
                                                  U 0 (Ct )
                                        τt =                     − 1.
                                               µU ∗0 (C ∗ (Ct ))
Since U and U ∗ are concave and C ∗ is decreasing in Ct along the Pareto frontier, we al-
ready know from Proposition 3 that

                                                                 ∂ρi (Ct )
                           τt+1 < τt if and only if         ∑i     ∂Ct
                                                                           dyit > 0.                        (43)

Now notice that by the envelope theorem, C ∗0 (Ct ) is equal to the opposite of the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the constraint g(c) ≥ Ct in (17). Thus the first-order conditions




                                                       36
associated with that program imply

                                     gi∗ (ct ) = −C ∗0 (Ct ) gi (ct ) .                               (44)

Let us now show that Pt = pit /gi (ct ). Let us denote ct (1) ≡ arg minc { pt · c : g (c) ≥ 1}.
The associated first-order conditions are given by (i ) pi = λgi [ct (1)] and (ii ) g [ct (1)] =
1. This implies

                  Pt =   ∑i pit cit (1) = λ ∑i gi [ct (1)] cit (1) = λg [ct (1)] = λ,
where the third equality uses the fact that g is homogeneous of degree one. Combining
this equality with condition (i ), we obtain Pt = pit /gi [ct (1)]. Since gi is homogeneous
of degree zero, this further implies Pt = pit /gi (ct ) for all i = 1, ..., n. The same logic
applied to Foreign implies Pt∗ = pit /gi∗ (ct ). Combining the two previous observations
with equation (44), we obtain
                                      Pt
                                          = −C ∗0 (Ct ) .
                                      Pt∗
Since g and g∗ are concave and homogeneous of degree one, standard arguments imply
that the solution C ∗ of (17) is (weakly) concave in Ct . By Proposition 3, we therefore have

                                                                    ∂ρi (Ct )
                     Pt+1 /Pt∗+1 > Pt /Pt∗ if and only if      ∑      ∂Ct
                                                                              dyit > 0.               (45)
                                                                i

Combining equation (42) with conditions (43) and (45), we finally get θt < 0 if and only if
   ∂ρi (Ct )
∑i ∂C   t
             dyit > 0.
Proof of Proposition 5. Suppose that dyit+1 > 0 and dy jt+1 = 0. By Proposition 4, we
know that θt < 0 if and only if ∂ρ(Ct )/∂Ct · dyt+1 > 0, where ρ(Ct ) ≡ U ∗0 (C ∗ (Ct )) gc∗ (c∗ (Ct )).
Thus if dyit+1 > 0 and dy jt+1 = 0, θt < 0 if and only if

                                                                     ∗ ∗            ∗
                                         gii∗ (c∗ (Ct )) ∂ci∗ (Ct ) gij (c (Ct )) ∂c j (Ct )
                                       "                                                     #
         U ∗00 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂C ∗ (Ct )
                                      + ∗ ∗                        + ∗ ∗                       > 0.   (46)
         U ∗0 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂Ct            gi (c (Ct )) ∂Ct           gi (c (Ct )) ∂Ct

Consider the first term on the left-hand side of inequality (46). In the proof of Proposition
4, we have already established that

                                           ∂C ∗ (Ct )    Pt
                                                      = − ∗.
                                             ∂Ct         Pt




                                                    37
Since U ∗ (C ∗ ) =     1
                      1− γ   (C ∗ )1−γ , we therefore have

                                           U ∗00 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂C ∗ (Ct )    γPt
                                                                        =         .                          (47)
                                           U ∗0 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂Ct           Pt∗ Ct∗

Let us now turn to the second term on the left-hand side of inequality (46). Our goal is to
establish that
         ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
        g11                   ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
                             g12
              t     1   t          t     2   t         α           (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
         ∗    ∗            +  ∗    ∗            =                                         ,                  (48)
        g1 (ct ) ∂Ct         g1 (ct ) ∂Ct         (1 − α)Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )
         ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
        g12                   ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
                             g22
              t     1   t          t     2   t       1      (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
         ∗    ∗            +  ∗    ∗            = −                                  .                       (49)
        g2 (ct ) ∂Ct         g2 (ct ) ∂Ct           Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )

Since g∗ (c∗ ) = (c2∗ )α (c1∗ )1−α , simple algebra implies

                                  ∗ (c∗ )
                                 g11                  ∗ (c∗ )
                                         t       α g12     t         α
                                  ∗     ∗   = −  ∗  ,  ∗   ∗     = ∗,
                                 g1 ( c t )     c1t g1 (ct )        c2t
                                  ∗ (c∗ )
                                 g12                      ∗ (c∗ )
                                         t    (1 − α) g22        t      (1 − α )
                                  ∗     ∗   =     ∗   ,   ∗     ∗   =− ∗ .
                                 g2 ( c t )     c1t      g2 ( c t )       c2t

Using the previous expressions, we obtain

              ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
             g11                   ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
                                  g12                    ∂ ln [c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]
                     t   1   t            t   2   t
                                +                    = α                             ,                       (50)
             g1∗ (c∗t ) ∂Ct       g1∗ (c∗t ) ∂Ct                     ∂Ct
              ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
             g12                   ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C )
                                  g22                                 ∂ ln [c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]
                     t   1   t            t   2   t
                                +                    = −  ( 1 −  α )                             .           (51)
             g2∗ (c∗t ) ∂Ct       g2∗ (c∗t ) ∂Ct                                 ∂Ct

                     ∂ ln[c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]
Let us compute                 ∂Ct             .   By definition, c (Ct ) and c∗ (Ct ) are the solution of

                                                      max (c2∗ )α (c1∗ )1−α
                                                       c,c
                                                        ∗



subject to

                                                       c1 + c1∗ ≤ Y1 ,
                                                       c2 + c2∗ ≤ Y2 ,
                                                        c1α c12−α ≥ Ct .




                                                               38
The associated first-order conditions imply

                        c2∗ (Ct )               Y2 − c2∗ (Ct )
                                                                
                                  =β                                 with β ≡ [α/(1 − α)]2 ,                                 (52)
                        c1∗ (Ct )               Y1 − c1∗ (Ct )

and
                                                                                 − 1
                                       Y2 − c2∗ (Ct )               Ct
                                                            
                                                                                    α
                                                      =                                 .                                    (53)
                                       Y1 − c1∗ (Ct )           Y2 − c2∗ (Ct )
Combining the two previous expressions, we obtain

  ∂ ln [c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]    1           1    ∂ ln [Y2 − c2∗ (Ct )]           1              1    ∂ ln [c2 (Ct )]
                                                                                                                    
                             =−                −                              =−                   −                       . (54)
             ∂Ct                α           Ct           ∂Ct                     α              Ct        ∂Ct

                   ∂ ln[c2 (Ct )]
Let us compute         ∂Ct        .   Using the resource constraint, we can express equation (52) as

                                                           βc2 (Ct ) Y1
                                         c1 (Ct ) =                          .
                                                       Y2 − (1 − β) c2 (Ct )

Together with equation (53), using again the resource constraint, this implies
                                                                                    α
                                                          Y2 − (1 − β) c2 (Ct )
                                                      
                                      c2 (Ct ) = Ct                                         .
                                                                  βY1

Taking the log and differentiating, we obtain after rearrangements

                           ∂ ln [c2 (Ct )]         Y2 − (1 − β) c2 (Ct )
                                           =                                    .                                            (55)
                                ∂Ct          Ct [Y2 − (1 − α) (1 − β) c2 (Ct )]

Equations (54) and (55) imply

                     ∂ ln [c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]   1        ( β − 1) c2 (Ct )
                                                =                                   .
                                ∂Ct               Ct Y2 + (1 − α) ( β − 1) c2 (Ct )

Using the definition of β ≡ [α/(1 − α)]2 , we can rearrange the previous expression as

                  ∂ ln [c2∗ (Ct )/c1∗ (Ct )]       1          (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
                                             =                                         .
                             ∂Ct               (1 − α)Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )

Equations (48) and (49) directly derive from the previous expression and equations (50)
and (51), respectively.




                                                             39
   To conclude the proof of Proposition 5, first note that equations (47) and (48) imply
                                  ∗ ∗
  U ∗00 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂C ∗ (Ct )                           ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C ) 
                                  g11 (ct ) ∂c1∗ (Ct ) g12              t
                               +   ∗    ∗              + ∗ ∗t       2
  U (C (Ct )) ∂Ct
    ∗0    ∗                       g1 (ct ) ∂Ct          g1 (ct ) ∂Ct
                                                   γPt         α            (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
                                             = ∗ ∗+                                              > 0.
                                                  Pt Ct  (1 − α)Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )

Thus if dy1t+1 > 0 and dy2t+1 = 0, then θt < 0. Second note that equations (47) and (49)
imply
                                  ∗ ∗
  U ∗00 (C ∗ (Ct )) ∂C ∗ (Ct )    g12 (ct ) ∂c1∗ (Ct ) g22
                                                        ∗ ( c∗ ) ∂c∗ (C ) 
                                                                       t
                               +   ∗    ∗             + ∗ ∗t       2
  U (C (Ct )) ∂Ct
    ∗0    ∗                       g2 (ct ) ∂Ct         g2 (ct ) ∂Ct
                                                              γPt       1      (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
                                                         = ∗ ∗−                                         .
                                                             Pt Ct     Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )

According to this expression, if dy1t+1 = 0 and dy2t+1 > 0, then θt < 0 if and only if

                                     Pt∗ Ct∗    (2α − 1) c2 (Ct )
                               γ>                                        .                            (56)
                                     Pt Ct (1 − α) c2∗ (Ct ) + αc2 (Ct )

Since utility functions are Cobb-Douglas, g(c) = c1α c12−α and g∗ (c∗ ) = (c2∗ )α (c1∗ )1−α , we
know that

                                     p2t c2 (Ct ) = (1 − α) Pt Ct
                                     p2t c2∗ (Ct ) = αPt∗ Ct∗

Combining these two observations with inequality     (56),
                                                        we         conclude that if dy1t+1 = 0
                                              
                                                             P ∗ C∗     
and dy2t+1 > 0, then θt < 0 if and only if γ > 2αα−1     Pt∗ Ct∗ + Pt Ct .
                                                               t t


Proof of Lemma 1. Let us rearrange equation (30) as

  F (ct , yt ) ≡ u0 (ct ) − u00 (ct )(yt − ct ) − α u∗0 (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) = 0.     (57)
                                                                                         


Note that ∂F (ct , yt )/∂yt > 0 by strict concavity of u and u∗ . Thus

                         dct /dyt = − ∂F (ct , yt )/∂yt ∂F (ct , yt )/∂ct > 0
                                                       


if and only if ∂F (ct , yt )/∂ct < 0. Differentiating equation (57) we get

  ∂F (ct , yt )    ∂  0                                 ∂  ∗0
                      u (ct ) − u00 (ct )(yt − ct ) − α     u (Y − ct ) − u∗00 (Y − ct )(ct − yt ) ,
                                                                                                 
                =
      ∂ct         ∂ct                                   ∂ct

                                                   40
which can be rearranged as

   ∂F (ct , yt )                                         ∂ [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )] /∂ct
                                                                                             
                   00         ∗00
                 = u (ct ) + αu (Y − ct ) 2 − (yt − ct )                                        .
                                         
       ∂ct                                                   [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )]

Since u and u∗ are strictly concave, this implies that

                                              (yt − ct ) ∂ [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )] /∂ct
       ∂F (ct , yt )/∂ct < 0 if and only if                                                   < 1.
                                                  2          [u00 (ct ) + αu∗00 (Y − ct )]

Lemma 1 directly derives from the previous equivalence.
Proof of Proposition 6. The foreign and domestic consumers’ Euler equations imply

                                   1 − θt    u0 (ct ) u∗0 (c∗t+1 )
                                           = ∗0 ∗ 0
                                   1 − θt∗  u ( c t ) u ( c t +1 )

Using the good market clearing condition (3), we can rearrange this expression as

                              1 − θt       u0 (ct ) u∗0 (Y − ct+1 )
                                      =                             .
                              1 − θt∗   u∗0 (Y − ct ) u0 (ct+1 )

By Lemma 1, we know that if inequality (31) holds, then ct is increasing in yt . Since u and
u∗ are strictly concave, the previous expression therefore implies

                              1 − θt
                                      < 1 if and only if yt > yt+1 .
                              1 − θt∗

Proposition 6 directly derives from the previous equivalence.




                                                   41
