NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AIRPORTS, AIR POLLUTION, AND CONTEMPORANEOUS HEALTH
Wolfram Schlenker
W. Reed Walker
Working Paper 17684
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17684

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

We would like to thank Antonio Bento, Janet Currie, Ryan Kellogg, Mushfiq Mobarak, Matthew Neidell,
Marit Rehavi, Jay Shimshack, and Christopher Timmins for comments on an earlier version of this
paper. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Wolfram Schlenker and W. Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous Health
Wolfram Schlenker and W. Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 17684
December 2011
JEL No. H0,I1,Q5
ABSTRACT
Airports are some of the largest sources of air pollution in the United States. We demonstrate that
daily airport runway congestion contributes significantly to local pollution levels and contemporaneous
health of residents living nearby and downwind from airports. Our research design exploits the fact
that network delays originating from large airports on the East Coast increase runway congestion in
California, which in turn increases daily pollution levels around California airports. Using the component
of California air pollution driven by airport congestion, we find that carbon monoxide (CO) leads to
significant increases in hospitalization rates for asthma, respiratory, and heart related emergency room
admissions that are an order of magnitude larger than conventional estimates: A one standard deviation
increase in daily pollution levels leads to an additional $1 million in hospitalization costs for respiratory
and heart related admissions for the 6 million individuals living within 10km (6.2 miles) of the 12
largest airports in California. While infants and the elderly are more sensitive to air pollution, we also
find significant relationships for the adult population. The health impacts are driven by CO, not NO2
or O3, and occur at levels far below existing EPA mandates. Our results suggest there may be sizable
morbidity benefits from lowering the existing CO standard.

Wolfram Schlenker
Department of Economics
School of International and Public Affairs
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wolfram.schlenker@columbia.edu
W. Reed Walker
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
rw2157@columbia.edu

The effect of pollution on health remains a highly debated topic. The Clean Air Act (CAA)
requires the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop and enforce regulations to protect
the general public from exposure to airborne contaminants that are known to be hazardous to
human health. In January 2011, the EPA preliminarily decided against lowering the existing CAA
carbon monoxide standard due to insufficient evidence that relatively low carbon monoxide levels
adversely affect human health. In order to assess the benefits and cost of lowering the standard,
accurate estimates are needed that link contemporaneous air pollution exposure to observable
health outcomes. However, these estimates are hard to come by as pollution is rarely randomly
assigned across individuals, and individuals who live in areas of high pollution may be in worse
health for reasons unrelated to pollution. Preferences for clean air may covary with unobservable
determinants of health (e.g., exercise) which can lead to various forms of omitted variable bias in
regression analysis. Moreover, heterogeneity across individuals in either preference for, or health
responses to, ambient air pollution implies that individuals may self-select into locations on the
basis of these unobserved differences. In both cases, estimates of the health effects of ambient air
pollution may reflect the response of various subpopulations and/or spurious correlations pertaining
to omitted variables. While recent research attempts to address the issue of non-random assignment
using various econometric tools such as fixed effects or instrumental variables, these studies often
focus on infant health at annual frequencies (Chay & Greenstone 2003, Currie & Neidell 2005).
Much less is known about short-term, daily effects of ambient air pollution on the health of the
more general population.1
We develop a novel framework for estimating the contemporaneous effect of air pollution on
health using variation in local air pollution driven by airport runway congestion. Airports are one
of the largest sources of air pollution in the United States with Los Angeles International Airport
(LAX) being the largest source of carbon monoxide in the state of California (Environmental
Protection Agency 2005). We show that airport runway congestion, as measured by the total time
planes spent taxiing between the gate and the runway, is a significant predictor of local pollution
levels. Since local runway congestion may be correlated with other determinants of pollution such
as weather, we exploit the fact that California airport congestion is driven by network delays that
began in large airports outside of California. Our analysis hence links health outcomes of residents
living near California airports to changes in air pollution driven by runway congestion at airports
on the East Cast. The identifying variation in pollution is caused by events several thousand miles
away (e.g., weather in Atlanta), which is unlikely to be correlated with unobserved determinants
of health in California.
This paper makes five primary contributions to the existing literature. To our knowledge, we
are the first to show how runway traffic congestion significantly increases pollution levels in areas
surrounding airports. The increase in demand for air travel, combined with the airline industry
change to the hub-and-spoke business model, has led to large increases in airport runway congestion
1

An important exception is recent work by Moretti & Neidell (2011), who examine how daily inpatient hospitalizations in Los Angeles respond to fluctuations in ozone driven by the arrival of ships to the port of Los Angeles.

1

(Carlin & Park 1970, Morrison & Winston 2007). Average airplane taxi time, measured by the
amount of time that an airplane spends between the gate and runway, has increased by 23 percent
from 1995 to 2007 (Bureau of Transportation Statistics 2008). This increase in average congestion,
combined with increased number of flights, translates to an aggregate increase of over 1 million
airplane hours per year spent idling on runways over this time period (Bureau of Transportation
Statistics 2008). Our estimates suggest this increase also leads to significantly higher levels of
ambient air pollution. We find that a one standard deviation increase in daily airplane taxi time
at LAX increases pollution levels of carbon monoxide (CO) by 23 percent of a standard deviation
in areas within 10km (6.2 miles) of the airport. The marginal effect of taxi time is largest in areas
adjacent to an airport or directly downwind, and the effect fades with distance.
Second, this paper develops a novel approach to estimating the contemporaneous effect of
pollution on health. Our solution to the identification problem is to exploit the fact that airports
generate a tremendous amount of local ambient air pollution on a given day, with areas downwind
of an airport experiencing much larger changes in ambient air pollution relative to areas upwind.
We leverage the quasi-experimental variation in both airport activity (as mediated through network
delays) and wind direction to estimate the causal effect of air pollution on contemporaneous health.
The primary estimation framework examines how zip code level emergency room admissions covary
with these quasi-experimental increases in air pollution stemming from airports. A one standard
deviation increase in pollution explains roughly one third of average daily admissions for asthma
problems. It leads to an additional $1 million in hospitalization costs for respiratory and heart
related admissions of individuals within 10km of one of the 12 largest airports in California. This
is likely a significant lower bound of the true cost as the willingness to pay to avoid a sickness
might be significantly larger than the medical reimbursement cost. Our baseline IV estimates are
an order of magnitude higher than uninstrumented fixed effects estimates. We find no evidence
that airport runway congestion affects diagnoses unrelated to air pollution such as bone fractures,
stroke, or appendicitis.
Third, while most existing literature focuses on the health impacts of infants or elderly, we
are able to examine the health responses of the entire population. Consistent with the previous
literature, we find that infants as well as the elderly are most sensitive to ambient air pollution.
However, given the size of pollution shocks that are caused by daily airport congestion, we are also
able to identify effects on the general adult population aged 20-64. While the adult population is
relatively less sensitive to pollution exposure, the total number of additional respiratory problems
caused by a one-standard deviation increase in pollution is largest for the general population given
its large share of the overall population. The impact of CO pollution on respiratory problems of
infants is roughly one-fourth of the total impact and an even smaller fraction for heart related
diagnoses. Studies that focus on infants will give a lower bound on the overall impact.
Fourth, we focus on morbidity outcomes using Inpatient as well as Emergency Room admission
data. While previous research has focused predominantly on the effects of pollution on mortality,
we examine the effects of daily variation in pollution on morbidity. At lower pollution levels, fluc-

2

tuations in pollution might not be fatal but result in sicknesses that can be treated. In addition,
previous work using administrative hospital records has mostly relied on Inpatient data from hospital discharge records. These records consist only of patients who, upon admission, spent at least
one night in the hospital. In case of respiratory distress, patients are often not admitted overnight.
We show that estimates using only Outpatient data lead to underestimates of the pollution-health
relationship.
Fifth, we estimate the contemporaneous effect of multiple pollutants simultaneously. Since
short-term fluctuations among ambient air pollutants are highly correlated, it has traditionally
been difficult to decipher which pollutant is responsible for adverse health outcomes. Our solution
to this identification problem is to rely on the fact that wind speed and wind direction transport
individual pollutants in different ways. By using interactions between taxi time, wind speed, and
wind angle from airports, we can pin down the direct effect of each pollutant, while holding the
others constant. We use over-identified models to instrument for several pollutants simultaneously.
CO is responsible for the large majority of the observed increase in hospital admissions.
Finally, we present several sensitivity checks of results that do not alter our conclusions. Since
it is possible that California airport delays impact airports on the East Coast, which then feedback
to California airports, we focus on morning airport congestion in the East. Due to the difference
in time zones, very few flights from California reach East Coast airports before 12pm. Estimates
remain similar to our baseline estimates. We also estimate a random coefficients version of our
baseline empirical model that provides a simple test of non-random sorting behavior. We find no
evidence that individuals sort according to their relative susceptibility to air pollution, which is
likely due to the fact that we focus on very small ranges around an airport. A distributed lag model
finds no evidence for delayed impacts or forward displacement, i.e., that individuals on the brink
of an asthma or heart attack may experience an episode that would have otherwise occurred in the
next few days anyway. A Poisson model linking sickness counts to pollution levels gives comparable
estimates to our baseline linear probability model, which does not account for the truncation of
daily sickness rates at zero.
Our findings have three policy implications. First, in January 2011, the EPA preliminarily
decided against lowering the existing CAA carbon monoxide standard due to insufficient evidence
that relatively low carbon monoxide levels adversely affect human health. Our estimates suggest
that daily variation in ambient air pollution has economically significant health effects at levels
below current EPA mandates.
Second, congestion at major airports has been steadily increasing over the past 15 years, and
some researchers have argued that congestion is an unfortunate, but necessary, consequence of the
“hub and spoke” system which provides large benefits to travelers (Mayer & Sinai 2003).2 An
important potential externality of congestion beyond the value of lost time are health effects due
to increasing pollution levels. As suggested in previous research, pollution externalities associated
2

There was a significant drop in flights and congestion after September 11th, 2001, but the increase in flights and
congestion has nearly regained its pre-9/11 trend.

3

with congestion should be counted in a full benefit-cost analysis of congestion. Our results are complimentary to the recent evidence showing automobile traffic congestion influences health outcomes
of nearby residents (Currie & Walker 2011).
Third, a significant portion of taxi time is avoidable as it is a direct consequence of an inefficient
queueing system. Most airports require airplanes to push from the gate to enter a waiting queue.
If idling planes during taxi time cause significant local air pollution, a better airplane queuing
system would require airplanes to wait at the gate until they are cleared for takeoff.3 In addition,
the increased costs of congestion externalities through adverse health of local communities suggests
that congestion or landing fees as airports, designed to limit peak runway usage, may have additional
co-benefits in the form of improved local air quality.

1

Background: Airports, Airplanes, and Air Pollution

Regulators have long been aware of the pollution generated by cars, trucks, and public transit.
There have been countless legislative policies designed to curtail harmful emissions from these
sources (Auffhammer & Kellogg 2011). However, aircraft and airport emissions have only recently
become the subject of regulatory scrutiny, although little has been done to reduce or manage
emissions generated by airports and air travel. While there has been some effort to curtail the
substantial CO2 emissions generated by aircraft,4 there has been relatively little effort to control or
contain some of the more pernicious air pollutants generated by jet engines. This lack of regulatory
scrutiny can be traced back to the way in which pollutants are regulated in the United States
under the Clean Air Act. Current Federal law preempts all federal, state, and local agencies
except the Federal Aviation Administration from establishing measures to reduce emissions from
aircraft due to potential interstate and international commerce conflicts that might arise from other
decentralized regulations.5
Aircraft jet engines, like many other mobile sources, produce carbon dioxide (CO2 ), nitrogen
oxides (NOx ), carbon monoxide (CO), oxides of sulfur (SOx ), unburned or partially combusted
hydrocarbons (also known as volatile organic compounds, or VOCs), particulates, and other trace
compounds (Federal Aviation Administration 2005a). Each of these pollutants are emitted at
different rates during various phases of operation, such as idling, taxing, takeoff, climbing, and
landing. NOx emissions are higher during high power operations like takeoff when combustor
temperatures are high. On the other hand, CO emissions are higher during low power operations
like taxiing when combustor temperatures are low and the engine is less efficient (Federal Aviation
3
Currently, airplane operators are keen on pushing off the gate as their on-time departure statistics are based on
when they push from the gate and not when they take off from the runway. Moreover, sometimes departing planes
have to push from the gateway to make space for incoming planes.
4
The European Union has recently approved greenhouse gas measures, which oblige airlines, regardless of nationality, that land or take off from an airport in the European Union to join the emissions trading system starting on
January 1, 2012.
5
Currently, the Environmental Protection Agency has an agreement with the FAA to voluntarily regulate ground
support equipment at participating airports known as the Voluntary Airport Low Emission (VALE) program (United
States Environmental Protection Agency 2004).

4

Administration 2005a).6 Even though the aircraft engine is often idling during taxi-out, the per
minute CO and NOx emissions factors are higher than at any other stage of a flight (Environmental
Protection Agency 1992). Combining this with the long duration of taxi-out times during peak
periods of the day, total taxiing over the course of a day can add up to a substantial amount.
Consistent with these facts, Los Angeles International airport is estimated to be the largest point
source of CO emissions in the state of California and the third largest of NOx (Environmental
Protection Agency 2005).
Airports provide a particularly compelling setting through which to estimate the contemporaneous relationship between air pollution and health. Not only are airports some of the largest
polluters of ambient air pollution in the United States but they also have extraordinarily rich data
on daily operating activity, detailing for each flight the length of time spent taxiing to and from
the gate before takeoff and after landing. This allows for a precise understanding of the aggregate
amount of daily runway congestion at airports. Moreover, daily runway congestion at airports
exhibits a great degree of residual variation even after controlling for normal scheduling patterns.
Much of the variation in runway congestion is driven by network delays propagating from major
airport hub delays thousands of miles away. Network delays at distant airports serve as an ideal instrumental variable for local pollution; the effect of a snow storm in Chicago on congestion at LAX
should be orthogonal to any other confounding influences of air pollution in the Los Angeles area.
In addition, local residents are likely unaware of increases in taxi time and hence cannot engage
in self-protective behavior. Lastly, every airport has detailed weather data, allowing researchers
to exploit the spatial distribution of airport generated pollution. We can therefore estimate how
areas downwind of an airport on a given day are disproportionately affected by runway congestion relative to areas upwind. Understanding this spatial variation in pollutant transport improves
the efficiency of our estimates, while also providing important tests of the validity of our research
design.

2

Data

This project uses the most comprehensive data currently available on airport traffic, air pollution,
weather, and daily measures of health in California. This data is rich in both temporal and
spatial dimension, allowing for fine-grained analysis of how daily airport congestion impacts areas
downwind of an airport on a given day. The various datasets and linkages are described in more
detail below.

2.1

Airport Traffic Data

A useful feature of a study involving airports is the detailed nature of daily flight data. The
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS) Airline On-Time Performance Database contains flight6
As a result, reducing engine power for a given operation like takeoff or climb out generally increases the rate of
CO emissions and reduces the rate of NOx emissions.

5

level information by all certified U.S. air carriers that account for at least one percent of domestic
passenger revenues. It has a wealth of information on individual flights: flight number, the origin
and departure airport, scheduled departure and arrival times, actual departure and arrival times,
the time the aircraft left the runway and when it touches down. We construct a daily congestion
measure for each of the 12 major airports in California by aggregating the combined taxi time of all
airplanes at an airport. This measure consists of (i) the time airplanes spend between leaving the
gateway and taking off from the runway and (ii) the time between landing and reaching the gate. An
interesting feature of aggregate daily taxi time is the large amount of residual variation remaining
after controlling for daily airport scheduling, weather, and holidays. We relate this variation to
local measures of pollution and health in our econometric analysis. One caveat of the BTS data
is that it only includes information for major domestic airline passenger travel.7 However, as long
as international flights are not treated differently in the queueing system, congestion of national
flights should be a good proxy for overall congestion.
We limit our analysis to the 12 largest airports in California by passenger count. These airports
are (including airport call sign in brackets): Burbank (BUR), Los Angeles International (LAX),
Long Beach (LGB), Oakland International (OAK), Ontario International (ONT), Palm Springs
(PSP), San Diego International (SAN), San Francisco International (SFO), San Jose International
(SJC), Sacramento International (SMF), Santa Barbara (SBA), and Santa Ana / Orange County
(SNA). The locations of these airports are shown as blue dots in Figure 1. Average flight statistics
at each of these airports are reported in Table A1 of the appendix. There is significant variation in
daily ground congestion at airports: the standard deviation of daily taxi time at the largest airport
(LAX) is 1852 minutes. Once we account for year, month, weekday and holiday fixed effects as
well as local weather, the remaining variation is still 891 minutes. Most of the airports are close
to urban areas as they serve the travel needs of these populations. Seven airports in California
rank among the top 50 busiest airports in the nation according to passenger enplanement (Federal
Aviation Administration 2005b).
A potential concern when linking daily airport activity to daily ambient air pollution levels is
that runway congestion in California airports may be highest in the late afternoon and evening.
This would lead us to erroneously misclassify some of the daily airport effects to the wrong day.
Appendix Figure A2 plots the distribution of aggregate taxi time within a day. Most ground
activity at airports is skewed towards the beginning of the day. We will address the sensitivity
of our estimates towards these issues of misclassification or across-day spillovers in subsequent
sections.
7

In January 2005, international departures (both cargo and passenger) accounted for 8.5% of total departures,
whereas cargo (both international and domestic) accounted for 5.9% of all United States airport departures (Department of Transportation 2009).

6

2.2

Pollution Data

We construct daily measures of air pollution surrounding airports using the monitoring network
maintained by the California Air Resource Board (CARB). This database combines pollution readings for all pollution monitors administered by CARB, including information on the exact location
of the monitor. Data includes both daily and hourly pollution readings. We concentrate on the
set of monitors with hourly emission readings for CO, NO2 , and O3 in the years 2005-2007.8 The
locations of all CO and NO2 monitors in relation to airports are shown in Figure 1.
A unique feature of pollution data is the significant number of missing observations in the
database. We therefore use the following algorithm when we aggregate the hourly data to daily
pollution readings: Our measure of the daily maximum pollution reading is simply the maximum
of all hourly pollution readings. The daily mean is the duration-weighted average of all hourly
pollution readings. We define the duration as the number of hours until the next reading.9 We
prefer this approach to simply taking the arithmetic average of all hourly readings on a day since
hourly pollution data exhibit great temporal dependance. A missing hourly observation is better
approximated by the previous non-missing value than the daily average. We also keep track of the
number of observations per day. In a sensitivity check (not reported) we rerun the analysis using
only monitors with at least 20 or 12 readings per day.10
We create daily zip code pollution measures by taking the average monitor reading of all monitors within 15km of a zip code centroid, weighting by the inverse distance between the monitor
and the zip code centroid.11 Summary statistics are given in Panel A of Table A2 in the appendix.
Since we have both the longitude and latitude of all airports and zip code centroids, we are able to
derive (i) the distance between the airport and a zip code, and (ii) the angle at which the zip code
is located relative to the airport. In order to leverage the spatial features of our data, we normalize
the angle between a zip code centroid and an airport to 0 if the zip code is lying to the north of
the airport. Degrees are measured in clockwise fashion, e.g., a zip code that is directly east of an
airport will have an angle of 90 degrees. The angle between an airport and a zip code allows us to
8
While data exists for other pollutants in California, we limit our analysis to using CO, NO2 as they are directly
emitted by airplanes and have better coverage than PM10. O3 forms from VOC and NOx , and the latter is emitted
by airplanes. We do, however, not find that O3 pollution levels are impacted by airport congestion and hence focus
on CO and NO2 . While monitor data exists as far back as 1993, our hospital data, described further in this section,
exists only from 2005 onwards.
9
Readings occur on the hour of each day ranging from midnight to 11pm. If readings at the beginning of a day
(midnight, 1am, etc) are missing, we adjust the duration of the first reading from midnight to the second reading.
For example, if readings occur on 3am, 5am, and 8am, the 3am reading would be assigned a duration of 5 hours and
the 5am reading would be assigned a duration of 3 hours. By the same token, if the last reading of a day is not 11pm,
the duration of that last reading is from the time of the reading until midnight.
10
If a monitor has not a single reading for a day, we approximate it’s value in a three step procedure: (i) we derive
the cumulative density function (cdf) at each monitor; (ii) take the inverse-distance weighted average of the cdf for
a given day at all monitors with non-missing data; (iii) we fill the missing observation with the same percentile of
the station’s cdf. For example, if surrounding monitors with non-missing data on average have pollution levels that
correspond to the 80th percentile of their respective distributions, we fill the missing value of a station with the 80th
percentile of it’s own distribution of pollution readings. This procedure gives us a balanced panel.
11
Inverse distance weighting pollution measures has been used to impute pollution in previous research. See for
example, Currie & Neidell (2005).

7

explore the link between airport emissions and pollution downwind of airports using the weather
data described next.

2.3

Weather Data

We use temperature, precipitation, and wind data in our analysis to both control for the direct
effects of weather on health (Deschênes, Greenstone & Guryan 2009) and also to leverage the
quasi-experimental features of wind direction and wind speed in distributing airport pollution from
airports. Our weather data comes from Schlenker & Roberts (2009), which provides minimum and
maximum temperature as well as total precipitation at a daily frequency on a 2.5×2.5 mile grid for
the entire United States.12 To assign daily weather observations to an airport or zip code, we use
the grid cell in which the zip code centroid is located. Summary statistics for the zip-code level
data are given in Panel B of Table A2 in the appendix.
Average wind speed and wind direction come from the National Climatic Data by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) hourly weather stations. Most airports have
weather stations with hourly readings. We construct wind direction, which is normalized to equal
zero if the wind is blowing northward and counted in clockwise fashion. If the angles of the zip code
and the wind direction are identical, the zip code is hence exactly downwind from the airport. An
angle of 180 degrees implies that the zip code is upwind from the airport. The hourly wind speed
and wind direction is aggregated to the daily level by calculating the duration-weighted average
between readings comparable to the pollution data above. The distribution of wind directions is
shown in Figure 2. Airports at the ocean predominantly have winds coming from the direction of
the ocean. For example, Santa Barbara, located on the only portion of the California coast that
runs east-west has winds blowing northward. Note again that we are measuring the direction in
which the wind is blowing, not from which it is coming. In our empirical analysis, we use this daily
variation in wind speed and wind direction to predict how pollution from airports disproportionately
impacts some zip codes more than others on a given day.

2.4

Hospital Discharge and Emergency Room Data

Health effects are measured by overnight hospital admission and emergency room visits to any
hospital in the state of California. We use the California Emergency Department & Ambulatory
Surgery data set for the years 2005-2007.13 The dataset gives the exact admission date, the zip code
of the patient’s residence (as well as the hospital), the age of the patient, as well as the primary
and up to 24 secondary diagnosis codes. An important limitation of the Emergency Department
data is that any person who visits an ER and is subsequently admitted to an overnight stay drops
out of the dataset. This is done to prevent double counting in California’s hospital admissions
12

There is one exception: in a set of regression models where we estimate the effect of airport weather on taxi
time we use the closest non-missing daily weather weather station data from NOAA’s COOP station data set for
each airport. This is because Schlenker & Roberts (2009) use a spatial interpolation procedure that might result in
artificial correlation between weather data at airports due to the spatial interpolation technique.
13
The Emergency Room data was not collected prior to 2005.

8

records, as overnight hospital stays are logged in California’s Inpatient Discharge data. Therefore
we also obtained Inpatient Discharge data for all individuals who stayed overnight in a hospital
in the years 2005-2007. In our baseline model we focus on the sum of emergency room visits and
overnight stays in a zip code-day to avoid non-random attrition in the ER data. Focusing only on
emergency room admittance would suffer from selection bias as higher pollution levels (and more
severe health outcomes) could result in more overnight stays, yet the emergency room numbers
would actually appear smaller.
We count the daily admissions of all people in a zip code who had a diagnosis code pertaining to
three respiratory illnesses: asthma, acute respiratory, and all respiratory. Note that each category
adds additional sickness counts but includes the previous. Asthma attacks are also counted in all
respiratory problems. We also count heart related problems, which Peters et al. (2001) have shown
to be correlated with pollution. Finally, we include three placebos: stroke, bone fractures, and
appendicitis.14 In our baseline model, we count a patient as suffering from a sickness if either the
primary or one of the secondary diagnosis codes lists the illness in question.
We merge the zip code level hospital data with age-specific population counts in each zip code
obtained from both the 2000 and 2010 Censuses. We use the weighted average between the 2000
(weight 0.4) and 2010 (weight 0.6) counts, as the midpoint of our data is 2006. We limit our
analysis to the 164 zip codes whose centroid lies within 10km of an airport and which have at least
10000 inhabitants.15 The total population of these 164 zip codes is around 6 million people, or
roughly one sixth of the overall population of California. Summary statistics for the zip codes in
the study are given in Panel C of Appendix Table A2. We use these age-specific population counts
to construct daily hospitalization rates for zip code. Table A3 provides sickness rates per 10 million
inhabitants for both the entire population as well as population subgroups of those over 64 years
of age and under 5 years of age.

3

Empirical Methodology

We are estimating the link between ground level airport congestion, local pollution levels, and
contemporaneous hospitalization rates for major airports in the state of California. To begin, we
consider the effects of increased levels of airport traffic congestion on local measures of pollution.

3.1

Aggregate Daily Taxi Time and Local Pollution Levels

Ambient air pollution is a function of the distance between a point source and the receptor location, as well as many other atmospheric variables including, but not limited to, wind speed, wind
direction, humidity, temperature, and precipitation. To model the effects of increases in aggregate
14

The exact ICD-9 codes are: asthma: [493, 494); acute respiratory: [460,479), [493,495), [500,509), [514,515),
[516,520); all respiratory: [460, 520); heart problems: [410, 430); stroke [430, 439); bone fractures [800, 830);
appendicitis: [540, 544).
15
The latter sample restriction excludes 0.8 percent of the total population that lives in a zip code whose centroid
is within 10km of an airport but has less than 10000 inhabitants.

9

airport taxi time on pollution levels, we adopt the following additive linear regression model
pzat = α1 Tat + Wzt Φ + weekdayt + montht + yeart + holidayt +νza + ezat
{z
}
|

(1)

Zzt Γ

where pollution pzat in zip code z that is paired with airport a on day t is specified as a function
of taxi time Tat and a vector of zip-code level controls Zzt that include weather controls Wzt
(a quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation and wind speed).16 We also
control for temporal variation in pollution by including weekday fixed effects (weekdayt ), month
fixed effects (montht ), and year fixed effects (yeart ) as well holiday fixed effects (holidayt ) to
limit the influence of airport congestion outliers.17 Since there may be time-invariant unobserved
determinants of pollution for any given zip code, all regressions include zip code fixed effects, νza .
The parameter of interest is α1 , which tells us the effect of a 1000 minute increase in aggregate
daily ground congestion on local ambient air pollution levels. Increased airplane taxiing leads to an
increase in airplane emissions and presumably increases in ambient air pollution. Hence, we would
expect this coefficient to be positive. Consistent estimation of α1 requires E[Tat · ezat | Zzt , νza ] = 0.
If there are omitted transitory determinants of local pollution levels that also covary with ground
congestion, then least squares estimates of α1 will be biased. This could occur, for example, if
weather adversely affected airport activity while also affecting local pollution levels.
To address this potential source of bias, we need an instrumental variable that is correlated with
changes in ground congestion at an airport but is unrelated to local levels of pollution. A natural
instrument comes from delays at major airport hubs outside California, which propagate through
the air network as connecting flights are delayed, leading to more ground congestion at airports in
California. The basic logic is that instead of smoothing out scheduling over the course of the day,
planes now arrive in more distinct blocks of time, leading to more waiting/taxiing by those planes
taking off as the runway space is shared. Specifically, we instrument taxi time at each California
airport with taxi time at major airports outside of California: Atlanta (ATL), Chicago O’Hare
(ORD), and New York John F. Kennedy (JFK).18 Appendix Figure A1 shows the location of those
airports in relation to the California airports. We estimate the following system of equations via
two-stage least squares (2SLS):
Tat = αa0 +

12
3 X
X

αak Tkt Ia + Zat Θ + ωat

(2)

k=1 a=1

Model 1:

pzat = α1 Tat + Zzt Γ + νza + ezat

(3)

Equation (2) regresses taxi time at a California airport on taxi time at each of 3 major airports
16

In principle a zip-code z could be paired with more that one airport a. In practice, our baseline model uses zip
codes whose centroid is within 10km of an airport. Each zip code is assigned to exactly one airport as none is within
10km of two airports.
17
We include fixed effects for New Year, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas, as well
as the three days preceding and following the holiday.
18
In a sensitivity check we also include Dallas Fort Worth (DFW).

10

outside of California: Atlanta (ATL), Chicago O’Hare (ORD), and New York Kennedy (JFK). We
allow the coefficients αak in equation (2) to vary by airport a by interacting taxi time with an
airport indicator Ia . These interactions allow for heterogeneity in the impact of delays from major
airports outside of California Tkt on each of the California airports Tat . This is important as the
impact of delays in Atlanta on California airports is likely to differ across airports. Our baseline
model utilizes 36 instruments (3 airports outside California interacted with each of the 12 airports
in California). We use two-way cluster robust standard errors for inference, clustering on both zip
code and day. The two-way cluster robust variance-covariance estimator implicitly adjusts standard
errors to properly account for both spatial correlation across zip codes on a given day, which are all
due to the same network delays, as well as within-zip code serial correlation in air pollution over
time.
The standard conditions for consistent estimation of α1 in the context of our 2SLS estimator
are that αak 6= 0 in equation (2) and E[Tkt · eazt | Zzt , νza ] = 0. Subsequent sections will show that
the first condition clearly holds; taxi time at airports on the East Coast leads to large increases in
taxi time at California airports. The second condition requires that the error term in the pollution
equation (3) be uncorrelated with taxi time at major airports outside of California, Tkt . This
condition would be violated if ground congestion in Chicago somehow co-varied with pollution levels
in California through reasons unrelated to California airport congestion due to network delays.
While the second condition is not explicitly testable, our data and research design permit
several indirect tests. First, we show evidence that taxi time in California is predicted by weather
fluctuations at airports inside and outside of California, but the reverse is not true: weather at the
major airports in California has no significant effect on taxi time at Eastern airports. Second, we
show that network delays propagate East to West rather than West to East. Taxi time in Atlanta is
not higher due to increased taxi time in Los Angeles.19 Further sensitivity checks show that using
only taxi time before noon at Eastern Airports or directly instrumenting with observed weather
variables at airports in the Eastern United States has little impact on our baseline estimates.
We also estimate models similar to equation (3), where we interact taxi time (or instrumented
taxi time) with the distance between an airport and the monitor, i.e.,
Tat = αa0 +

3 X
12
X

αak Tkt Ia + Zat Θ + ωat

k=1 a=1

Model 2:

pzat = α1 Tat + α2 Tat dza + Zzat Γ + νza + ezat

(4)

The additional coefficient is α2 .20 The effect of taxi time on pollution should fade out with distance,
19

This issue is largely addressed by the difference in time zones between our instrumental variable airports and
California. Airplane traffic in the United States generally starts around 6am in the morning and slows down in the
evening. Due to the change in time zones, a flight that leaves at LAX in the morning to go to one of the airports
does not reach of the three airports outside California before noon. On the other hand, a flight that leaves at 6am
on the East Coast will reach California by 9am.
20
We instrument both Tat and Tat daz with the taxi time outside California Tkt and Tkt daz , i.e., we now have 72
instruments.

11

and we would hence expect this coefficient to be negative. The marginal effect of taxi time in model
2 is α1 + α2 dza .
In a third step we also include interactions with wind direction and wind speed. The intuition
is that both wind direction and speed transport pollutants across space. Thus, holding speed
constant, areas downwind should be relatively more affected by aggregate daily taxi time relative
to areas upwind. To model this relationship formally, we let vat be the wind speed and czat the
cosine of the difference between the wind direction and the direction in which the zip code is located.
The variable czat will be equal to 1 in the case that the angle in which the wind is blowing equals
the direction in which the zip code is located, and czat will be equal to zero when they are at a
right angle (the difference is 90 degrees). We allow for different impacts upwind and downwind.
Allowing for all possible time-varying interactions we get:21
Tat = αa0 +

12
3 X
X

αak Tkt Ia + Zat Θ + ωat

k=1 a=1

Model 3:

pzat = α1 Tat + α2 Tat dza + α3 Tat czat I[czat>0] + α4 Tat czat I[czat <0]
+α5 Tat vat + α6 Tat dza czat I[czat>0] + α7 Tat dza czat I[czat<0]
+α8 Tat dza vat + α9 Tat czat I[czat>0] vat + α10 Tat czat I[czat<0] vat
+α11 Tat dza czat I[czat>0] vat + α12 Tat dza czat I[czat <0] vat
+Zzat Γ + νza + ezat

(5)

The new coefficients are α3 through α12 .22 The predicted signs of these coefficients are less intuitive.
While higher wind speeds can clear the air they may also carry greater amounts of the pollutant
further distances.23 Moreover, downwind areas should have higher pollution levels relative to those
areas upwind, but aircrafts usually start against the wind. To better interpret the combination of all
of these interactions, we plot the marginal effects of this particular regression model using contour
plots in subsequent sections. These contour plots provide strong visual evidence of the relationship
between daily aggregate airport taxi time, wind speed, wind direction, and local pollution levels.

3.2

Aggregate Daily Taxi Time, Local Pollution, and Health

To estimate the pollution-health association in our data we begin by assuming that the relationship
between health and ambient air pollution can be summarized by the following linear probability
model:
yzat = βpzat + Zzt Π + ηza + ǫzat

(6)

21
We also include all possible time-varying interactions between distance, wind speed and angle (up and downwind)
without taxi time as pollution levels might vary if the wind comes from a different direction.
22
We are now instrumenting all 12 interaction of taxi time Tat at the 12 airports by the taxi time at the three
largest airports outside California Tkt , which results in 12×12×3 = 432 instruments.
23
Recall that we are already controlling for overall wind speed in Wzt , but it has so far not been interacted with
taxi time or any other weather measure.

12

where the dependent variable yzat is our observable measure of health in zip code z when paired with
airport a on day t.24 The remaining notation is consistent with the previous models, Zzt are the
same weather and time controls and ηza is a zip code fixed effect. Here, we have made the additional
assumption that the relationship between pollution and health outcomes (β) is homogenous within
the population. We relax this assumption in subsequent sections.
We focus primarily on respiratory related hospital admissions as defined by International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems ICD-9 (Friedman et al. 2001, Seaton
et al. 1995). The dependent variable yzat is the number of admissions to either the emergency room
or an overnight hospital stay where either the primary or one of the secondary diagnosis code fell in
one of the following admission categories: asthma, acute respiratory, all respiratory, or heart related
diagnoses. These daily zip code counts are scaled by zip code population so that the dependent
variable represents hospitalization rates per 10 million zip code residents. We also estimate models
for diagnoses unrelated to pollution: strokes, bone fractures, and appendicitis. These outcomes are
meant to serve as an important test for the internal validity of our research design. Since these
health outcomes are unrelated to pollution exposure, they should not be significantly related to
changes in pollution.
The coefficient of interest in this model is β which provides an estimate of the effect of a one
unit increase in pollution levels on daily hospitalization rates in zip code z and time t. Consistent
estimation of β requires E[pzat · ǫzat | Zzt , ηza ] = 0. The inclusion of a zip code fixed effect implicitly
controls for any time invariant determinants of local health that also covary with average pollution
levels. For example, if relatively disadvantaged households live in more polluted areas and have
poorer health for reasons unrelated to air pollution, then the zip code fixed effect will control for
this time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity. However, least squares estimation of β will be biased
if there are time-varying influences of both health and pollution (e.g., weather), and/or if there is
measurement error in pzat . Since we are proxying for pollution exposure using the average level of
pollution in a zip code on a given day, measurement error might be substantial.
Instrumental variables provide a convenient solution to both the bias from omitted variables as
well as the bias introduced from measurement error in the dependent variable.25 We use airport
ground congestion as an instrumental variable for local pollution levels in the following two stage
least squares regression model:
Model 1:

pzat =
yzat =

α1 Tc
at + Zzt Γ + νza + ezat

βpzat + Zzt Π + ηza + ǫzat

(7)
(8)

The first stage regression, equation (7), estimates the degree to which instrumented airport taxi
24

Our analysis implicitly assumes that we can summarize health responses and behavior at the zip code level
(responses between zip codes are more important than responses within zip codes) and that the effect of interest, β,
is stable over time.
25
Instrumental variables only solves the bias from measurement error in the independent variable when the measurement error is classical, namely mean zero and i.i.d. (Griliches & Hausman 1986).

13

26
time Tc
at predicts local pollution levels in areas surrounding airports.

The second stage equation uses the predicted values from the first stage to estimate the impact

of local pollution variation on health. We also estimate versions of equation (7) using models that
interact Tc
at with distance, wind speed, and wind direction as in equations (4) and (5), models 2

and 3, respectively.

Aside from the relationship between pollution and health, we are also interested in the “reduced
form” relationship between health outcomes and taxi time. As such, we estimate models of the
following form:
yzat = α1 Tc
at + Zzt Π + ηza + ǫzat

(9)

These “reduced form” estimates are directly policy relevant; namely, how does aggregate daily taxi
time impact the health of nearby residents? Understanding the degree to which variation in airport
runway congestion directly impacts health has implications for both managing congestion through
either demand pricing mechanisms (e.g., a congestion tax) or a more efficient runway queuing
system.

3.3

Health Outcomes: Alternative Models

We supplement our baseline health regressions with several alternative models, exploring model
specification and model dynamics in more detail. These various regression models are described in
more detail below.
3.3.1

Health Outcomes: Dynamic Effects and Forward Displacement

By looking at the daily response of health outcomes to contemporaneous pollution shocks, we may
be neglecting important dynamic effects of pollution and health. For example, contemporaneous
exposure to air pollution may have lagged effects on health, leading people to seek care one or
two days after the initial pollution episode. Our contemporaneous regression models might miss
these important lagged impacts. Alternatively, health estimates may be driven by various forms
of forward displacement. Short-term spikes in pollution might lead individuals on the brink of an
asthma or heart attack to experience an episode that would have otherwise occurred in the next
few days anyway. Such behavior would overestimate the dose-response function as an increase in
hospitalization rates is followed by a decrease once pollution levels subside. We explore the dynamic
effects of pollution on health by estimating the following distributed lag model:
yzat =

3
X

βk pza(t−k) + Zzt Π + ηza + ǫzat

(10)

k=0

We are using predicted aggregate taxi time Tc
at as an instrumental variable in these regression models. Taxi
time is predicted from an auxiliary regression of California taxi time on Eastern airport taxi time using equation (2).
Wooldridge (2002, p. 117) presents a weak set of assumptions for which the standard errors of 2SLS regressions using
generated instruments are unbiased. The key assumption turns on strict exogeneity between the error term in the
structural model and the covariates used to generate the instrument in the auxiliary regression.
26

14

Instrumented pollution pzat is again obtained using either model 1, 2, or 3 from previous sections. In
the case of forward displacement, the spike in hospital admissions should be followed by a decrease in
P
admissions, and hence 3k=0 βk < β, where the latter β comes from the baseline, contemporaneous
regression.
3.3.2

Health Outcomes: Heterogeneity and Self-Selection

Our baseline models rely upon the relatively unattractive assumption that the relationship between
pollution and health is the same for everyone in the population. If there is heterogeneity in a persons
relative susceptibility to pollution (or in how people respond to adverse health outcomes), then
people may sort themselves into locations based on these observed or unobserved differences. This
heterogeneity may manifest itself through access to medical care or through biological differences in
the pollution-health relationship among certain segments of the population. Previous research (e.g.,
Chay & Greenstone (2003)) and results presented in subsequent sections of this paper suggest that
health effects differ by observable characteristics of the population. If people sort themselves based
on this underlying heterogeneity, then our estimates may identify the average effect of pollution on
health for a nonrandom subpopulation in the data (Willis & Rosen 1979, Garen 1984, Wooldridge
1997, Heckman & Vytlacil 1998).
We address these issues in various ways. In a sensitivity check, we limit our estimates to
people 65 and older who have guaranteed health insurance in the form of Medicare. Thus, any
heterogeneity in hospitalization should no longer be driven by access to health insurance. Another
concern is that the severity of the particular health shock determines whether a person will seek
emergency care. We therefore also include heart problems as a category, which are severe enough
that patients will seek medical help independent of their insurance or financial situation. There
may also exist significant heterogeneity based on unobservable characteristics. Previous research
suggests that individuals engage in avoidance behavior on days where pollution is predicted to be
high (Neidell 2009), which will also lead to correlation between β and pzat . Here we develop a
framework to test whether selection on unobserved heterogeneity leads to bias in our estimates.
We draw upon the control function approach to the correlated random coefficient model (Garen
1984), which is a generalization of the 2SLS approach to the random coefficients model under
assumptions outlined below (Wooldridge 1997, Card 1999). An attractive feature of the control
function model is that it provides an unbiased estimate of the average treatment effect for the
population while also providing a straightforward test as to the relative importance of self-selection
bias for our estimates.27
Following Card (1999), we can write our model in a random coefficients framework, whereby the
health outcome, yzat , is related to pollution, pzat , through a linear regression model with random
27

This test for self-selection bias has seen wide application in the fields of labor economics and applied econometrics.
In the context of environmental economics, Chay & Greenstone (2005) use this approach to test for self-selection bias
in the context of peoples’ marginal willingness to pay for clean air.

15

slope coefficient βz :
yzat = β̄pzat + (βz − β̄)pzat + Zzt Π + ηza + ǫzat

(11)

where β̄ denotes the mean of βz , and E[pzat · ǫzat | Zzt , ηza ] 6= 0.
Garen (1984) derives a set of assumptions whereby estimation of the random coefficients model
yields a consistent and unbiased estimate of β̄.28 Specifically, one needs an instrumental variable
Tat (in our case taxi time) such that conditional on the instrument, βz is symmetrically distributed
(E[(βz − β̄)|Tat , Zzt , ηza ] = 0). The first stage equation relating aggregate daily taxi time to ambient
air pollution is the same as before: pzat = α1 Tat + Zzt Γ + νza + ezat . The primary assumptions used
when estimating this model are the standard conditional independence assumptions pertaining to
the first and second stage equations, namely E[ezat |Tat , Zzt , ηza ] = 0 and E[ǫzat |pzat , Tat , Zzt , ηza ] =
0. We also adopt the relatively strong assumption in Garen (1984) that the conditional expectation
of βz is linear in pzat and Tat , i.e., E[(βz − β̄)|pzat , Tat , Zzt , ηza ] = µp pzat + µT Tat . Using these
assumptions, one can write the conditional expectation of yzat as
E[yzat |pzat , Tat , Zzt , ηza ] = β̄pzat + Zzt Π + ηza + γ1 ed
d
zat + γ2 (pzat · e
zat )

(12)

which implies that we can recover consistent estimates of β̄ using control functions for the last
two parameters, respectively ed
d
d
zat and pzat · e
zat , where e
zat is simply the residual from the first
stage regression of pzat on Tat .29 The advantage of using the control function approach, relative

to the approaches outlined in both Wooldridge (1997) and Heckman & Vytlacil (1998), is that the
parameter estimate of the second control function (γb2 ) provides an implicit test as to the relative

importance of self-selection bias in our model. This model is simply a more general version of
2SLS, whereby the last term is not normally accounted for in a 2SLS model. Since the two control
functions are generated regressors from a first stage regression, we use a two-step, block-bootstrap
procedure to obtain our standard errors. Specifically, we sample zip codes with replacement and
estimate the full two-stage model for each of the 100 bootstrap draws.30
3.3.3

Health Outcomes: Poisson Model

Since our dependent variable is measured as hospital visits in a given zip code day (before we
convert it to a sickness rate), we also estimate regression models that account for the non-negative
and discrete nature of the data. Specifically, we use a conditional (“fixed effects”) quasi-maximum
28
Alternative assumptions necessary to recover unbiased and consistent estimates of β̄ are derived in Wooldridge
(1997) and Heckman & Vytlacil (1998).
29
See Card (1999) for details of the derivation.
30
Here, the block-bootstrap is equivalent to cluster robust standard errors at the zip code level. We forego twoway clustering for the random coefficients model presented here to limit the computation burden. In principal it is
possible to block-bootstrap standard errors accounting for two-way clustering at the cost of a substantial increase
in computer time. See for example, Cameron, Gelbach & Miller (2011). In addition, as we discuss in subsequent
sections, clustering standard errors by zip code gives us comparable results to two-way clustering by zip code and
day.

16

likelihood Poisson model (Hausman, Hall & Griliches 1984, Wooldridge 1999).31 To account for the
endogeneity of pollution exposure, we generalize the standard conditional Poisson model into an
instrumental variables setting. To do this, we adopt a control-function approach to the conditional
Poisson model (see e.g., Wooldridge (1997) and Wooldridge (2002)), whereby we include the residual
(d
ezat ) from our first stage regression (i.e., the effect of taxi time on pollution) in our regression
equation of interest:
E[szat |pzat , Tat , Zzt , ηza ] = ηza exp (βpzat + γ1 ed
zat + Zzt Π)

(13)

where szat are sickness counts (no longer rates), pzat is the observed pollution level in a county, and
ed
zat is the residual from one of the first-stage regression of pollution on taxi time using model 1, 2,

or 3. The fixed effect model allows the marginal effect of pollution to differ by zip code. The model
accounts for the fact that zip codes have different number of residents through the fixed effects ηza .
While including the first-stage error purges the estimates of the various selection biases outlined

above (Wooldridge 2002, p. 663), the standard errors need to be corrected for the variation coming
from the first stage estimation. To account for the first stage sampling error in the ezat , we again
bootstrap the regression using a block-bootstrap procedure where we randomly draw the entire
history of a zip code with replacement.

4

Empirical Results

4.1

Aggregate Daily Taxi Time and Local Pollution Levels

We start by examining the effect of airport congestion on pollution levels in surrounding areas. As
previously noted, Los Angeles International Airport is the largest point source of CO emissions in
California and the third largest point source of NOx emission. Since a significant portion of these
pollutants are emitted during airplane taxiing, we begin by examining the impact of aggregate daily
taxi time on ambient CO and NO2 levels surrounding airports. Taxi time is instrumented using
runway congestion at the three major airports outside of California.32 Table 1 presents regression
estimates using the specifications outlined in equation (3), (4), and (5), presented in columns a, b,
and c, respectively. Each column represents a different regression, where the dependent variable in
the columns (1a)-(1c) is the daily mean CO measured in parts per billion (ppb). Columns (2a)-(2c)
report regression estimates for daily mean NO2 , while columns (3a)-(3c) report estimates for ozone
O3 . Taxi time is reported in thousands so that the coefficients in Table 1 report the marginal effect
of a 1000 minute increase in taxi time on local pollution levels.
All regressions report robust standard errors, clustering on both zip code and day. The heavily
over-identified models from equation (5) impose significant computational burdens when estimating
31

The Poisson model is generally preferred to alternative count data models, such as the negative binomial model,
because the Poisson model is more robust to distributional misspecification provided that the conditional mean is
specified correctly (Cameron & Trivedi 1998, Wooldridge 2002).
32
OLS estimates are presented in Appendix Table A4.

17

IV models containing two-way, cluster-robust standard errors. To circumvent this issue, we report
the results from running the first stage and then using the predicted values in the second stage
without accounting for the fact that we are using generated regressors in the second stage. To
understand the likely magnitude of this bias, Appendix Table A5 reports two sets of standard
errors for equations (3) and (4): (i) the IV results; and (ii) running the first stage and using the
predicted values in the second stage with two-way clustered errors but no other adjustments. The
results suggest that the standard errors from the IV are quite similar to those from manual 2SLS.
Column (1a) suggests that a 1000 minute increase in taxi time increases ambient CO concentrations in zip codes within 10km of an airport by 40.37ppb (an 8% increase relative to the mean,
or 13% of the day-to-day standard deviation). Since the standard deviation of taxi time at LAX
in Table A1 is 1852, a one-standard deviation increase in taxi time leads to 0.23 standard deviation increase in CO pollution of the zip codes around LAX. Column (1b) of Table 1 includes an
interaction of taxi time with distance to the airport. The non-interacted taxi time coefficient now
reports the effect of airplane idling on pollution levels directly at the airport. The point estimate
implies that a one standard deviation increase in taxi time at LAX leads to 0.32 standard deviation
increase in CO levels in areas adjacent to LAX. The interaction term shows how this effect decays
linearly with distance.
Lastly, column (1c) reports the coefficients from the estimated version of equation (5) that
interacts taxi time with wind speed and wind angle from an airport. The F-test for the joint
significance of these coefficients is given in the last two rows of the table and shows that they are
highly significant. Since individual coefficients are difficult to interpret, we plot the marginal effect
of an extra 1000 minutes of taxi time for four wind speeds in the first row of Figure 3. Wind speeds
increase from left to right. The color indicates the marginal impact ranging from low (blue) to
high (red). If a zip code is directly downwind, it is on the positive x-axis, while areas upwind are
on the negative x-axis. Areas downwind are more affected by taxi time than areas upwind. For
the very highest wind speeds, the largest marginal impact of taxi time can be found just upwind
from the centroid of the airport (although the average marginal impact remains highest downwind).
This is possibly due to the fact that airplanes start against the wind and mostly line up in the
opposite direction, i.e., the direction in which the wind is blowing. Local wind is highly predictive
of congestion. When local wind is strong and the average local taxi time is high and the queue is
long, an additional unit of congestion due to network delays will hence “add” an additional plane
that is idling upwind from the airport centroid. For example, the four runways of LAX are between
2.7km and 3.7km long, which is significant as we are examining monitors within 10km of the airport
centroid.
Columns (2a)-(2c) of Table 1 give estimates pertaining to the effect of taxi time on NO2 levels.
The results are comparable to those from CO, although the linear decrease in distance from the
airport is not significant. A one standard deviation increase in taxi time at LAX increases NO2
concentrations by roughly 1ppb, or 10% of the day-to-day standard deviation. The second row
of Figure 3 shows again that downwind areas are much more impacted than upwind areas. Both

18

Table 1 and Figure 3 show that the relative impact of NO2 is different than CO: the range of
marginal impacts for CO in Figure 3 is between -90% and +50% relative to the average impact
from column (1a) in Table 1. In contrast, the marginal effect of taxi time on NO2 varies between
-100% and +100% relative to the average effect from column (2a) of Table 1. The spatial pattern
is also slightly different. In subsequent sections, we use these relative differences in pollutant
dispersion to jointly estimate the effect of both CO and NO2 . Recall from Section 1 that CO
emissions are higher during low power operation, while NOx is higher during high power operation.
Larger wind speeds require more thrust during takeoff and hence change the mix of CO and NOx
emissions.
Finally, columns (3a)-(3c) replicate the same analysis for ozone (O3 ), a pollutant that is not
directly emitted from airplanes.33 The results in Table 1 suggest that airport taxi time has no
significant impact on ozone levels. In the remainder of the analysis we therefore focus on CO and
NO2 , the two criteria air pollutants for which airplanes are large emitters.
Our baseline pollution estimates presented above come from models in which airport taxi time
is instrumented with taxi time at large airports outside of California. We instrument taxi time
because delays and runway congestion might be correlated with local weather, which in turn might
impact pollution levels. While we control for weather in our regressions, there might be unobserved
weather (or other) variables that jointly impact both pollution and taxi time. Appendix Table A4
replicates the baseline IV analysis of Table 1 using local taxi time at California airports, which is
not instrumented. The estimated effect is generally half as big for CO and NO2 . The smaller OLS
estimates are consistent with adverse weather (e.g., precipitation) causing both airport delays and
at the same time reducing ambient air pollution. Thus, in the remainder of the paper we rely on
instrumented taxi time stemming from network delays.
We use taxi time at three major airports in our baseline regressions: Atlanta (ATL), Chicago
(ORD), and New York (JFK). Appendix Table A5 presents first-stage F-statistics if we instrument
taxi time at California on up to four airports outside of California. Recall that we allow the
coefficients to vary by airport, as network congestion will have different absolute effects on California
airports. Irrespective of whether we use 1, 2, 3, or 4 airports outside of California, the F-statistic
is well above 10. In our baseline model we use three airports that cover weather patterns in three
regions of the Eastern United States: Southeast (Atlanta), Midwest (Chicago), and Northeast (New
York JFK), and the first-stage F-stat is 42.82. The fourth largest airport outside of California is
Dallas Fort Worth (DFW). While results are not particularly sensitive to including DFW, we
exclude it from our baseline specifications as it is significantly closer to California airports and thus
may be more endogenous than the other three airports. Dallas Fort Worth may be delayed because
California airports are delayed.
Reverse causality is less of a concern for the other three airports: A flight that leaves a California
airport at 6am will not reach Atlanta, Chicago, or New York until roughly noon due to the change
33

Ozone is formed through a complicated chemical reaction between both nitrogen dioxides and VOC’s in the
presence of sunlight.

19

in time zones. Table A6 in the appendix tests for reverse causality directly by regressing taxi
time at an airport on the eight weather measures we generally include as controls: a quadratic in
minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, as well as wind speed. The column heading
gives the airport at which the congestion is measured while the row indicates the airport at which
the weather variables are measured.34 The table reports p-values of a hypothesis test pertaining to
the joint significance of the weather variables. The diagonal is highly significant as local weather
measures impact airport taxi time. However, while weather at the eastern airports (ATL, ORD, or
JFK) sometimes impacts taxi time at the two largest airports in California (LAX and SFO), the
reverse is not true. This is consistent with weather at Eastern airports causing local network delays
that propagate through the airspace and impact taxi time in California. The reverse direction
does not hold. California airports do not affect East Coast airports on the same day. This result
is not simply an artifact of there being less weather variation in California, as weather at LAX
significantly impacts taxi time at SFO.
We have also run two sensitivity checks to further rule out endogeneity through reverse causality,
the results of which are reported in the subsequent section on health section. First, we only
utilize the combined taxi time between 5am and noon at the three major Eastern airports to rule
out California feedback effects. This reduces the F-stat in model 1 from 42.82 to 28.50, but the
results remain similar to baseline estimates. Second, instead of using taxi time at the three major
Eastern airports, we use the eight weather variables at each of these airports. Since this effectively
increases the number of instruments by a factor of eight, we no longer estimate model 3 (which had
432 instruments to begin with). The F-statistic for the weather-instrumented regression is 22.31.
Again, results remain similar to our baseline estimates but the standard errors in the second stage
increase. The model with the highest F-statistic is the one which uses the overall taxi time at
each of the three large East Coast airports as instrumental variables. Going forward we instrument
using the overall measure.
Finally, to put the magnitude of these effects into perspective, it is useful to consider the
current ambient air standards in place for CO as regulated by the EPA under the Clean Air Act.
The current one hour carbon monoxide standard specifies that pollution may not exceed 35 ppm
(or 35000 ppb) more than once per year. California has their own CO standard which is 20ppm.
A one standard deviation increase in LAX airplane idling (1852 minutes) translates into an 75 ppb
increase (40.37 × 1.852) in carbon monoxide levels for areas within 10km of LAX using estimates
from column (1a) of Table 1. Adding this number to the average daily maximum CO level at zip
codes from Panel A of Table A2 (1235 ppb), the estimated increase in pollution concentrations is
far below the current EPA standard. Similarly, for NO2 , the current EPA 1-hour standard is 100
ppb. Using estimates from column (2a) of Table 1, a standard deviation increase in LAX taxi time
would lead to a 1ppb increase in NO2 levels. Evaluated relative to the average daily maximum
NO2 levels of 35.5 ppb, these are again well below the ambient criteria standard. Note, however,
34

If we pair airport taxi time with weather from another airport, we also include the local weather measure as
control. The local weather measures are not included in the joint test of significance.

20

that the maximum of the maximum daily NO2 levels is above the standard as some areas are out of
attainment. The remaining sections estimate the social costs of these congestion related increases
in ambient air concentrations by focusing on heath outcomes of the populations most affected by
these emissions.

4.2

Effects of Taxi Time on Local Measures of Health

We begin by investigating the “reduced form” health effects of airports, relating aggregate daily
taxi time to local measures of health. Namely, how does variation in airport congestion predict
local health outcomes? Appendix Table A7 presents the results from a regression relating daily
measures of airport taxi time to local hospital admissions for the overall population as well as
two susceptible subgroups: people below 5 as well as people ages 65 and above. The dependent
variable is measured as the daily sum of hospital and emergency room visits for persons living in
a particular zip code scaled by the population (per 10 million individuals) in that particular zip
code. The regressions are weighted by zip code population size, and taxi time is instrumented using
taxi time at three major airports in the East. The estimated coefficient on the taxi time variable
corresponds to the increased rate of hospitalizations per 10 million individuals in a zip code for an
extra 1000 minutes of taxi time. Using various diagnosis codes, we examine the impact of taxi time
on asthma, respiratory, and heart related admissions separately. As a falsification exercise, we also
estimate the incidence of taxi time on strokes, bone fractures, and appendicitis rates. The reported
standard errors are clustered on both zip code and day.
For the overall population (Panel A), all respiratory sickness rates as well as heart problems are
significantly impacted by taxi time, while the placebo effects for stroke, bone fractures, and appendicitis are not significantly affected. Results become larger in magnitude for the at-risk age groups.
For the population 65 years and above, the incidence of stroke and bone fractures is marginally
significant at the 10% level. This may be do to statistical chance or may be explained by the fact
that senior citizens may also be more susceptible to sicknesses that covary with one another (e.g.,
a respiratory problem might make them fall and break a bone). Additionally, Medicare provides
doctors implicit incentives to add additional diagnosis codes to receive higher reimbursement rates.
Consistent with this explanation, models for which the dependent variable is measured only using
the primary diagnosis code, the placebo effects for 65 and older are no longer significant.

4.3

Hospital Admissions and Instrumented Pollution Exposure

Results thus far have shown that aggregate airplane taxi time generates variation in pollution levels
of nearby communities. We exploit this variation to examine the relationship between pollution and
health explicitly. Table 2 summarizes regression results for various pollutants and illnesses using a
variety of traditional econometric specifications. Each entry corresponds to a different regression,
where the dependent variable is measured as hospital admission rates, and the independent variable
is the daily mean ambient pollution concentration in a particular zip code. As before, regression

21

estimates are weighted by zip code population and standard errors are clustered on both zip code
and day.35
The first row within each panel presents estimates from a pooled OLS version of equation (6)
without any controls Zzt , which suggests that increased ambient air concentrations lead to adverse
health outcomes for respiratory and heart problems. Each consecutive row adds more controls.
The the second row uses time controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects), and the
third row additionally adds weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature,
precipitation, and wind speed). To control for unobserved, time-invariant determinants of health,
the fourth row of Table 2 reports regression estimates from a model using zip code fixed effects.
The model is identified by examining how within zip code changes in pollution are related to
hospitalization rates of that particular zip code. Again, pollution is often strongly correlated with
health, although the estimates in the fourth row are usually smaller than those in the first three.
These smaller point estimates are consistent with time-invariant omitted variables introducing bias
into the estimates from rows one through three. Alternatively, classical measurement error in
the pollution variable may lead to significant attenuation bias in fixed effects models (Griliches &
Hausman 1986), and this may be responsible for the smaller point estimates in the last row.
Aside from attenuation bias, fixed effects models may also suffer from biases introduced by any
unobserved, time-varying determinants of both pollution and health (e.g., weather). To explore this
issue further, Table 3 presents instrumental variable estimates of the pollution-health relationship,
using instrumented aggregate airport taxi time as an instrumental variable for daily mean pollution.
Table 3 presents results for both the overall population in Panel A as well as children below 5 in
Panel B and people aged 65 and above in Panel C.36 The three rows (labeled model 1-3) use (i)
taxi time, (ii) taxi time interacted with distance, and (iii) taxi time interacted with distance, wind
speed, and wind direction, respectively. These are the specifications outlined in equation (3), (4),
and (5) above.
The estimates in Table 3 are usually an order of magnitude larger than the OLS, fixed-effects
estimates from Table 2. To put the magnitudes into perspective: The average asthma sickness rate
for the overall population is 339 per 10 million inhabitants (Panel A1 and A2 of Table A3). The
asthma coefficient for CO (model 1) in Table 1 implies that a one standard deviation increase in
CO pollution leads to an additional 0.341×368 = 125 astma attacks per 10 million people,37 which
is 37% of the daily mean.38 This suggests that fluctuations in air pollution are a major cause of
35

Unweighted regression estimates are presented in Appendix Table A21.
Results for the two remaining groups: children ages 5-19 and adults ages 19-64 are given in Appendix Table A8.
Children between 5 and 19 years of age show no sensitivity to pollution shocks. Conversely, the estimated doseresponse for adults are roughly comparable to the baseline estimates, which is not surprising since they are the
largest share of the overall population.
37
Panel A of Table A2 in the appendix shows that the standard deviation for CO is 368.
38
This back-of-the-envelope calculation increases the pollution level in each zip code by the average overall standard
deviation of pollution fluctuations. Moreover, the average sickness rate is not population weighted. In a later part, we
increase pollution in each zip code by the zip-code specific standard deviation in pollution fluctuations and calculate
the population-weighted average sickness count. The relative impact decreases to 30% of the daily mean under the
linear probability model and 33% under a Poisson count model.
36

22

asthma related illnesses. For heart related problems, the relative magnitude is 20% of the daily
mean.
Model 2 and 3 in Table 3 estimate over-identified models instrumenting pollution with both
taxi time and taxi time interactions. While estimates in model 2 are similar to those from model 1,
estimates from model 3 are generally smaller. The reason for the difference in magnitudes between
models 2 and 3 is not entirely clear. There are several possible explanations. First, recall that
model 3 uses distance as well as wind direction and wind speed. Marginal impacts of airport
congestion vary greatly across space as shown in Figure 3, much more than in a model that only
includes distance. While we know the exact location of a monitor, we only know the zip code of a
person’s residence, and the person might be staying outside the home zip code for work. This will
induce great measurement error. Strikingly, model 3 in Panel B gives comparable point estimates
to model 1 and 2 for children under the age of 5, which are more likely to be at home or in a
close-by day care. Second, another possible explanation is the well-known bias of 2SLS estimators
when instruments are weak and when there are many over-identifying restrictions (Bound, Jaeger &
Baker 1995). While the results from Table 1 suggest that model 3 is a strong first-stage predictor
of local pollution levels with a F-statistic that is 12 for CO pollution and 6 for NO2 pollution,
the first stage is not as strong as models 1 and 2, and the model is highly over-identified with
12 excluded instruments. Bound, Jaeger & Baker (1995) show how the bias of 2SLS increases in
the number of instruments and decreases in the strength of the first stage. The bias of 2SLS in
the case of weakly identified or over-identified models is towards the OLS counterpart. This is
consistent with model 3 estimates in Table 3 being smaller than both model 1 and 2 but still above
the OLS estimates. Table A9 in the appendix estimates models 2 and 3 using Limited Information
Maximum Likelihood (LIML), which is median-unbiased for over-identified, constant-effects models
(Davidson & MacKinnon 1993). Results remain similar. Finally, a third alternative explanation
for why model 3 gives lower point estimates is that the hourly wind data represent snapshots of
the wind speed and direction and include significant measurement error. Although, this is at odds
with the fact that we find such significant spatial patterns in the pollution regressions.
Panels B and C of Table 3 present estimates for children and senior citizens. While the sensitivity
is higher, so are average sickness rates. In relative terms, a one standard deviation increase in CO
pollution now causes a 40% increase in asthma cases for children under 5 compared to the average
daily mean. On the other hand, a one standard deviation increase in CO pollution causes a 26%
increase in heart problems for people 65 and above. The higher absolute sensitivity in Panel B and
C suggests that there may exist significant heterogeneity in the population response to ambient
air pollution exposure. Since the population aged 65 and older has guaranteed access to health
insurance through Medicare, they may be more inclined to visit the emergency room or hospital
relative to the rest of the population, leading to larger estimated effects. On the other hand, the
relative magnitude compared to average sickness rates are only slightly larger than for the overall
population.
Columns (3)-(5) of each panel includes results for one of three placebos: strokes, bone fractures,

23

and appendicitis. Both strokes and appendicitis are severe enough that people should go to the
hospital. None of the results are significant for the overall population in Panel A. Consistent with
the reduced form evidence in Table A7, some of the coefficients in Panel C are significant at the
10% level. In Appendix Table A10 we replicate the analysis using only the primary diagnosis code.
None of the placebo regressions remain significant. However, since we are interested in the overall
effect of pollution on hospitalization rates, our baseline models continue to count total sickness
counts for both primary and secondary diagnoses.
Appendix Table A11 further investigates the sensitivity of our IV estimates to different choices
of instrumental variables. As a point of comparison, Panel A replicates the baseline results of
Table 3 for all ages. Panel B instruments for pollution using only the taxi time between 5am and
noon at Eastern airports to rule out endogeneity through reverse causality. The results remain
robust to this change. Panel C goes one step further and instruments for taxi time at California
airports using only weather measures at the three major airports in the Eastern United States.
While the point estimates remain comparable, the standard errors generally increase.39
4.3.1

Inpatient versus Outpatient Data

Traditionally, studies have relied on Inpatient data sets to examine health responsiveness to various
external factors such as pollution. One limitation of such data is that a person only enters the
Inpatient data set if they are admitted for an overnight stay in the hospital. Many ER visits result
in a discharge the same day and hence never result in an overnight stay. Starting in 2005, California
began collecting Outpatient (Emergency Room) data. To better understand the differences between
these two datasets as well as compare our results to those from the previous literature, we replicate
the analysis using sickness counts from only the Inpatient data in Table A12 of the appendix. By
the same token, Table A13 of the appendix only uses the Outpatient data.40 Not surprisingly, there
is a significant relationship between pollution and heart problems (column 2) in the Inpatient data
for patient ages 65 and above (as these conditions usually require an overnight stay), but no or
very limited sensitivity of asthma or overall respiratory illnesses (column 1a and 1c) to pollution.
Conversely, the Outpatient (ER) data shows a much larger sensitivity of respiratory problems
to changes in pollution, even among the general population. These results show the importance
of Outpatient (ER) data when studying the morbidity effects of ambient air pollution on health
outcomes.
4.3.2

Jointly Estimating the Effect of Ambient Air Pollutants

A common challenge in studies linking health outcomes to pollution measures is that ambient air
pollutants are highly correlated. It is therefore difficult to determine empirically which pollutant
is the true cause of any observed changes in health. Our research design provides one possible
39

We do not estimate model 3 using weather variables as it would include 3456 instruments.
Patients that enter the ER and are later admitted for an overnight stay are dropped from the ER data to avoid
double counting.
40

24

solution to the identification problem. Wind speed and wind direction differentially affect both CO
and NO2 dispersion patterns. Moreover, the rate of CO and NOx emissions depend on the thrust
produced by the engine, and higher wind speeds require more engine thrust. Wind speed hence
impacts both the rate at which pollutants are produced and how they disperse. Table 4 estimates
the joint effect of both CO and NO2 on health using our first stage model with wind speed and wind
direction interactions (model 3).41 Table 4 shows that the coefficient for CO remains significant
and is comparable in size to our baseline estimates from Table 3. This is true for all age groups,
including children below 5, where model 3 gave comparable estimates to model 1 and 2. Conversely,
the coefficients on NO2 sometimes switch sign and are mostly insignificant. We see this as evidence
that returns from regulating CO exceed those from regulating NO2 .
It is also unlikely that ozone O3 is causing the observed relationship. Table A14 in the appendix
estimates the relationship separately for the summer (April-September) and the winter (OctoberMarch). Ozone is higher during the summer, while CO and NO2 are higher during the winter.
The observed health effects are larger and more significant during the winter time when ozone is
not a big problem. The fact that the estimated coefficients are larger when pollution levels are
larger is consistent with increasing marginal impacts of pollution. However, the standard errors are
also much larger for the summer, especially in the case of acute respiratory problems and overall
respiratory problems. This is not surprising, because other pollutants like ozone also impact health
outcomes, which will be part of the error term.
4.3.3

Temporal Displacement and Dynamics

Our baseline regression models examine only the contemporaneous effect of pollution on health.
Contemporaneous estimates may lead to underestimates of the total effects of air pollution on health
if health effects respond sluggishly to changes in pollution. Conversely, estimates may overstate the
hypothesized effect due to temporal displacement: if spikes in daily pollution levels make already
sick people go to the hospital one day earlier, contemporaneous models overestimate the true effect
associated with permanently higher pollution levels. If temporal displacement is important, the
contemporaneous increase in sickness rates should be followed by a decrease in sickness rates in
subsequent periods.
We investigate both of these issues by estimating a distributed lag regression model, including
three lags in the pollution variable of interest. Table 5 presents the distributed lag results of CO
pollution for the overall population. Results for NO2 as well as children below 5 and people 65
and above are given in Table A15 - A17 in the appendix. We present individual coefficients as
well as the combined effect (the sum of the four) in the last row of each panel. To preserve space,
we only list the results for the sickness categories that are impacted by changing pollution levels.
Since regulatory policy is concerned with the health effects of a permanent change in pollution, we
focus on cumulative effects of the model over the estimated 4 day horizon. The cumulative effect
41
It is not possible to include both CO and NO2 measures in our baseline model 1 as they are both linear functions
of the same instrument and thus perfectly collinear.

25

is slightly larger than the comparable baseline results in Table 3. This might be because some
individuals delay hospital visits, although the exact dynamics are hard to determine empirically
given the lack of significance of the individual coefficients.
4.3.4

Random Coefficient Estimates of Self-Selection Bias

The baseline health results from Table 3 show a substantial amount of heterogeneity in health
responsiveness to air pollution; those over 65 years of age and below five years of age show larger
health responses. There may also be other forms of heterogeneity in the dose-response function
unobserved to the econometrician. In either case, if this heterogeneity is correlated with ambient
air pollution exposure, our estimates will be biased by self-selection.
This type of selection is plausible, as we know that people non-randomly sort into locations based
on levels and changes to air pollution (Banzhaf & Walsh 2008), and these preferences may also be
correlated with responsiveness to or health effects of air pollution. We test for the presence of this
non-random assortative behavior using equation (12) for various pollutants and health outcomes.
The results are presented in Table 6 for the effects of CO pollution on the overall population and
in Tables A18 - A20 in the appendix for NO2 as well as children below 5 and senior citizens aged
65 and above. Each column of each panel represents a separate regression. To account for the first
stage variation from the the two-step estimation procedure, we use a block-bootstrap procedure,
resampling entire zip codes with replacement.42
The first row of each column and panel provides the unbiased estimates of the average treatment
effect associated with increasing the specific pollutant by 1ppb. The second row of Table 6 provides
a simple test as to the importance of our instrumental variable in accounting for omitted variable
bias or measurement error in the context of a fixed-effects, OLS regression model. The large and
significant results suggest that failing to account for either of these issues will lead researchers to
downwardly bias estimates pertaining to pollution and health.
The test for self-selection bias in the 2SLS regression is shown in the third row of each panel.
These estimates are the coefficients from the last term in equation (12), interacting the first stage
errors with pollution variable. We fail to detect biases arising from self-selective behavior. This
lack of self-selective behavior may be in part due to our relatively homogenous sample within 10km
of an airport.
4.3.5

Count Model

Our baseline health estimates consist of linear probability models, relating the population-scaled
hospital admission rates to changes in pollution. To account for the non-negative and discrete nature of the hospital admission data, Table 7 presents estimates from a quasi-maximum likelihood,
conditional Poisson IV estimator given in equation (13). In contrast to the baseline linear probability health models, these models are not weighted. In addition, since we use a control function to
42

This is equivalent to clustering by zip code instead of twoway clustering by zip code and day. However, recall
that clustering by zip code gives comparable results in Table A21.

26

address issues pertaining to measurement error and omitted variables, we adjust standard errors
for the first stage sampling variation using a block-bootstrap sampling procedure, resampling zip
codes.43 Analogous to the linear probability model, we find that respiratory illnesses and heart
problems are sensitive to pollution fluctuations, while the three placebos are not (with the usual
caveat applying to sickness counts for people aged 65 and above).
The coefficients no longer give marginal impacts and are difficult to interpret. In order to
compare the marginal impacts of pollution exposure and congestion across all of our models, Table 8
presents the predicted increase in sickness counts from (i) a one standard deviation increase in taxi
time, and (ii) a one standard deviation increase in pollution levels in each zip code. The results
are then added for all zip codes that are within 10km of an airport. The table also summarizes
population surrounding airports. Various admission categories are given in rows, while the columns
show the results for each of the 12 airports. The last column gives the combined impact among all
12 airports.
Panels A, B, and C give the predicted increase in hospital admissions using estimates from
the baseline linear probability model whereby pollution is instrumented using model 1 (pollution
instrumented with taxi time - no interactions with distance or wind direction). These results
are presented for the overall population (Panel A), children below 5 years (Panel B), and senior
citizens 65 and above (Panel C). Panel D gives the results for the overall population using the
count model shown in Table 7. Impacts are evaluated at the sample mean for the nonlinear Poisson
model. The results from the Poisson model are similar to those from the linear probability model
in Panel A. Panel E gives the average daily sickness count in 2005-2007 for the overall population
for comparison.
Pollution fluctuations have a large effect on the 6 million people living within 10km of one of
the 12 airports: A one standard deviation increase in a zip-codes specific pollution fluctuations
increases asthma counts for the overall population by 30% under the linear probability model and
33% under the Poisson count model.44 Overall, a one standard deviation increase in zip-code
specific daily pollution levels results in 157 additional admissions for respiratory problems and 90
additional admissions for heart problems, which are 18% and 17% of the daily mean. For respiratory
problems, infants only account for roughly one fourth of the overall impacts. Studies focusing only
on the impact on infants therefore would miss a significant portion of the overall impacts. Not
surprisingly, the elderly are responsible for the largest share of heart related impacts.
Airport congestion significantly contributes to the overall impacts: a one standard deviation
increase in taxi time increases respiratory and heart admissions by 11 and 6 cases, respectively. At
LAX, the largest airport in California, a one standard deviation increase in taxi time is responsible
for roughly one-fourth of the effect of a one-standard deviation increase in pollution. On the other
43

This is equivalent to clustering by zip code instead of twoway clustering by zip code and day. Recall that an
unweighted regression that clusters by zip code gives comparable results in Table A21.
44
Recall that these estimates are smaller than what we reported under Table 3, where we increased pollution levels
in each zip code by the average overall standard deviation in pollution levels and took an average baseline sickness
rate that was not population weighted.

27

hand, smaller airports (e.g., Santa Barbara or Long Beach) are responsible for a much lower share
of the overall pollution impacts.
4.3.6

Economic Cost

In order to monetize the health impacts associated with both pollution exposure as well as airport
congestion, we use the diagnosis-specific reimbursement rates offered to hospitals through medicare.45 We view this measure as a lower bound on the total health costs for several reasons: first,
our methodology measures limited impacts on both a temporal and spatial scale. By focusing on
day-to-day fluctuations, we do not address the long run, cumulative effect of pollution on health.
If these are sizable relative to the contemporaneous effects, the overall cost estimate will be higher.
Similarly, our focus has been on individuals living within 10km of an airport. Some of our estimates
suggest the marginal impact of taxi time extends beyond the 10km radius, in which case we would
be understating the overall effect. Second, we only count people that are sick enough to go to
the hospital - anybody who sees their primary care physician or stays home feeling sick will not
be counted. Recent work by Hanna & Oliva (2011) finds that pollution decreases labor supply in
Mexico City, imposing real economic costs on society not measured in our analysis. Third, and
most importantly, the marginal willingness to pay to avoid treatment is likely higher than the cost
of treatment. For example, severe heart related problems that are not treated within a narrow
time frame will likely result in death. The statistical value of life that EPA uses for its benefit-cost
analyses is around 6 million dollars, which is 1000 times as larger as our medical reimbursement
cost for heart-related problems. Individuals might be willing to pay significantly more than medical
reimbursement rates to avoid illnesses that, if not adequately treated, have dire consequences.
Using the predicted increase in hospital visits under the linear probability model given in Table 8,
a one standard deviation increase in pollution levels amounts to about a $1 million increase in
hospitalization payments related to respiratory and heart related hospital admissions.46 Similarly,
a one standard deviation increase in taxi time at California airports results in 70 thousand dollars
of additional health expenses in a given day. For comparison, the average time cost of a one
standard deviation increase in taxi time at the 12 airports is 726 thousand dollars.47 The increased
hospitalization costs for local residents amounts to about 10 percent of the total time cost of
congestion for affected airline passengers. The ratio varies between 0.8% for Sacramento and 16%
45

This information comes from a translation between our hospital diagnosis codes (ICD-9) and Diagnosis Related
Group (DRG) codes. We used the crosswalk from the AMA Code Manager Online Elite. Using the set of DRG
codes, we calculate the medicare reimbursement rates using the DRG Payment calculator provided by TRICARE
(http://www.tricare.mil/drgrates/). In accordance with medicare reimbursement policy, we adjust the DRG payments using the average wage index in our sample. The average cost for respiratory problems and heart related
admissions are US$ 2702 and 6501, respectively.
46
This figure is calculated by taking the estimated increase in hospital visits and multiplying it by the average
medicare reimbursement for each of the respective diagnoses.
47
This figure is calculated by dividing average boardings at each airport in 2005-2007 by the average number of
departures to get the average number of passengers per flight. We then transform additional taxi time into peoplehours of added travel time. We use the estimated cost of added travel time by Morrison & Winston (1989) ($34.04
in 1983 dollars) and transform it into 2006 dollars.

28

for Burbank and Santa Ana airport. The ratio of health cost to time cost is highest for the last two
airports as pollution impacts a large number of people living around the airport (0.8 million) yet
the average number of passenger per plane, which impacts the time cost, are low. For the reasons
mentioned above, the health cost are likely a lower bound, and the ratio of congestion-related health
cost to time cost is hence likely even higher.

5

Conclusions

This study has shown how daily variation in ground level airport congestion due to network delays
significantly affects both local pollution levels as well as local measures of health. In doing so, we
develop a framework through which to credibly estimate the effects of exogenous shocks to local
air pollution on contemporaneous measures of health. Daily local pollution shocks are caused by
events that occur several thousand miles away and are arguably exogenous to the local area. We
address several longstanding issues pertaining to non-random selection and behavioral responses
to pollution. Our results suggest that ground operations at airports are responsible for a tremendous amount of local ambient air pollution. Specifically, a one standard deviation change in daily
congestion at LAX is responsible for a 0.32 standard deviation increase in levels of CO next to the
airport that faces out with distance. The average impact for zip codes within 10km is 0.23 standard
deviations.
When connecting these models to measures of health, we find that admissions for respiratory
problems and heart disease are strongly related to these pollution changes. A one standard deviation
increase in zip-code specific pollution levels increases asthma counts by 30% of the baseline average,
total respiratory problems by 18%, and heart problems by 17%. Infants and the elderly show a
higher sensitivity to pollution fluctuations. At the same time, adults age 20-64 are also impacted.
For respiratory problems, the general adult population accounts for the majority of the total impacts
despite the lower sensitivity to fluctuations as they are the largest share of the population. A one
standard deviation increase in pollution levels is responsible for 1 million dollars in hospitalization
costs for the 6 million people living within 10km of one of the 12 airports of our study. This is
likely a significant lower bound as the willingness to pay to avoid such illnesses will be higher than
the medicare reimbursement rates.
Examining various mechanisms for the observed pollution-health relationship, we find that CO
is primarily responsible for the observed health effects as opposed to NO2 or O3 . We find no
evidence of forward displacement or delayed impacts of pollution. We also find no evidence that
people in areas with larger pollution shocks are less susceptible or less responsive to pollution.
These estimates suggest that relatively small amounts of ambient air pollution can have substantial effects on the incidence of local respiratory illness. While EPA recently decided against
lowering the existing carbon monoxide standards due to lack of sufficient evidence of the harmful effects of CO at levels below current EPA mandates, we find significant impacts on morbidity. Recent
research suggests that the rates of respiratory illness in the United States are rising dramatically,

29

even as ambient levels of air pollution have continued to fall (Center for Disease Control 2011).
Why asthma rates continue to rise is an open question, but the increase in asthma rates is most pronounced amongst African Americans who disproportionately live in densely populated, congested
areas. At the same time, traffic congestion in cities has been rising dramatically. Results presented
here suggests that at least part of the increased rate of asthma in urban areas can be explained by
increased levels of traffic congestion. The exact mechanism remain beyond the scope of the current
study, but this remains an interesting area for further research.48

References
Auffhammer, Maximilan, and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. “Clearing the Air? The Effects of Gasoline
Content Regulation on Air Quality.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2687–2722.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. “Do People Vote with Their Feet? An
Empirical Test of Tiebouts Mechanism.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 843863.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker. 1995. “Problems with Instrumental
Variables Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous
Explanatory Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(430): 443–
450.
Bruner, Jon. 2009. “America’s Worst Intersections.” Forbes.
Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 2008. “Air Carriers: T-100 Domestic Segment U.S. Carriers Data.”
Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression Analysis of Count Data. Cambridge, MA:Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference
With Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(2): 238–249.
Card, David. 1999. “The Handbook of Labor Economics.” , ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card Vol. III, Chapter The causal effect of education on earnings, 1801–1863. Elsevier.
Carlin, Alan, and R. E. Park. 1970. “Marginal Cost Pricing of Airport Runway Capacity.”
American Economic Review, 60(3): 310–319.
Center for Disease Control. 2011. “Asthma in the US: Growing Every Year.” CDC Vital Signs.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121–1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376–424.
48

Currently, the highest rates of asthma incidence in the United States are found in Bronx, New York (Garg
et al. 2003). This area of northern New York City is bisected by 5 major highways, that rank among the most
congested in the United States (Bruner 2009).

30

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn From California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 1003–
1030.
Currie, Janet, and Reed Walker. 2011. “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
E-ZPass.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 65–90.
Davidson, Russell, and James G. MacKinnon. 1993. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. Oxofd University Press.
Deschênes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. “Climate Change
and Birth Weight.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99(2): 211–217.
Environmental Protection Agency. 1992. “Procedures for Emission Inventory Preparation.
Volume IV: Mobile Sources.”
Environmental Protection Agency. 2005. “2005 National Emissions Inventory Data And Documentation.”
Federal Aviation Administration. 2005a. “Aviation & Emissions: A Primer.” Office of Environment and Energy.
Federal
Aviation
Administration.
2005b.
Passenger
Boarding
(Enplanement)
and
All-Cargo
Data
for
U.S.
Airports.
http://www.faa.gov/airports/planning capacity/passenger allcargo stats/passenger/.
Friedman, Michael S., Kenneth E. Powell, Lori Hutwagner, LeRoy M. Graham, and
W. Gerald Teague. 2001. “Impact of Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors
During the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma.”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 285(7): 897–905.
Garen, John. 1984. “The Returns to Schooling: A Selectivity Bias Approach with a Continuous
Choice Variable.” Econometrica, 52(5): 1199–1218.
Garg, Renu, Adam Karpati, Jessica Leighton, Mary Perrin, and Mona Shah. 2003.
Asthma Facts. . Second ed., New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
Griliches, Zvi, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. “Errors in variables in panel data.” Journal of
Econometrics, 31(1): 93–118.
Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. 2011. “The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence
from a Natural Experiment in Mexico City.” NBER Working Paper 17302.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count
Data with an Application to the Patents-R & D Relationship.” Econometrica, 52(4): 909–938.
Heckman, J., and E. Vytlacil. 1998. “Instrumental Variables Methods for the Correlated Random Coefficient Model: Estimating the Average Rate of Return to Schooling When the Return
is Correlated with Schooling.” Journal of Human Resources, 33(4): 974–987.
Mayer, Christopher, and Todd Sinai. 2003. “Network Effects, Congestion Externalities, and
Air Traffic Delays: Or Why Not All Delays Are Evil.” American Economic Review, 93(4): 1194–
1215.
31

Moretti, Enrico, and Matthew Neidell. 2011. “Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior:
Evidence from the Ports of Los Angeles.” Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154–175.
Morrison, Steven A., and Clifford Winston. 1989. “Enhancing the Performance of the Deregulated Air Transportation System.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics,
1989: 61–123.
Morrison, Steven A., and Clifford Winston. 2007. “Another Look at Airport Congestion
Pricing.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1970–1977.
Neidell, Matthew. 2009. “Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of Ozone
on Asthma Hospitalizations.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(2): 450–478.
Peters, Annette, Douglas W. Dockery, James E. Muller, and Murray A. Mittleman.
2001. “Increased Particulate Air Pollution and the Triggering of Myocardial Infarction.” Circulation, 103: 2810–2815.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate
Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States, 106(37): 15594–15598.
Seaton, A., D. Godden, W. MacNee, and K. Donaldson. 1995. “Particulate air pollution
and acute health effects.” The Lancet, 345(8943): 176–178.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2004. “Guidance on Airport Emissions
Reduction Credits for Early Measures Through Voluntary Airport Low Emissions Programs.”
Air Quality Strategies and Standards Division. Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards.
Willis, R.J., and S. Rosen. 1979. “Education and Self-Selection.” Journal of Political Economy,
87(5): S7–S36.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1997. “On two stage least squares estimation of the average treatment
effect in a random coefficient model.” Economics Letters, 56(2): 129–133.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1999. “Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models.” Journal of Econometrics, 90(1): 77–97.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press.

32

Figure 1: Location of Airports, Pollution Monitors, and Zip Codes
Northern California

Southern California

Airport Location
CARB CO Pollution Monitor
CARB NO2 Pollution Monitor
Zip Code Centroid [0,10] km of Airport
Zip Code Centroid (10,oo) km of Airport

Notes: The 12 largest airports in California are shown as blue dots. The location of CO pollution monitors in the
California Air Resource Board (CARB) data base are shown as X, the location of NO2 monitors as +. Zip code
boundaries are shown in grey. They are shaded if the centroid is within 10km (6.2miles) of an airport.

33

Figure 2: Histogram of Daily Wind Direction At Airports
North

Oakland (OAK)
North

East

East

West

Long Beach (LGB)

North

West

Los Angeles (LAX)

East

East

West

North

West

Burbank (BUR)

North

North

South

South

West

North

West

South

Santa Ana (SNA)

East

West

South

Sacramento (SMF)

East

South

East

East

West

North

East

South

San Jose (SJC)

North

East

East

East

South

San Francisco (SFO)

West

South

Santa Barbara (SBA)

North

West

South

San Diego (SAN)

North

West

South

Palm Springs (PSP)

North

West

South

Ontario (ONT)

South

Notes: Histogram of the distribution of daily directions in which the wind is blowing (2005-2007). Plot is normalized
to the most frequent category. The four circles indicate the quartile range. Airport locations are shown in Figure 1.

34

Figure 3: Contour Maps: Marginal Impact of Taxi Time on Pollution Levels
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
10km

10km

10km
61.00

10km

59.12
57.24
55.36
53.48
51.60
49.72
47.84
45.96
44.08
42.20
40.32

Downwind
−10km

10km

Downwind
−10km

10km

Downwind
−10km

38.44

Downwind

10km
−10km

10km

36.56
34.68
32.80
30.92
29.04
27.16
25.28
23.40
21.52
19.64
17.76
15.88
14.00

−10km

−10km

−10km

−10km

35

Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2 )
10km

10km

10km
1.00

10km

0.96
0.92
0.88
0.84
0.80
0.76
0.72
0.68
0.64
0.60
0.56

Downwind
−10km

10km

Downwind
−10km

10km

Downwind
−10km

0.52

Downwind

10km
−10km

10km

0.48
0.44
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
0.00

−10km

−10km

−10km

−10km

Notes: Graphs display the marginal impact of taxi time (ppb per 1000 minute of taxi time, i.e., kmin) on pollution levels across space for different wind speeds.
The x-axis shows the direction in which the wind is blowing: positive x-values imply the location is downwind, negative value simply they are upwind. Points on
the y-axis are at a right angle to the wind direction. The wind speeds in columns 1-4 are 0.1m/s, 1m/s, 2m/s, and 3m/s corresponding to the 0.1, 10.6, 34.5, and
66.5 percentiles of the distribution of wind speeds in 2005-2007 at the 12 airports in our study (see Figure 1).

Table 1: Pollution Regressed On Instrumented Taxi Time

Variable
Taxi Time
Taxi x Distance
Taxi x Angleu
Taxi x Angled
Taxi x Speed
Taxi x Distance x Angleu
Taxi x Distance x Angled
36

Taxi x Distance x Speed
Taxi x Angled x Speed
Taxi x Angleu x Speed
Taxi x Dist. x Angleu x Speed
Taxi x Dist. x Angled x Speed
Observations
Zip Codes
Days
F-stat(joint sig.)
p-value (joint sig.)

CO Pollution
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
40.37∗∗∗ 56.16∗∗∗ 49.44∗∗∗
(4.83)
(9.61)
(8.79)
-2.23∗
-1.82
(1.23)
(1.13)
15.28∗∗∗
(5.75)
1.07
(5.38)
-0.50
(1.27)
-1.27
(0.79)
0.26
(0.66)
0.19
(0.15)
1.03
(1.65)
-9.65∗∗∗
(2.37)
1.29∗∗∗
(0.32)
-0.34
(0.21)
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
69.29
38.23
12.39
3.26e-14 2.43e-14 1.09e-17

NO2 Pollution
(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
0.51∗∗∗
0.65∗∗∗
0.76∗∗∗
(0.09)
(0.16)
(0.17)
-0.02
-0.03
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.30
(0.19)
-0.02
(0.13)
-0.06∗∗
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.04
(0.03)
-0.17∗∗∗
(0.06)
0.02∗∗
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
33.13
16.85
6.00
4.17e-08 2.23e-07 1.25e-08

O3 Pollution
(3a)
(3b)
(3c)
-0.07
0.04
-0.11
(0.09)
(0.11)
(0.16)
-0.02∗
0.01
(0.01)
(0.02)
-0.43∗∗
(0.17)
0.12
(0.09)
0.09∗∗
(0.04)
0.05∗∗
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01∗
(0.01)
-0.09∗
(0.05)
0.23∗∗∗
(0.08)
-0.03∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
179580 179580 179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
0.65
2.11
1.13
.4223
.1251
.3373

Notes: Table regresses zip-code level pollution measures on airport congestion (total taxi time in 1000min) in 2005-2007. Taxi time at the local airport is
instrumented with the taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States. All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and
maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total
population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table 2: Sickness Rates Regressed On Pollution

Asthma
(1a)
No Controls
Time Controls
Time + Weather
Time + Weather + Zip Code FE
37
No Controls
Time Controls
Time + Weather
Time + Weather + Zip Code FE

0.070∗∗∗
(0.017)
0.030
(0.024)
0.070∗∗
(0.029)
0.011
(0.007)
3.1∗∗∗
(0.5)
1.7∗∗
(0.7)
4.6∗∗∗
(1.1)
0.1
(0.2)

Acute
All
All
Respiratory Respiratory
Heart
Stroke
(1b)
(1c)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: CO Pollution - All Ages
0.265∗∗∗
0.353∗∗∗
0.035
-0.002
(0.041)
(0.053)
(0.028)
(0.006)
0.058
0.070
-0.022
-0.014∗
(0.057)
(0.075)
(0.040)
(0.008)
0.071
0.097
0.004
-0.004
(0.070)
(0.094)
(0.054)
(0.010)
0.049∗∗∗
0.078∗∗∗
0.030∗∗∗
-0.000
(0.019)
(0.023)
(0.008)
(0.003)
Panel B: NO2 Pollution - All Ages
∗∗∗
10.7
14.6∗∗∗
4.3∗∗∗
0.6∗∗∗
(1.3)
(1.7)
(1.1)
(0.2)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
6.0
7.9
1.0
-0.1
(1.5)
(2.1)
(1.4)
(0.3)
9.0∗∗∗
12.3∗∗∗
3.2
0.8∗
(2.7)
(3.8)
(2.5)
(0.5)
1.1∗
2.4∗∗∗
1.1∗∗∗
0.1
(0.6)
(0.8)
(0.3)
(0.1)

Bone
Fractures
(4)

Appendicitis
(5)

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.010)
-0.010
(0.012)
-0.006
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.002∗
(0.001)

-0.3
(0.2)
0.6∗
(0.3)
0.9∗
(0.5)
0.0
(0.2)

0.1∗∗
(0.0)
0.1∗∗
(0.0)
0.0
(0.1)
0.1∗∗
(0.0)

Notes: Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (based on primary and secondary diagnosis codes) on daily pollution (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a
separate regression. Columns use sickness rates (counts per 10 million people) for different diseases, while rows use different controls. The first specification
(row) in each panel has no controls, while the second adds time controls (year, month, weekday as well as holiday fixed effects), the third adds weather controls
(quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed), and the fourth adds zip code fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by
the total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table 3: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution
All
Heart
Bone
Respiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: CO
0.341∗∗∗
0.607∗∗∗
0.828∗∗∗
0.475∗∗∗
0.059
-0.031
(0.072)
(0.179)
(0.230)
(0.148)
(0.042)
(0.069)
Model 2: CO
0.330∗∗∗
0.592∗∗∗
0.812∗∗∗
0.444∗∗∗
0.048
-0.032
(0.066)
(0.179)
(0.234)
(0.137)
(0.040)
(0.070)
Model 3: CO
0.203∗∗∗
0.415∗∗∗
0.534∗∗∗
0.233∗∗∗
0.020
-0.041
(0.049)
(0.130)
(0.172)
(0.082)
(0.031)
(0.042)
Model 1: NO2
29.2∗∗∗
52.0∗∗
70.9∗∗∗
40.7∗∗∗
5.1
-2.7
(8.0)
(20.7)
(26.4)
(13.1)
(3.7)
(6.1)
Model 2: NO2
28.7∗∗∗
51.3∗∗
70.3∗∗∗
39.0∗∗∗
4.4
-2.7
(7.8)
(20.6)
(26.6)
(12.9)
(3.6)
(6.3)
Model 3: NO2
11.9∗∗∗
16.2
19.4
16.0∗∗
0.6
-0.8
(4.0)
(10.5)
(13.7)
(7.2)
(2.2)
(2.9)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: CO
0.606∗∗
2.137∗
2.956∗∗
0.166∗
0.019
0.047
(0.262)
(1.232)
(1.485)
(0.088)
(0.023)
(0.147)
Model 2: CO
0.621∗∗
2.095∗
2.846∗
0.124
0.021
0.069
(0.252)
(1.202)
(1.476)
(0.082)
(0.025)
(0.141)
Model 3: CO
0.727∗∗∗
2.300∗∗∗
2.639∗∗∗
0.076
0.023
-0.030
(0.173)
(0.800)
(0.990)
(0.058)
(0.015)
(0.126)
Model 1: NO2
48.8∗
172.0
237.9∗
13.3∗
1.5
3.8
(25.0)
(115.8)
(143.5)
(7.5)
(1.9)
(11.7)
Model 2: NO2
50.0∗∗
168.9
229.5
10.1
1.7
5.5
(24.2)
(113.0)
(142.3)
(7.1)
(2.1)
(11.1)
Model 3: NO2
47.9∗∗∗
116.9∗
132.1∗
4.6
2.8∗∗
1.6
(14.8)
(64.9)
(78.9)
(4.7)
(1.2)
(9.6)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: CO
0.930∗∗∗
1.620∗∗∗
2.523∗∗∗
3.888∗∗∗
0.551∗
0.478∗
(0.341)
(0.485)
(0.710)
(1.098)
(0.321)
(0.262)
Model 2: CO
0.864∗∗∗
1.505∗∗∗
2.423∗∗∗
3.700∗∗∗
0.503
0.417
(0.298)
(0.451)
(0.695)
(1.035)
(0.326)
(0.260)
Model 3: CO
0.529∗∗
0.734∗∗
1.496∗∗∗
2.011∗∗∗
0.187
0.182
(0.213)
(0.326)
(0.545)
(0.642)
(0.259)
(0.169)
Model 1: NO2
78.0∗∗∗
135.9∗∗∗
211.6∗∗∗
326.1∗∗∗
46.2
40.1∗
(26.8)
(41.9)
(65.5)
(93.2)
(28.5)
(21.4)
Model 2: NO2
77.9∗∗∗
135.6∗∗∗
211.5∗∗∗
326.0∗∗∗
46.1
39.9∗
(26.8)
(42.0)
(65.7)
(93.4)
(28.5)
(21.4)
Model 3: NO2
35.3∗∗
35.4
66.2
122.8∗∗∗
0.9
9.5
(14.4)
(24.3)
(41.7)
(47.7)
(16.1)
(12.1)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

Appendicitis
(5)
0.007
(0.016)
0.002
(0.016)
0.003
(0.011)
0.6
(1.4)
0.3
(1.4)
0.5
(0.9)
-0.009
(0.035)
-0.019
(0.038)
-0.009
(0.023)
-0.7
(2.8)
-1.5
(3.0)
0.8
(2.1)
0.019
(0.030)
0.017
(0.030)
-0.031
(0.028)
1.6
(2.6)
1.6
(2.6)
-1.3
(1.8)
179580
164
1095
10 million

people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is
instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports
in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes
surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore
adds interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather
controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls
(year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are
two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

38

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table 4: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Joint Estimation

Model 3: CO
Model 3: NO2

Model 3: CO
Model 3: NO2

Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

0.239∗∗∗
(0.091)
-3.216
(6.489)

0.798∗∗∗
(0.243)
-34.165∗
(18.781)

0.842∗
(0.481)
-9.776
(35.044)

4.703∗∗∗
(1.824)
-205.580
(139.758)

All
Heart
Respiratory Problems
(1c)
(2)
Panel A: All Ages
1.084∗∗∗
0.183
(0.352)
(0.114)
-48.974∗
4.399
(26.680)
(9.804)

Stroke
(3)

Bone
Fractures
(4)

Appendicitis
(5)

0.046
(0.045)
-2.310
(2.928)

-0.109∗
(0.065)
6.104
(4.756)

-0.008
(0.015)
0.938
(1.221)

Panel B: Ages Below 5
5.519∗∗∗
0.114
-0.050
(2.092)
(0.128)
(0.042)
-246.384
-3.250
6.183∗
(158.472)
(10.077)
(3.290)

-0.243
(0.290)
18.267
(22.111)

-0.093
(0.062)
7.148
(5.384)

Panel C: Age
0.346
0.851∗∗
1.899∗∗∗
(0.314)
(0.410)
(0.735)
Model 3: NO2
16.601
-10.548
-36.416
(20.161)
(29.941)
(56.274)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for
Model 3: CO

65 and Above
1.623∗∗
0.439
0.192
-0.041
(0.767)
(0.376)
(0.256)
(0.043)
35.119
-22.780
-0.890
0.895
(54.776)
(23.046)
(18.476)
(2.730)
179580
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
1095
primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10

million people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. The effect of the two pollutants is jointly
estimated for the over-identified model 3. Pollution is instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused
by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States). All regression include weather
controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls
(year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are
two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

39

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table 5: Sickness Rates of All Ages Regressed On Instrumented CO Pollution - Lagged Pollution

Model 1: Pollution in t
Model 1: Pollution in t-1
Model 1: Pollution in t-2
Model 1: Pollution in t-3
Model 1: Cumulative Effect
Model 2: Pollution in t
Model 2: Pollution in t-1
Model 2: Pollution in t-2
Model 2: Pollution in t-3
Model 2: Cumulative Effect
Model 3: Pollution in t
Model 3: Pollution in t-1
Model 3: Pollution in t-2
Model 3: Pollution in t-3
Model 3: Cumulative Effect
Observations
Zip Codes
Days

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
0.214∗
0.365
0.522
0.477∗∗∗
(0.112)
(0.294)
(0.369)
(0.152)
-0.024
-0.058
-0.029
-0.064
(0.146)
(0.280)
(0.324)
(0.200)
0.134
0.119
0.066
0.045
(0.159)
(0.277)
(0.373)
(0.278)
0.040
0.239
0.346
0.010
(0.103)
(0.203)
(0.269)
(0.155)
0.364∗∗∗
0.665∗∗∗
0.905∗∗∗
0.467∗∗∗
(0.076)
(0.179)
(0.233)
(0.159)
0.213∗∗
0.354
0.516
0.457∗∗∗
(0.108)
(0.292)
(0.368)
(0.147)
-0.024
-0.053
-0.028
-0.068
(0.146)
(0.282)
(0.324)
(0.200)
0.113
0.096
0.047
0.034
(0.154)
(0.276)
(0.369)
(0.271)
0.056
0.253
0.355
0.011
(0.100)
(0.203)
(0.269)
(0.152)
0.357∗∗∗
0.650∗∗∗
0.890∗∗∗
0.434∗∗∗
(0.069)
(0.179)
(0.238)
(0.149)
0.184∗∗∗
0.339
0.444
0.232∗∗
(0.070)
(0.209)
(0.277)
(0.104)
-0.063
-0.005
0.002
-0.009
(0.058)
(0.161)
(0.201)
(0.113)
0.084
0.033
0.038
-0.009
(0.062)
(0.122)
(0.159)
(0.090)
-0.001
0.126
0.118
0.045
(0.042)
(0.097)
(0.126)
(0.058)
0.203∗∗∗
0.492∗∗∗
0.601∗∗∗
0.258∗∗∗
(0.054)
(0.121)
(0.162)
(0.068)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Notes: Table replicates the results of CO pollution on all ages in Table 3 except that three lags of the instrumented
pollution levels are included. Each column in each panel presents the coefficients from one regression as well as the
cumulative effect (sum of all four coefficients). Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels
are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

40

Table 6: Sickness Rates of All Ages Regressed On Instrumented CO Pollution - Control Function
Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
Model 1: Pollution
0.340∗∗∗
0.608∗∗∗
0.830∗∗∗
0.476∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.157)
(0.212)
(0.151)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Model 1: Control Function
-0.340
-0.556
-0.743
-0.439∗∗∗
(0.071)
(0.164)
(0.219)
(0.149)
Model 1: Pollution x Control (x1000)
9.149
-6.113
-13.807
-11.028
(9.293)
(22.543)
(28.348)
(14.543)
Model 2: Pollution
0.329∗∗∗
0.593∗∗∗
0.814∗∗∗
0.445∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.161)
(0.223)
(0.137)
Model 2: Control Function
-0.329∗∗∗
-0.541∗∗∗
-0.728∗∗∗
-0.408∗∗∗
(0.064)
(0.168)
(0.230)
(0.134)
Model 2: Pollution x Control (x1000)
9.214
-6.089
-13.719
-11.113
(9.273)
(22.532)
(28.337)
(14.542)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Model 3: Pollution
0.185
0.404
0.533
0.228∗∗
(0.054)
(0.148)
(0.198)
(0.092)
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
Model 3: Control Function
-0.185
-0.353
-0.445
-0.187∗∗
(0.055)
(0.154)
(0.204)
(0.090)
Model 3: Pollution x Control (x1000)
9.287
-6.247
-14.757
-13.375
(9.221)
(22.727)
(28.572)
(14.723)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates the results of CO pollution on all ages in Table 3 except that we use a control function
approach, i.e., we run a first stage of pollution on taxi time and then include (i) pollution, (ii) the residual from
the first stage, and (iii) the interaction of the pollution level with the residual from the first stage in the regression.
Further difference are that standard errors are obtained from 100 clustered bootstrap draws (drawing entire zip code
histories with replacement). Significance levels are indicated by

41

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table 7: Sickness Counts Regressed On Instrumented CO Pollution - Poisson Model
Asthma
(1a)
Model 1: CO
Model 2: CO
Model 3: CO

Model 1: CO
Model 2: CO
Model 3: CO

0.915∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.923∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.522∗∗∗
(0.000)
1.295∗∗∗
(0.000)
1.287∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.851∗∗∗
(0.000)

Model 1: CO

1.411∗∗∗
(0.000)
Model 2: CO
1.364∗∗∗
(0.000)
Model 3: CO
0.849∗∗∗
(0.000)
Observations
179580
Zip Codes
164
Days
1095
Notes: Table replicates the

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

All
Heart
Bone
Respiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: All Ages
0.652∗∗∗
0.629∗∗∗
0.529∗∗∗
0.276
-0.118
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.635∗∗∗
0.618∗∗∗
0.515∗∗∗
0.237
-0.121
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.376∗∗∗
0.361∗∗∗
0.287∗∗∗
0.096
-0.196
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
0.268
0.339
2.209∗
3.501
0.181
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.001)
0.234
0.299
1.939∗
3.539
0.253
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.001)
0.202
0.199
1.675
3.924
-0.078
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
0.832∗∗∗
0.665∗∗∗
0.683∗∗∗
0.412∗
0.673∗∗
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.802∗∗∗
0.656∗∗∗
0.668∗∗∗
0.394
0.607∗
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.378∗
0.367∗∗
0.352∗∗
0.214
0.231
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
results of CO pollution in Table 3 except that we use a Poisson count model

Appendicitis
(5)
0.357
(0.000)
0.237
(0.000)
0.172
(0.000)
-0.838
(0.003)
-1.402
(0.003)
-2.191
(0.003)
1.280
(0.001)
1.218
(0.001)
-0.562
(0.001)
179580
164
1095
instead of a

linear probability model. Further difference are that the regressions are unweighted and standard errors are obtained
from 100 clustered bootstrap draws (drawing entire zip code histories with replacement). Result of an unweighted
linear probability model that is clustered at the zip code level are given in Table A21 of the appendix. Significance
levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

42

Table 8: Impact of CO Pollution on Health (Model 1)
BUR

LAX

LGB

Population

794

812

875

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

0.21
0.38
0.51
0.29

2.07
3.68
5.02
2.88

0.17
0.30
0.41
0.23

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

10.42
18.56
25.31
14.52

8.45
15.05
20.53
11.77

11.36
20.23
27.60
15.83

55

54

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

0.03
0.09
0.13
0.01

0.25
0.87
1.20
0.07

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

1.28
4.52
6.26
0.35

1.03
3.64
5.03
0.28

79

82

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

0.06
0.10
0.16
0.24

0.57
1.00
1.56
2.40

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

2.85
4.96
7.73
11.91

2.32
4.03
6.28
9.68

Population

Population

OAK
ONT PSP
SAN SBA
SFO
SJC
Panel A: Linear Probability Model - All Ages
448
454
93
540
59
182
910
One Standard Deviation Increase in Taxi Time
0.25
0.17
0.02
0.50
0.01
0.26
0.37
0.45
0.30
0.03
0.88
0.01
0.47
0.67
0.61
0.40
0.05
1.20
0.02
0.64
0.91
0.35
0.23
0.03
0.69
0.01
0.37
0.52
One Standard Deviation Increase in Pollution
2.41
3.48
0.26
7.03
0.31
0.91
10.49
4.29
6.19
0.47
12.52
0.56
1.63
18.67
5.86
8.45
0.64
17.08
0.76
2.22
25.47
3.36
4.84
0.37
9.80
0.44
1.27
14.61

SMF

SNA

Total

41

822

6028

0.02
0.03
0.04
0.03

0.45
0.80
1.10
0.63

4.49
8.00
10.92
6.26

0.31
0.55
0.75
0.43

9.03
16.08
21.93
12.58

64.47
114.80
156.60
89.81

58

424

0.06
0.20
0.28
0.02

0.54
1.92
2.66
0.15

1.13
3.97
5.49
0.31

8.11
28.60
39.57
2.22

79

615

0.12
0.21
0.32
0.50

1.26
2.20
3.42
5.27

2.40
4.19
6.52
10.05

17.60
30.65
47.72
73.54

0.02
0.03
0.04
0.02

0.27
0.69
0.92
0.48

4.65
8.99
12.03
6.15

0.37
0.56
0.70
0.29

6.24
15.51
20.48
10.63

70.28
138.82
185.99
93.34

1.6
3.6
4.7
2.4

18.1
66.9
91.6
56.9

213.6
623.0
866.8
524.2

Panel B: Linear Probability Model - Ages 5 and Below
65
32
35
6
33
3
11
68
4
One Standard Deviation Increase in Taxi Time
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.08
0.11
0.08
0.01
0.19
0.00
0.10
0.18
0.01
0.11
0.15
0.11
0.01
0.27
0.00
0.14
0.24
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
One Standard Deviation Increase in Pollution
1.52
0.30
0.48
0.03
0.76
0.03
0.10
1.39
0.05
5.36
1.06
1.70
0.10
2.69
0.09
0.36
4.92
0.18
7.41
1.47
2.36
0.14
3.72
0.13
0.50
6.80
0.26
0.42
0.08
0.13
0.01
0.21
0.01
0.03
0.38
0.01
Panel C: Linear Probability Model - Ages 65 and Above
89
51
34
18
54
12
26
88
3
One Standard Deviation Increase in Taxi Time
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.01
0.13
0.00
0.10
0.10
0.00
0.08
0.14
0.06
0.02
0.23
0.01
0.18
0.17
0.01
0.13
0.21
0.09
0.03
0.37
0.01
0.28
0.27
0.01
0.20
0.32
0.14
0.04
0.56
0.02
0.43
0.41
0.01
One Standard Deviation Increase in Pollution
3.18
0.74
0.72
0.14
1.92
0.17
0.35
2.75
0.05
5.54
1.29
1.25
0.25
3.34
0.29
0.62
4.79
0.09
8.63
2.01
1.94
0.38
5.21
0.46
0.96
7.46
0.14
13.29
3.10
2.99
0.59
8.02
0.71
1.48
11.50
0.22

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

0.18
0.43
0.57
0.30

2.32
4.29
5.73
2.89

0.18
0.38
0.52
0.25

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

10.92
24.06
31.79
16.41

10.99
19.55
26.01
12.68

15.00
28.91
39.74
19.12

Panel D: Poisson Model - All Ages
One Standard Deviation Increase in Taxi Time
0.38
0.15
0.02
0.55
0.00
0.31
0.27
0.67
0.33
0.05
0.96
0.01
0.60
0.56
0.87
0.45
0.07
1.31
0.01
0.81
0.74
0.40
0.21
0.04
0.71
0.01
0.46
0.39
One Standard Deviation Increase in Pollution
3.84
3.40
0.23
9.28
0.14
1.13
8.73
6.64
7.55
0.64
15.35
0.32
2.26
17.46
8.62
10.13
0.95
21.02
0.47
3.01
23.06
3.95
4.63
0.55
11.14
0.42
1.61
11.92

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease

26.0
85.8
117.9
73.4

33.1
87.4
121.3
72.8

36.0
104.3
149.0
86.1

25.4
63.2
85.2
46.4

Panel E:
14.9
48.0
67.2
36.9

Baseline Average - All Ages
3.0
22.3
0.9
7.9
11.8
55.2
3.1
21.7
18.0
78.2
4.6
30.3
12.3
50.0
5.0
20.3

24.2
71.8
98.7
61.7

Notes: Table gives population as well as daily hospital admissions for all zip codes that are within 10km (6.2miles)
of one of the 12 major California airports. Panels A-D give predicted changes in sickness counts, while Panel E
gives baseline averages. Panels A-C use the linear probability model 1 for CO from Table 3, while panel D uses
the Poisson model 1 for CO from Table 7. Panel E gives average daily sickness counts in the data. The first 12
columns give impacts by airport, while the last column gives the total for all 12 airports. Population is in thousand.
Predicted changes in hospitalization are for both inpatient as well as outpatient admissions.

43

A1

Online Appendix
Figure A1: Location of Airports in Study

Chicago O‘Hare (ORD)

New York (JFK)

Atlanta (ATL)

Notes: Figure displays the location of the 12 airports in California as well as the three Eastern airports used to
instrument taxi time in California.

A1

Figure A2: Boxplots of Taxi Time By Hour and Airport
Panel A: Airports in California
Los Angeles (LAX)

Burbank (BUR)

Oakland (OAK)

Long Beach (LGB)
300

1000

350

350
900

300

100

700

600

500

400

300

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

150

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

200

250

300

800

250

250

200

150

100

200

150

100

200

50
50

50
100

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

San Diego (SAN)

Ontario (ONT)

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

Santa Barbara (SBA)

Palm Springs (PSP)

80
700

120

400

70

250

200

150

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

300

100

80

60

40

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

600

350

500

400

300

200

20

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

San Francisco (SFO)

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

50

40

30

20

100

50

60

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

San Jose (SJC)

0
0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Sacramento (SMF)

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day
Santa Ana (SNA)

600

700

700

250
600

500

400

300

200

400

300

200

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

500

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

600
200

150

100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

0
0

400

300

200

50

100

100

100

0
0

500

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

Panel B: Airports Outside California
Chicago O‘Hare (ORD)

Atlanta (ATL)

8000

John F. Kennedy New York (JFK)

6000

3000

5000

2500

5000

4000

3000

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

6000

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

Total Taxi Time of All Planes (Minutes)

7000

4000

3000

2000

2000

1500

1000

2000
500

1000
1000

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time of Day

Notes: Boxplots of taxi time by hour of day 2005-2007. The box spans the 25%-75% range, while the median is
shown as black solid line. Whiskers extend to the minimum and maximum.

A2

Table A1: Summary Statistics: Airports
Average Flight Time (min)
[s.e.]
Average Flight Distance (miles)
[s.e.]
Arrival Delays (min)
[s.e.]
Average Departure Delays (min)
[s.e.]
Average Taxi Time after Landing (min)
[s.e.]
Average Taxi Time to Takeoff (min)
[s.e.]
Daily Number of Arrivals
[s.e.]
Daily Number of Departures
[s.e.]
Daily Taxi Time All Flights (min)
[s.e.]

BUR
77.45
[6.02]
520
[36]
7.49
[7.77]
7.78
[7.42]
2.78
[0.46]
11.61
[1.21]
86.09
[8.63]
86.07
[8.50]
1231
[193]

LAX
125.60
[4.40]
974
[26]
6.48
[7.09]
7.77
[5.19]
8.09
[1.06]
15.00
[1.47]
641.60
[31.58]
641.33
[32.59]
14691
[1852]

Airports in Southern California
LGB
ONT
PSP
SAN
185.16
80.28
79.27
108.55
[58.32]
[4.83]
[12.41]
[4.15]
1256
562
537
815
[181]
[36]
[109]
[26]
3.93
6.79
8.22
6.27
[11.10]
[7.02]
[8.45]
[6.89]
4.70
6.89
6.49
6.64
[8.49]
[5.78]
[8.44]
[5.77]
4.87
4.37
4.34
3.73
[0.91]
[0.37]
[0.51]
[0.40]
14.34
10.63
10.68
13.50
[1.94]
[1.27]
[1.51]
[1.83]
35.00
104.07
34.21
255.02
[3.91]
[11.67]
[7.86]
[17.29]
34.99
104.02
34.18
255.13
[3.89]
[11.74]
[7.88]
[17.48]
673
1553
515
4369
[140]
[266]
[151]
[666]

SBA
56.70
[2.50]
303
[11]
4.27
[7.90]
4.89
[8.13]
4.12
[0.43]
9.75
[1.44]
37.80
[3.75]
37.84
[3.78]
519
[83]

SNA
102.74
[3.22]
748
[18]
4.81
[5.85]
6.12
[5.59]
6.26
[0.82]
13.28
[1.32]
139.76
[13.58]
139.77
[12.53]
2712
[399]

Northern California
Eastern United States
OAK
SFO
SJC
SMF
ATL
ORD
JFK
Average Flight Time (min)
104.54 135.10
95.11
94.22
88.00
101.95 164.18
[s.e.]
[6.38]
[5.08]
[3.74]
[2.71]
[11.14]
[4.28]
[11.56]
Average Flight Distance (miles)
749
1061
678
687
649
719
1212
[s.e.]
[35]
[40]
[21]
[19]
[14]
[30]
[80]
Arrival Delays (min)
5.68
11.40
5.84
7.78
10.73
14.71
15.25
[s.e.]
[7.51]
[14.44]
[6.79]
[7.14]
[16.62]
[24.17] [19.29]
Average Departure Delays (min)
8.50
10.38
6.44
8.27
14.27
17.11
13.81
[s.e.]
[6.33]
[9.81]
[5.77]
[6.08]
[12.98]
[16.72] [16.08]
Average Taxi Time after Landing (min)
5.37
5.64
4.06
4.31
9.80
8.58
9.98
[s.e.]
[0.74]
[0.49]
[0.31]
[0.40]
[1.55]
[1.65]
[2.66]
Average Taxi Time to Takeoff (min)
10.84
16.46
11.64
10.33
19.44
19.73
32.88
[s.e.]
[1.15]
[1.73]
[0.93]
[0.86]
[3.48]
[4.74]
[9.99]
Daily Number of Arrivals
201.03 364.58 167.78 148.47
1140.18 992.96 309.53
[s.e.]
[14.24] [24.04] [13.52] [13.74]
[85.16]
[75.09] [35.32]
Daily Number of Departures
201.01 364.66 167.73 148.43
1146.63 992.92 309.48
[s.e.]
[14.09] [24.46] [13.61] [13.74]
[90.51]
[75.93] [34.51]
Daily Taxi Time All Flights (min)
3235
7979
2614
2166
33081
27170
13059
[s.e.]
[409]
[1061]
[298]
[324]
[5743]
[4735]
[3804]
Notes: Table lists average flight characteristics by airport in 2005-2007. The first six variables in each panel are
characteristics per flight, while the last three variables are average characteristics per day.

A3

Table A2: Summary Statistics: Pollution, Weather, and Population by Distance From Airport

Mean CO (ppb)
Max CO (ppb)
Mean NO2 (ppb)
Max NO2 (ppb)
Mean O3 (ppb)
Max O3 (ppb)
A4

Min Temp (◦ C)
Max Temp (◦ C)
Precipitation (mm)
Wind Speed (m/s)
Population
Population
Population
Population
Population

(1000)
Age [0,5)
Age [5,20)
Age [20,65)
Age [65,∞)

Within [0,10]km of Airport
Within [0,5]km of Airport
Within (5,10]km of Airport
Mean (Std) Min Max Mean (Std) Min Max Mean (Std) Min Max
(1a)
(1b) (1c) (1d)
(2a)
(2b) (2c) (2d)
(3a)
(3b) (3c) (3d)
Panel A: Daily Pollution Data
576
(368)
0
2994
549
(391)
0
2850
587
(357)
0
2994
1235 (841)
0
7487 1165 (857)
0
7487 1263 (833)
0
5791
20.5
(9.7)
0.7
66.4
19.8 (10.1) 0.7
65.0
20.7
(9.5)
1.0
66.4
35.5 (13.5) 2.0 136.0 34.6 (14.1) 2.0 125.9 35.9 (13.2) 2.0 136.0
22.8 (10.4) 1.1
90.0
23.4 (11.6) 1.1
90.0
22.6
(9.8)
1.1
65.7
43.8 (16.3) 2.6 166.0 44.0 (17.1) 2.8 166.0 43.7 (16.0) 2.6 166.0
Panel B: Daily Weather
11.8
(4.3) -4.6 32.6
12.1
(4.5) -4.1 32.6
11.7
(4.2) -4.6 27.7
22.6
(5.5)
6.7
49.1
22.8
(5.9)
7.9
49.1
22.5
(5.4)
6.7
45.5
0.10 (0.44) 0.00 10.70 0.09 (0.42) 0.00 9.97
0.10 (0.45) 0.00 10.70
2.59 (1.33) 0.00 12.73 2.55 (1.34) 0.00 12.73 2.61 (1.32) 0.00 12.73
Panel C: Average Population
36.8 (17.8) 11.1 101.1 32.4 (12.6) 11.1 60.7
38.6 (19.3) 11.4 101.1
2.6
(1.7)
0.4
8.7
2.2
(1.3)
0.4
5.6
2.8
(1.9)
0.5
8.7
7.5
(5.0)
0.8
27.4
6.5
(3.6)
0.8
15.9
7.9
(5.5)
0.9
27.4
22.9 (10.6) 7.1
57.7
20.2
(7.8)
7.2
36.8
24.1 (11.4) 7.1
57.7
3.7
(1.7)
0.3
9.1
3.4
(1.5)
0.3
6.6
3.9
(1.8)
0.5
9.1

Notes: Table lists summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum) of variables in the data set. The first four columns (1a)-(1d) use all
zip codes, while columns (2a)-(2d) only use zip codes within 5km of an airport, and columns (3a)-(3d) use zip codes 5-10km from an airport.

Table A3: Summary Statistics: Sickness Rates by Distance From Airport

Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis
Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis
Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis
Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis
Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis
Asthma
Acute Respiratory
All Respiratory
Heart Disease
Stroke
Bone Fracture
Appendicitis

Within [0,10]km of Airport
Within [0,5]km of Airport
Within (5,10]km of Airport
Mean
(Std)
Min
Max
Mean
(Std)
Min
Max
Mean
(Std)
Min
Max
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
(1d)
(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
(2d)
(3a)
(3b)
(3c)
(3d)
Panel A1: Outpatient Sickness Rates - All Ages
184
(268)
0
4162
170
(265)
0
3185
189
(270)
0
4162
608
(568)
0
6243
594
(586)
0
5843
614
(561)
0
6243
756
(653)
0
7012
748
(680)
0
7012
760
(641)
0
6243
168
(254)
0
3396
172
(267)
0
3396
166
(247)
0
2775
23
(90)
0
1456
22
(92)
0
1454
23
(89)
0
1456
208
(273)
0
2909
208
(282)
0
2909
208
(269)
0
2775
2
(26)
0
903
2
(27)
0
903
2
(26)
0
875
Panel A2: Inpatient Sickness Rates - All Ages
155
(237)
0
2775
153
(241)
0
2547
156
(235)
0
2775
373
(379)
0
4377
372
(387)
0
3396
373
(376)
0
4377
626
(522)
0
5253
635
(538)
0
5224
622
(514)
0
5253
728
(589)
0
7879
747
(612)
0
5214
720
(579)
0
7879
149
(235)
0
4183
151
(242)
0
2709
148
(231)
0
4183
92
(181)
0
2510
95
(189)
0
1829
90
(177)
0
2510
32
(103)
0
1806
32
(105)
0
1806
32
(101)
0
1751
Panel B1: Outpatient Sickness Rates - Ages Below 5
413
(1503)
0
33178
383
(1575)
0
33036
425
(1471)
0
33178
2739
(4262)
0
90992
2777
(4621)
0
90992
2724
(4104)
0
66357
3084
(4567)
0
90992
3113
(4930)
0
90992
3072
(4407)
0
66357
12
(263)
0
21358
11
(255)
0
15165
12
(266)
0
21358
1
(63)
0
10860
1
(74)
0
7651
1
(57)
0
10860
165
(963)
0
33036
160
(1031)
0
33036
166
(933)
0
27785
2
(81)
0
13148
2
(75)
0
7651
2
(84)
0
13148
Panel B2: Inpatient Sickness Rates - Ages Below 5
147
(883)
0
23697
138
(922)
0
23697
150
(866)
0
21358
404
(1485)
0
25562
403
(1572)
0
24155
405
(1447)
0
25562
483
(1635)
0
33036
483
(1734)
0
33036
483
(1592)
0
26810
55
(568)
0
22701
54
(592)
0
22701
56
(557)
0
21358
6
(186)
0
21834
7
(225)
0
21834
5
(168)
0
16589
31
(415)
0
23697
29
(420)
0
23697
31
(412)
0
21358
7
(177)
0
15684
7
(181)
0
12077
7
(175)
0
15684
Panel C1: Outpatient Sickness Rates - Ages 65 and Above
142
(696)
0
20730
127
(675)
0
12358
148
(705)
0
20730
349
(1109)
0
38168
332
(1117)
0
38168
356
(1106)
0
20730
752
(1636)
0
41459
736
(1655)
0
38168
759
(1628)
0
41459
910
(1803)
0
41459
889
(1816)
0
38168
919
(1797)
0
41459
136
(684)
0
20730
129
(686)
0
15108
138
(683)
0
20730
289
(1004)
0
38168
284
(1053)
0
38168
291
(984)
0
20730
1
(46)
0
9705
1
(45)
0
4950
1
(46)
0
9705
Panel C2: Inpatient Sickness Rates - Ages 65 and Above
488
(1342)
0
41459
496
(1426)
0
38168
485
(1305)
0
41459
1579
(2406)
0
41459
1582
(2530)
0
38168
1578
(2353)
0
41459
3143
(3472)
0
76336
3170
(3654)
0
76336
3132
(3395)
0
62189
4696
(4257)
0
76336
4746
(4502)
0
76336
4675
(4152)
0
41543
1018
(1895)
0
41459
1013
(1973)
0
38168
1020
(1861)
0
41459
392
(1151)
0
38168
402
(1183)
0
38168
387
(1138)
0
29721
22
(283)
0
38168
23
(323)
0
38168
21
(265)
0
20730

Notes: Table lists summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum) of variables in the
data set. Admissions are counted if either the primary or one of the 24 other diagnosis codes include the ICD-9
classification for an illness. Sickness rates are measured in cases per 10 million people. The first four columns
(1a)-(1d) use all zip codes, while columns (2a)-(2d) only use zip codes within 5km of an airport, and columns
(3a)-(3d) use zip codes 5-10km from an airport.

A5

Table A4: Pollution Regressed On Uninstrumented Taxi Time

Variable
Taxi Time
Taxi x Distance
Taxi x Angleu
Taxi x Angled
Taxi x Speed
Taxi x Distance x Angleu
Taxi x Distance x Angled
A6

Taxi x Distance x Speed
Taxi x Angled x Speed
Taxi x Angleu x Speed
Taxi x Dist. x Angleu x Speed
Taxi x Dist. x Angled x Speed
Observations
Zip Codes
Days
F-stat(joint sig.)
p-value (joint sig.)

CO Pollution
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
18.69∗∗∗ 26.41∗∗∗ 22.18∗∗∗
(3.10)
(6.65)
(8.19)
-1.10
-0.94
(0.85)
(1.04)
15.01∗
(7.67)
4.40
(6.84)
-2.48
(1.91)
-0.72
(1.07)
0.28
(0.87)
0.58∗∗
(0.25)
2.59
(2.82)
-10.56∗∗∗
(3.82)
1.55∗∗∗
(0.51)
-0.72∗
(0.37)
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
36.05
19.55
5.86
1.21e-08 2.45e-08 1.08e-11

NO2 Pollution
(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
0.23∗∗∗
0.26∗∗
0.31
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.19)
-0.00
-0.01
(0.01)
(0.03)
0.35
(0.23)
0.03
(0.17)
-0.10∗∗
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.01∗
(0.01)
0.11∗
(0.06)
-0.21∗∗
(0.10)
0.03∗∗
(0.01)
-0.01∗
(0.01)
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
11.44
5.77
3.82
.0009012 .003775 5.47e-07

O3 Pollution
(3a)
(3b)
(3c)
-0.02
0.04
0.06
(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.16)
-0.01∗∗
-0.02
(0.00)
(0.02)
-0.52∗∗∗
(0.17)
0.05
(0.11)
0.04
(0.04)
0.05∗∗
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.07
(0.06)
0.26∗∗∗
(0.09)
-0.03∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
179580 179580 179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
0.13
3.46
2.30
.7208
.03389 .001903

Notes: Table regresses zip-code level pollution on congestion (total taxi time in 1000min) at the airport in 2005-2007. Table is analogous to Table 1 except
that taxi time at California airports is not instrumented with taxi time outside California. All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and
maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total
population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A5: Pollution Regressed On Instrumented Taxi Time Using Different Airports Outside California
Variable

A7

(1a)

(1b)

Taxi Time
(s.e.)
[s.e.]
Taxi Time x Distance
(s.e.)
[s.e.]
F-stat (joint sig.)
p-val. (joint sig.)
F-stat (1st stage)

33.03∗∗∗
(5.77)
[5.73]

31.75∗∗∗
(5.53)
[5.50]

32.51
5.4e-08
46.00

32.81
4.8e-08
31.32

(1c)
(1d)
(2a)
(2b)
Panel A1 : CO Pollution
41.16∗∗∗ 42.22∗∗∗ 49.58∗∗∗ 47.16∗∗∗
(4.92)
(4.95)
(10.61)
(10.07)
[4.83]
[4.87]
[10.54]
[10.03]
-2.33∗
-2.17∗
(1.23)
(1.18)
[1.23]
[1.19]
69.64
72.15
17.58
17.87
2.9e-14
1.2e-14
1.2e-07
9.6e-08
42.82
44.96

Taxi Time
(s.e.)
[s.e.]
Taxi Time x Distance
(s.e.)
[s.e.]
F-stat (joint sig.)
p-val. (joint sig.)
F-stat (1st stage)
Busiest Airports
Observations
Zip Codes
Days

0.246∗∗

0.252∗∗

0.480∗∗∗

(0.121)
[0.118]

(0.120)
[0.117]

4.09
.04488
46.00
1
179580
164
1095

4.40
.03753
31.32
2
179580
164
1095

Panel A2: NO2 Pollution
0.498∗∗∗
0.375∗
0.396∗
(0.092)
(0.091)
(0.220)
(0.215)
[0.089]
[0.088]
[0.222]
[0.216]
-0.018
-0.020
(0.025)
(0.025)
[0.026]
[0.025]
27.25
29.72
2.24
2.48
5.4e-07
1.8e-07
.1098
.08678
42.82
44.96
3
4
1
2
179580
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
1095

(2c)

(2d)

56.98∗∗∗
(9.65)
[9.61]
-2.23∗
(1.23)
[1.23]
38.34
2.3e-14

58.91∗∗∗
(9.42)
[9.36]
-2.35∗∗
(1.20)
[1.20]
40.32
5.9e-15

0.613∗∗∗
(0.158)
[0.159]
-0.019
(0.018)
[0.018]
13.93
2.6e-06

0.639∗∗∗
(0.158)
[0.159]
-0.020
(0.018)
[0.018]
15.23
8.6e-07

3
179580
164
1095

4
179580
164
1095

Notes: Table regresses zip-code level pollution measures on congestion (total taxi time in 1000min) at the airport in 2005-2007. Taxi time at the local airport
is instrumented on the taxi time at airports in the Eastern United States. Columns (a), (b), (c), and (d) consecutively add additional airports that are used
as instruments. Standard errors in () are obtained from joint estimation of the IV regression. Standard errors in [] are obtained from manually estimating
the first stage and using the predicted values in the second stage. All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature,
precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code.
Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A6: Taxi Time Regressed on Weather at Airport

Weather
Weather
Weather
Weather
Weather

at
at
at
at
at

LAX
SFO
ATL
ORD
JFK

Taxi Time
at LAX
[1.3e-33]∗∗∗
[0.272]
[3.1e-04]∗∗∗
[0.538]
[0.123]

Taxi Time
at SFO
[0.011]∗∗
[7.2e-21]∗∗∗
[7.1e-05]∗∗∗
[3.8e-04]∗∗∗
[0.013]∗∗

Taxi Time
at ATL
[0.321]
[0.357]
[2.0e-09]∗∗∗
[7.9e-06]∗∗∗
[0.048]∗∗

Taxi Time
at ORD
[0.594]
[0.113]
[0.002]∗∗∗
[2.0e-25]∗∗∗
[0.709]

Taxi Time
at JFK
[0.484]
[0.730]
[0.338]
[0.275]
[5.5e-09]∗∗∗

Notes: Table gives p-values of the joint significance of the eight weather variables (a quadratic in minimum and
maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) used to explain taxi time at an airport. Each entry in the
Table is from a separate regression. The taxi time is from the airport given in the column heading while the weather
variables are from the airport given in the row heading. Regressions that include weather from another airport also
control for local weather measures (not included in joint p-value). P-values are obtained using robust standard errors.
All regressions include temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects). Significance levels are
indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

A8

Table A7: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Taxi Time
Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

Taxi Time

14.03∗∗∗
(2.74)

24.98∗∗∗
(7.88)

Taxi Time

24.27∗∗
(11.31)

85.57
(52.12)

Taxi Time

37.51∗∗∗

65.34∗∗∗

Observations
Zip Codes
Days

(11.45)
179580
164
1095

(16.46)
179580
164
1095

A9

Asthma
(1a)

All
All
Respiratory
Heart
Stroke
(1c)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: All Ages
34.07∗∗∗
19.54∗∗∗
2.44
(10.03)
(5.24)
(1.71)

Bone
Fractures
(4)

Appendicitis
(5)

-1.28
(2.89)

0.27
(0.68)

Panel B: Ages Below 5
118.38∗
6.63∗
0.75
(63.47)
(3.49)
(0.95)

1.88
(5.83)

-0.35
(1.39)

Panel C: Age 65 and Above
101.73∗∗∗
156.77∗∗∗
22.22∗
(25.31)
(36.96)
(12.99)
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095

19.28∗
(9.89)
179580
164
1095

0.78
(1.22)
179580
164
1095

Notes: Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on daily congestion (taxi time in
1000min) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States). All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in
minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted
by the total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A8: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Ages 5-64
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: Ages 5 - 19
Model 1: CO
-0.019
0.037
0.119
0.013
-0.001
-0.135
-0.000
(0.124)
(0.315)
(0.331)
(0.035)
(0.013)
(0.155)
(0.033)
Model 2: CO
-0.018
0.068
0.155
0.011
0.002
-0.083
-0.003
(0.109)
(0.279)
(0.296)
(0.034)
(0.011)
(0.156)
(0.032)
Model 3: CO
-0.006
0.004
-0.025
-0.002
-0.005
-0.056
0.022
(0.090)
(0.202)
(0.225)
(0.029)
(0.012)
(0.085)
(0.024)
Model 1: NO2
-1.4
2.9
9.2
1.0
-0.1
-10.4
-0.0
(9.4)
(24.4)
(26.2)
(2.7)
(1.0)
(12.8)
(2.5)
Model 2: NO2
-1.4
4.7
11.4
0.9
0.1
-7.5
-0.2
(8.7)
(22.6)
(24.4)
(2.6)
(0.9)
(12.8)
(2.5)
Model 3: NO2
-5.2
-7.6
-11.5
-1.3
-0.9
-0.8
1.2
(7.7)
(16.1)
(17.7)
(2.0)
(0.9)
(6.5)
(1.9)
Panel B: Ages 20 - 64
Model 1: CO
0.291∗∗∗
0.311∗∗
0.379∗∗
0.082
0.001
-0.090∗
0.008
(0.080)
(0.132)
(0.184)
(0.096)
(0.031)
(0.053)
(0.022)
Model 2: CO
0.285∗∗∗
0.301∗∗
0.369∗∗
0.070
-0.008
-0.092∗
0.003
(0.076)
(0.127)
(0.179)
(0.093)
(0.030)
(0.053)
(0.021)
Model 3: CO
0.129∗∗
0.167∗
0.191∗
0.058
0.011
-0.067∗
0.005
(0.051)
(0.085)
(0.115)
(0.061)
(0.024)
(0.035)
(0.013)
Model 1: NO2
26.1∗∗∗
27.9∗∗
34.0∗∗
7.4
0.0
-8.1
0.7
(7.8)
(12.0)
(16.2)
(8.2)
(2.8)
(5.6)
(2.0)
Model 2: NO2
25.8∗∗∗
27.3∗∗
33.3∗∗
6.6
-0.6
-8.3
0.4
(7.6)
(11.6)
(15.8)
(8.1)
(2.7)
(5.7)
(1.9)
Model 3: NO2
9.1∗∗
9.0
7.2
5.0
1.6
-2.9
0.6
(3.7)
(7.1)
(9.4)
(4.9)
(1.7)
(2.2)
(1.0)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 3 for the two remaining age groups: 5-19 and 20-64. Table regresses zip-code level
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on daily instrumented
pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented on airport
congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United
States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding an airport,
while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds interactions
with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in
minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday,
and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by
zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by ∗∗∗ 1%, ∗∗ 5%, ∗ 10%.

A10

Table A9: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - LIML
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 2: CO
0.331∗∗∗
0.592∗∗∗
0.813∗∗∗
0.447∗∗∗
0.048
-0.032
0.002
(0.066)
(0.179)
(0.234)
(0.137)
(0.041)
(0.070)
(0.016)
Model 3: CO
0.207∗∗∗
0.425∗∗∗
0.552∗∗∗
0.236∗∗∗
0.020
-0.041
0.003
(0.050)
(0.134)
(0.178)
(0.084)
(0.031)
(0.042)
(0.011)
Model 2: NO2
28.8∗∗∗
51.5∗∗
70.4∗∗∗
39.8∗∗∗
4.5
-2.7
0.3
(7.9)
(20.7)
(26.7)
(13.2)
(3.7)
(6.3)
(1.4)
Model 3: NO2
12.9∗∗∗
18.8
23.4
16.9∗∗
0.6
-0.8
0.5
(4.5)
(12.6)
(17.2)
(7.8)
(2.2)
(3.0)
(0.9)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 2: CO
0.621∗∗
2.096∗
2.848∗
0.125
0.021
0.069
-0.019
(0.252)
(1.202)
(1.477)
(0.082)
(0.025)
(0.141)
(0.038)
Model 3: CO
0.733∗∗∗
2.336∗∗∗
2.683∗∗∗
0.077
0.023
-0.030
-0.009
(0.175)
(0.814)
(1.009)
(0.059)
(0.015)
(0.127)
(0.023)
Model 2: NO2
50.0∗∗
169.0
230.1
10.3
1.7
5.5
-1.5
(24.3)
(113.1)
(142.8)
(7.3)
(2.1)
(11.2)
(3.0)
Model 3: NO2
49.7∗∗∗
127.5∗
145.2
4.8
2.8∗∗
1.6
0.8
(15.6)
(72.7)
(89.3)
(4.9)
(1.3)
(9.9)
(2.1)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 2: CO
0.867∗∗∗
1.511∗∗∗
2.426∗∗∗
3.712∗∗∗
0.504
0.418
0.017
(0.299)
(0.453)
(0.696)
(1.039)
(0.327)
(0.261)
(0.030)
Model 3: CO
0.534∗∗
0.743∗∗
1.506∗∗∗
2.046∗∗∗
0.188
0.184
-0.031
(0.215)
(0.331)
(0.549)
(0.655)
(0.261)
(0.170)
(0.028)
Model 2: NO2
78.4∗∗∗
136.5∗∗∗
211.7∗∗∗
327.0∗∗∗
46.2
40.2∗
1.6
(27.0)
(42.4)
(65.8)
(93.8)
(28.6)
(21.6)
(2.6)
Model 3: NO2
36.2∗∗
37.0
68.5
130.4∗∗
0.9
9.7
-1.3
(14.9)
(25.4)
(43.4)
(51.1)
(16.4)
(12.4)
(1.8)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates models 2 and 3 of Table 3 except that the IV regression is done using limited information
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

maximum likelihood instead of 2-stage least squares. Model 1 is dropped as it is exactly identified, in which case
LIML is identical to twos-stage least squares. Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and
secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each
entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network
delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of
congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the
distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in
Table 1). All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation,
and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the
total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated
by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

A11

Table A10: Sickness Rates (Primary Diagnosis Code) Regressed On Instrumented Pollution
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: CO
0.039
0.260∗
0.463∗∗
0.086
0.006
-0.075
0.008
(0.043)
(0.150)
(0.206)
(0.057)
(0.024)
(0.063)
(0.016)
Model 2: CO
0.050
0.274∗
0.481∗∗
0.080
-0.002
-0.073
0.004
(0.040)
(0.145)
(0.202)
(0.059)
(0.023)
(0.064)
(0.016)
Model 3: CO
0.045
0.206∗
0.343∗∗
0.052
0.010
-0.062∗
0.004
(0.031)
(0.107)
(0.145)
(0.034)
(0.018)
(0.037)
(0.011)
Model 1: NO2
3.4
22.3
39.7∗
7.3
0.5
-6.4
0.7
(3.9)
(14.7)
(21.3)
(5.1)
(2.1)
(6.1)
(1.4)
Model 2: NO2
4.1
23.2
41.0∗
7.0
0.0
-6.3
0.5
(3.8)
(14.5)
(21.2)
(5.3)
(2.0)
(6.2)
(1.4)
Model 3: NO2
0.3
2.3
7.6
6.9∗∗
1.0
-2.2
0.4
(2.2)
(7.6)
(10.7)
(3.2)
(1.3)
(2.8)
(0.9)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: CO
0.393∗∗
2.274∗∗
2.919∗∗
0.005
0.005
-0.017
0.000
(0.173)
(0.950)
(1.253)
(0.040)
(0.013)
(0.145)
(0.033)
Model 2: CO
0.438∗∗∗
2.322∗∗
2.895∗∗
0.002
0.009
0.007
-0.009
(0.162)
(0.921)
(1.238)
(0.039)
(0.015)
(0.137)
(0.035)
Model 3: CO
0.388∗∗∗
1.902∗∗∗
2.226∗∗∗
-0.020
0.003
-0.060
0.000
(0.113)
(0.630)
(0.861)
(0.027)
(0.009)
(0.121)
(0.022)
Model 1: NO2
31.6∗∗
183.0∗∗
234.9∗
0.4
0.4
-1.3
0.0
(15.7)
(90.3)
(122.0)
(3.2)
(1.1)
(11.8)
(2.6)
Model 2: NO2
35.2∗∗
187.1∗∗
233.4∗
0.2
0.7
0.5
-0.7
(15.1)
(86.9)
(120.3)
(3.2)
(1.3)
(11.0)
(2.8)
Model 3: NO2
21.1∗∗∗
92.3∗
110.0
-1.9
0.4
-1.4
1.3
(7.9)
(51.0)
(69.7)
(2.4)
(0.9)
(9.1)
(2.1)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: CO
0.189∗
0.499∗∗
1.347∗∗∗
1.067∗∗∗
0.109
0.274
0.005
(0.105)
(0.250)
(0.420)
(0.402)
(0.197)
(0.246)
(0.029)
Model 2: CO
0.185∗
0.471∗∗
1.345∗∗∗
1.048∗∗∗
0.048
0.222
0.000
(0.103)
(0.235)
(0.405)
(0.400)
(0.197)
(0.241)
(0.028)
Model 3: CO
0.114∗
0.334∗∗
1.017∗∗∗
0.523∗
0.122
0.085
-0.028
(0.064)
(0.145)
(0.301)
(0.285)
(0.147)
(0.155)
(0.023)
Model 1: NO2
15.8∗
41.8∗∗
113.0∗∗∗
89.5∗∗
9.2
23.0
0.5
(8.6)
(20.3)
(39.9)
(36.7)
(16.8)
(19.9)
(2.4)
Model 2: NO2
15.8∗
41.8∗∗
113.2∗∗∗
89.5∗∗
8.8
22.8
0.4
(8.6)
(20.3)
(39.8)
(36.9)
(16.8)
(19.9)
(2.4)
Model 3: NO2
7.7∗
19.3∗
52.2∗∗
53.5∗∗∗
5.2
2.0
-0.9
(4.5)
(10.3)
(22.5)
(20.4)
(9.7)
(11.2)
(1.6)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that sickness counts are based on primary diagnosis codes only. Table
regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts per 10 million people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb)
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that
is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a
uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an
interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds interactions with wind direction and
speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum
temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed
effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day.
Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

A12

Table A11: Sickness Rates of All Ages Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Sensitivity of IV
Acute
All
Heart
Bone
Respiratory Respiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
(1b)
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Baseline: Tax Time at Eastern Airports
Model 1: CO
0.341∗∗∗
0.607∗∗∗
0.828∗∗∗
0.475∗∗∗
0.059
-0.031
(0.072)
(0.179)
(0.230)
(0.148)
(0.042)
(0.069)
Model 2: CO
0.330∗∗∗
0.592∗∗∗
0.812∗∗∗
0.444∗∗∗
0.048
-0.032
(0.066)
(0.179)
(0.234)
(0.137)
(0.040)
(0.070)
Model 3: CO
0.203∗∗∗
0.415∗∗∗
0.534∗∗∗
0.233∗∗∗
0.020
-0.041
(0.049)
(0.130)
(0.172)
(0.082)
(0.031)
(0.042)
Model 1: NO2
29.2∗∗∗
52.0∗∗
70.9∗∗∗
40.7∗∗∗
5.1
-2.7
(8.0)
(20.7)
(26.4)
(13.1)
(3.7)
(6.1)
Model 2: NO2
28.7∗∗∗
51.3∗∗
70.3∗∗∗
39.0∗∗∗
4.4
-2.7
(7.8)
(20.6)
(26.6)
(12.9)
(3.6)
(6.3)
Model 3: NO2
11.9∗∗∗
16.2
19.4
16.0∗∗
0.6
-0.8
(4.0)
(10.5)
(13.7)
(7.2)
(2.2)
(2.9)
Panel B: Tax Time 5am to noon at Eastern Airports
Model 1: CO
0.383∗∗∗
0.568∗∗∗
0.701∗∗∗
0.525∗∗∗
0.045
-0.055
(0.104)
(0.176)
(0.225)
(0.177)
(0.046)
(0.068)
Model 2: CO
0.365∗∗∗
0.541∗∗∗
0.668∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.038
-0.060
(0.096)
(0.173)
(0.223)
(0.166)
(0.045)
(0.070)
Model 3: CO
0.208∗∗∗
0.386∗∗∗
0.462∗∗∗
0.231∗∗∗
0.005
-0.053
(0.055)
(0.119)
(0.154)
(0.084)
(0.030)
(0.038)
Model 1: NO2
31.3∗∗∗
46.5∗∗∗
57.4∗∗∗
42.9∗∗∗
3.7
-4.5
(9.1)
(16.3)
(20.5)
(15.1)
(3.7)
(5.9)
Model 2: NO2
30.4∗∗∗
45.2∗∗∗
55.7∗∗∗
41.6∗∗∗
3.3
-4.8
(8.8)
(16.2)
(20.5)
(14.8)
(3.7)
(6.0)
Model 3: NO2
12.6∗∗∗
15.7
16.1
15.9∗∗
-0.3
-1.9
(4.5)
(9.7)
(12.3)
(7.3)
(2.1)
(2.8)
Panel C: Weather at Eastern Airports
Model 1: CO
0.359∗
1.057∗
1.406∗
0.557∗
0.168∗
0.278∗
(0.195)
(0.622)
(0.807)
(0.339)
(0.098)
(0.168)
Model 2: CO
0.396∗∗
1.122∗
1.538∗
0.514
0.100
0.200
(0.200)
(0.628)
(0.832)
(0.327)
(0.084)
(0.144)
Model 1: NO2
25.4∗
74.8
99.5
39.4
11.9
19.7∗
(15.0)
(50.5)
(64.9)
(24.4)
(7.8)
(11.6)
Model 2: NO2
27.7∗
77.8
107.4∗
34.0
5.4
11.9
(15.6)
(48.6)
(63.7)
(22.0)
(5.5)
(8.4)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table lists the results for all ages from Table 3 in Panel A. Panel B instruments taxi time at
Asthma
(1a)

Appendicitis
(5)
0.007
(0.016)
0.002
(0.016)
0.003
(0.011)
0.6
(1.4)
0.3
(1.4)
0.5
(0.9)
0.014
(0.016)
0.011
(0.016)
0.005
(0.011)
1.1
(1.3)
1.0
(1.3)
0.7
(0.9)
-0.002
(0.029)
-0.023
(0.029)
-0.2
(2.1)
-2.0
(2.1)
179580
164
1095
California

airports on the taxi time between 5am and noon of each day at the three Eastern Airports. Panel C uses the
weather at each of the three Eastern airports as instrument (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature,
precipitation, and wind speed). We do not estimate model 3 in panel C as it would include 3456 instruments. Table
regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on
daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented
on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern
United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding
an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds
interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather controls
(quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year,
month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are
two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

A13

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A12: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Inpatient Data
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: CO
0.048
0.129∗∗
0.133
0.179∗
0.020
0.043
0.008
(0.044)
(0.065)
(0.097)
(0.101)
(0.033)
(0.032)
(0.016)
Model 2: CO
0.043
0.120∗
0.125
0.162
0.012
0.042
0.003
(0.041)
(0.064)
(0.099)
(0.099)
(0.032)
(0.033)
(0.015)
Model 3: CO
0.020
0.069
0.058
0.074
-0.009
-0.002
0.004
(0.028)
(0.044)
(0.073)
(0.058)
(0.026)
(0.023)
(0.011)
Model 1: NO2
4.1
11.1∗
11.4
15.4∗
1.7
3.7
0.7
(3.8)
(6.3)
(8.8)
(8.7)
(2.9)
(2.5)
(1.4)
Model 2: NO2
3.8
10.6∗
11.0
14.4∗
1.2
3.7
0.4
(3.6)
(6.3)
(8.9)
(8.7)
(2.8)
(2.6)
(1.4)
Model 3: NO2
0.8
0.9
-0.9
3.2
-1.4
0.3
0.4
(2.0)
(3.5)
(5.7)
(5.2)
(1.9)
(1.6)
(0.8)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: CO
0.002
0.213
0.058
0.097
0.013
-0.032
-0.014
(0.159)
(0.315)
(0.404)
(0.075)
(0.021)
(0.058)
(0.026)
Model 2: CO
0.010
0.209
0.039
0.063
0.016
-0.014
-0.021
(0.149)
(0.299)
(0.393)
(0.068)
(0.023)
(0.056)
(0.028)
Model 3: CO
0.126
0.331∗
0.172
0.063
0.016
-0.019
-0.004
(0.097)
(0.191)
(0.269)
(0.047)
(0.014)
(0.042)
(0.018)
Model 1: NO2
0.2
17.1
4.7
7.8
1.0
-2.5
-1.1
(12.8)
(27.0)
(33.0)
(6.2)
(1.7)
(4.8)
(2.1)
Model 2: NO2
0.8
16.9
3.2
5.1
1.3
-1.2
-1.7
(12.1)
(25.8)
(32.0)
(5.7)
(1.9)
(4.6)
(2.2)
Model 3: NO2
8.4
16.8
3.9
2.3
2.3∗
0.3
1.0
(7.6)
(14.4)
(19.5)
(4.0)
(1.2)
(2.7)
(1.5)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: CO
0.362
0.865∗∗
0.990∗
2.020∗∗
0.257
0.267
0.017
(0.231)
(0.381)
(0.540)
(0.829)
(0.273)
(0.169)
(0.030)
Model 2: CO
0.313
0.794∗∗
0.982∗
1.935∗∗
0.215
0.235
0.015
(0.204)
(0.376)
(0.552)
(0.820)
(0.277)
(0.167)
(0.029)
Model 3: CO
0.158
0.225
0.486
0.970∗
-0.005
-0.012
-0.035
(0.144)
(0.264)
(0.426)
(0.512)
(0.218)
(0.126)
(0.028)
Model 1: NO2
30.4∗
72.5∗∗
83.0∗
169.4∗∗
21.5
22.4
1.4
(18.2)
(31.8)
(46.3)
(70.5)
(23.6)
(13.7)
(2.5)
Model 2: NO2
30.2∗
72.4∗∗
83.2∗
169.5∗∗
21.3
22.3
1.4
(18.1)
(31.9)
(46.5)
(70.7)
(23.7)
(13.7)
(2.5)
Model 3: NO2
8.9
-1.8
2.9
45.8
-8.1
-0.6
-1.2
(9.8)
(19.5)
(32.8)
(39.1)
(14.5)
(9.5)
(1.8)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that sickness counts only use Inpatient Data (i.e., patients stay overnight).
Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is
instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports
in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes
surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore
adds interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather
controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls
(year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are
two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

A14

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A13: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Outpatient Data
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: CO
0.293∗∗∗
0.478∗∗∗
0.695∗∗∗
0.295∗∗∗
0.039∗∗
-0.074
-0.002
(0.059)
(0.149)
(0.185)
(0.076)
(0.016)
(0.050)
(0.004)
Model 2: CO
0.287∗∗∗
0.472∗∗∗
0.687∗∗∗
0.282∗∗∗
0.036∗∗
-0.074
-0.002
(0.058)
(0.148)
(0.185)
(0.068)
(0.015)
(0.050)
(0.004)
Model 3: CO
0.183∗∗∗
0.346∗∗∗
0.477∗∗∗
0.159∗∗∗
0.029∗∗∗
-0.039
-0.001
(0.044)
(0.111)
(0.140)
(0.049)
(0.011)
(0.028)
(0.003)
Model 1: NO2
25.1∗∗∗
40.9∗∗
59.5∗∗∗
25.3∗∗∗
3.4∗∗
-6.4
-0.2
(6.9)
(16.8)
(21.6)
(6.9)
(1.4)
(4.9)
(0.4)
Model 2: NO2
24.9∗∗∗
40.8∗∗
59.4∗∗∗
24.6∗∗∗
3.2∗∗
-6.4
-0.1
(6.9)
(16.8)
(21.7)
(6.7)
(1.4)
(4.9)
(0.4)
Model 3: NO2
11.0∗∗∗
15.3∗
20.4∗
12.8∗∗∗
2.0∗∗
-1.1
0.1
(3.8)
(8.8)
(11.1)
(4.1)
(0.9)
(2.1)
(0.2)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: CO
0.604∗∗∗
1.924∗
2.897∗∗
0.068∗
0.006
0.079
0.005
(0.205)
(1.048)
(1.223)
(0.036)
(0.006)
(0.129)
(0.018)
Model 2: CO
0.611∗∗∗
1.886∗
2.807∗∗
0.061∗
0.006
0.083
0.002
(0.204)
(1.033)
(1.224)
(0.035)
(0.006)
(0.123)
(0.019)
Model 3: CO
0.602∗∗∗
1.969∗∗∗
2.467∗∗∗
0.014
0.006∗
-0.011
-0.005
(0.166)
(0.698)
(0.827)
(0.024)
(0.004)
(0.111)
(0.011)
Model 1: NO2
48.6∗∗
154.8
233.2∗
5.5∗
0.5
6.3
0.4
(20.0)
(97.6)
(119.5)
(3.1)
(0.5)
(10.3)
(1.5)
Model 2: NO2
49.2∗∗
152.1
226.4∗
4.9∗
0.4
6.7
0.2
(20.0)
(95.9)
(119.0)
(3.0)
(0.4)
(9.8)
(1.6)
Model 3: NO2
39.5∗∗∗
100.1∗
128.2∗
2.3
0.5∗
1.3
-0.2
(12.2)
(57.5)
(69.7)
(1.8)
(0.3)
(8.7)
(1.0)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: CO
0.568∗∗∗
0.756∗∗∗
1.534∗∗∗
1.868∗∗∗
0.294∗∗
0.211
0.002
(0.161)
(0.246)
(0.357)
(0.444)
(0.117)
(0.156)
(0.004)
Model 2: CO
0.550∗∗∗
0.711∗∗∗
1.442∗∗∗
1.765∗∗∗
0.288∗∗
0.182
0.003
(0.146)
(0.229)
(0.332)
(0.402)
(0.119)
(0.153)
(0.005)
Model 3: CO
0.371∗∗∗
0.509∗∗∗
1.010∗∗∗
1.041∗∗∗
0.192∗∗
0.194∗∗
0.004
(0.111)
(0.157)
(0.234)
(0.310)
(0.091)
(0.094)
(0.004)
Model 1: NO2
47.7∗∗∗
63.4∗∗∗
128.6∗∗∗
156.6∗∗∗
24.7∗∗
17.7
0.2
(13.8)
(21.9)
(34.7)
(37.1)
(10.2)
(13.0)
(0.3)
Model 2: NO2
47.7∗∗∗
63.2∗∗∗
128.3∗∗∗
156.5∗∗∗
24.7∗∗
17.6
0.2
(13.8)
(21.9)
(34.7)
(37.1)
(10.3)
(13.0)
(0.3)
Model 3: NO2
26.3∗∗∗
37.2∗∗∗
63.3∗∗∗
77.0∗∗∗
9.1
10.1
-0.1
(7.8)
(10.8)
(18.4)
(21.7)
(6.3)
(8.4)
(0.3)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that sickness counts only use Outpatient Data (i.e., patients do not stay
overnight). Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

10 million people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression.
Pollution is instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three
major airports in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at
all zip codes surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model
3 furthermore adds interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include
weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal
controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code.
Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

A15

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A14: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution (Season)
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Months
Model 1: CO
0.341∗∗∗
0.607∗∗∗
0.828∗∗∗
0.475∗∗∗
0.059
-0.031
0.007
(0.072)
(0.179)
(0.230)
(0.148)
(0.042)
(0.069)
(0.016)
Model 2: CO
0.330∗∗∗
0.592∗∗∗
0.812∗∗∗
0.444∗∗∗
0.048
-0.032
0.002
(0.066)
(0.179)
(0.234)
(0.137)
(0.040)
(0.070)
(0.016)
Model 3: CO
0.203∗∗∗
0.415∗∗∗
0.534∗∗∗
0.233∗∗∗
0.020
-0.041
0.003
(0.049)
(0.130)
(0.172)
(0.082)
(0.031)
(0.042)
(0.011)
Model 1: NO2
29.2∗∗∗
52.0∗∗
70.9∗∗∗
40.7∗∗∗
5.1
-2.7
0.6
(8.0)
(20.7)
(26.4)
(13.1)
(3.7)
(6.1)
(1.4)
Model 2: NO2
28.7∗∗∗
51.3∗∗
70.3∗∗∗
39.0∗∗∗
4.4
-2.7
0.3
(7.8)
(20.6)
(26.6)
(12.9)
(3.6)
(6.3)
(1.4)
Model 3: NO2
11.9∗∗∗
16.2
19.4
16.0∗∗
0.6
-0.8
0.5
(4.0)
(10.5)
(13.7)
(7.2)
(2.2)
(2.9)
(0.9)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Panel B: Summer (April-September)
Model 1: CO
0.295∗∗
0.086
0.328
0.431∗∗
0.100
0.062
0.002
(0.123)
(0.244)
(0.301)
(0.180)
(0.073)
(0.131)
(0.030)
Model 2: CO
0.297∗∗
0.087
0.338
0.416∗∗
0.095
0.068
0.000
(0.120)
(0.245)
(0.305)
(0.181)
(0.073)
(0.133)
(0.030)
Model 3: CO
0.255∗∗
0.002
0.156
0.304∗
0.098
0.059
0.009
(0.105)
(0.201)
(0.262)
(0.169)
(0.067)
(0.109)
(0.030)
Model 1: NO2
30.4∗
8.8
33.7
44.4∗
10.3
6.4
0.2
(15.9)
(25.9)
(34.7)
(23.2)
(8.1)
(13.0)
(3.1)
Model 2: NO2
29.5∗∗
8.8
35.8
36.0∗
8.0
8.4
-0.3
(14.3)
(25.1)
(34.9)
(21.4)
(7.4)
(13.2)
(2.8)
Model 3: NO2
5.3
-13.0
-12.0
7.2
4.6
5.1
1.0
(4.8)
(8.4)
(10.7)
(9.6)
(3.4)
(4.8)
(1.5)
Observations
90036
90036
90036
90036
90036
90036
90036
Panel C: Winter (October-March)
Model 1: CO
0.377∗∗∗
0.694∗∗∗
0.802∗∗∗
0.554∗∗∗
0.038
-0.152∗∗
0.022
(0.113)
(0.195)
(0.239)
(0.213)
(0.046)
(0.063)
(0.020)
Model 2: CO
0.346∗∗∗
0.650∗∗∗
0.745∗∗∗
0.522∗∗∗
0.027
-0.151∗∗
0.016
(0.102)
(0.184)
(0.226)
(0.188)
(0.045)
(0.063)
(0.020)
Model 3: CO
0.156∗∗∗
0.258∗∗
0.249∗
0.215∗∗
-0.011
-0.087∗∗
0.005
(0.060)
(0.106)
(0.147)
(0.100)
(0.035)
(0.038)
(0.012)
Model 1: NO2
34.2∗∗∗
62.9∗∗∗
72.6∗∗∗
50.1∗∗
3.4
-13.7∗∗
2.0
(12.3)
(23.1)
(26.8)
(22.3)
(4.2)
(6.8)
(1.9)
Model 2: NO2
35.1∗∗∗
64.0∗∗∗
74.2∗∗∗
50.9∗∗
3.9
-13.5∗∗
2.3
(12.6)
(23.2)
(26.9)
(22.9)
(4.2)
(6.7)
(2.0)
Model 3: NO2
14.2∗∗
21.5∗
20.1
23.6∗∗
1.4
-6.7∗
1.4
(6.5)
(11.4)
(13.5)
(11.8)
(3.0)
(3.6)
(1.1)
Observations
89544
89544
89544
89544
89544
89544
89544
Notes: Table lists the results for all ages from Table 3 in Panel A and then splits the sample into the summer
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

months (Panel B) and winter months (Panel C). Table regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary
and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007.
Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by
network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact
of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the
distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in
Table 1). All regressions include weather controls (quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation,
and wind speed) and temporal controls (year, month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the
total population in a zip code. Errors are two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated
by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

A16

Table A15: Sickness Rates of All Ages Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Lagged Pollution

Model 1: Pollution in t
Model 1: Pollution in t-1
Model 1: Pollution in t-2
Model 1: Pollution in t-3
Model 1: Cumulative Effect
Model 2: Pollution in t
Model 2: Pollution in t-1
Model 2: Pollution in t-2

A17

Model 2: Pollution in t-3
Model 2: Cumulative Effect
Model 3: Pollution in t
Model 3: Pollution in t-1
Model 3: Pollution in t-2
Model 3: Pollution in t-3
Model 3: Cumulative Effect
Observations
Zip Codes
Days

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
0.214∗
0.365
0.522
0.477∗∗∗
(0.112)
(0.294)
(0.369)
(0.152)
-0.024
-0.058
-0.029
-0.064
(0.146)
(0.280)
(0.324)
(0.200)
0.134
0.119
0.066
0.045
(0.159)
(0.277)
(0.373)
(0.278)
0.040
0.239
0.346
0.010
(0.103)
(0.203)
(0.269)
(0.155)
0.364∗∗∗
0.665∗∗∗
0.905∗∗∗
0.467∗∗∗
(0.076)
(0.179)
(0.233)
(0.159)
0.213∗∗
0.354
0.516
0.457∗∗∗
(0.108)
(0.292)
(0.368)
(0.147)
-0.024
-0.053
-0.028
-0.068
(0.146)
(0.282)
(0.324)
(0.200)
0.113
0.096
0.047
0.034
(0.154)
(0.276)
(0.369)
(0.271)
0.056
0.253
0.355
0.011
(0.100)
(0.203)
(0.269)
(0.152)
0.357∗∗∗
0.650∗∗∗
0.890∗∗∗
0.434∗∗∗
(0.069)
(0.179)
(0.238)
(0.149)
0.184∗∗∗
0.339
0.444
0.232∗∗
(0.070)
(0.209)
(0.277)
(0.104)
-0.063
-0.005
0.002
-0.009
(0.058)
(0.161)
(0.201)
(0.113)
0.084
0.033
0.038
-0.009
(0.062)
(0.122)
(0.159)
(0.090)
-0.001
0.126
0.118
0.045
(0.042)
(0.097)
(0.126)
(0.058)
0.203∗∗∗
0.492∗∗∗
0.601∗∗∗
0.258∗∗∗
(0.054)
(0.121)
(0.162)
(0.068)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
31.8∗∗∗
57.5∗∗
79.2∗∗
47.7∗∗∗
(10.7)
(27.8)
(35.8)
(15.3)
-13.7∗
-26.4
-35.0
-20.3∗
(7.8)
(17.3)
(22.0)
(11.1)
22.0∗∗
37.4∗
48.4∗
26.6∗
(9.6)
(21.2)
(27.5)
(15.6)
-8.9
-11.3
-14.7
-13.8
(6.7)
(14.3)
(18.7)
(9.5)
31.2∗∗∗
57.2∗∗∗
77.9∗∗∗
40.1∗∗∗
(9.0)
(21.9)
(28.0)
(14.9)
31.1∗∗∗
56.6∗∗
78.6∗∗
45.8∗∗∗
(10.2)
(27.5)
(35.6)
(15.0)
-13.9∗
-26.1
-35.2
-19.6∗
(7.5)
(17.1)
(21.8)
(10.8)
21.3∗∗
36.3∗
47.8∗
25.3∗
(9.2)
(21.1)
(27.6)
(15.3)
-8.3
-10.5
-14.3
-12.8
(6.3)
(14.0)
(18.6)
(9.2)
30.1∗∗∗
56.2∗∗∗
76.8∗∗∗
38.7∗∗∗
(8.7)
(21.7)
(28.0)
(14.5)
7.7∗∗
11.3
15.2
16.7∗∗∗
(3.9)
(10.2)
(14.0)
(5.7)
-2.5
-1.6
-2.1
-3.6
(1.7)
(4.7)
(6.1)
(2.9)
2.6
1.7
2.2
1.6
(1.6)
(2.8)
(3.8)
(2.0)
-1.1
0.5
-0.7
-0.6
(1.0)
(2.6)
(3.4)
(1.5)
6.7∗∗
11.8∗
14.6
14.1∗∗∗
(3.2)
(6.8)
(9.3)
(4.2)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Notes: Table replicates the results for all ages in Table 3 except that three lags of the instrumented pollution levels are included. The first four columns give the
results using CO pollution, the last four using NO2 . Each column in each panel presents the coefficients from one regression as well as the cumulative effect (sum
of all four coefficients). Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A16: Sickness Rates of Ages Below 5 Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Lagged Pollution

Model 1: Pollution in t
Model 1: Pollution in t-1
Model 1: Pollution in t-2
Model 1: Pollution in t-3
Model 1: Cumulative Effect
Model 2: Pollution in t
Model 2: Pollution in t-1
Model 2: Pollution in t-2

A18

Model 2: Pollution in t-3
Model 2: Cumulative Effect
Model 3: Pollution in t
Model 3: Pollution in t-1
Model 3: Pollution in t-2
Model 3: Pollution in t-3
Model 3: Cumulative Effect
Observations
Zip Codes
Days

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
-0.067
0.627
0.901
0.059
(0.469)
(1.626)
(1.880)
(0.156)
0.758
-0.483
0.126
0.214
(0.637)
(1.664)
(1.809)
(0.241)
-0.637
0.364
0.150
-0.204
(0.759)
(1.834)
(1.981)
(0.272)
0.666
2.113∗
2.345∗
0.097
(0.435)
(1.251)
(1.289)
(0.173)
0.719∗∗
2.620∗∗
3.522∗∗
0.165∗
(0.284)
(1.231)
(1.463)
(0.092)
-0.032
0.461
0.691
0.018
(0.450)
(1.604)
(1.861)
(0.143)
0.722
-0.396
0.169
0.219
(0.629)
(1.628)
(1.770)
(0.232)
-0.650
0.169
-0.068
-0.240
(0.745)
(1.808)
(1.938)
(0.265)
0.702
2.236∗
2.479∗
0.109
(0.427)
(1.246)
(1.277)
(0.172)
0.742∗∗∗
2.471∗∗
3.271∗∗
0.106
(0.270)
(1.196)
(1.453)
(0.084)
0.703∗∗∗
1.845∗
1.931
0.061
(0.252)
(1.067)
(1.264)
(0.067)
-0.257
-0.099
0.171
0.011
(0.246)
(0.934)
(1.000)
(0.079)
0.271
0.014
-0.291
-0.048
(0.255)
(0.713)
(0.796)
(0.087)
-0.066
0.554
0.776
0.032
(0.190)
(0.480)
(0.537)
(0.056)
0.651∗∗∗
2.314∗∗∗
2.588∗∗∗
0.056
(0.204)
(0.676)
(0.879)
(0.050)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
43.4
184.1
249.6
12.5
(33.5)
(144.9)
(179.1)
(9.4)
-2.4
-102.2
-113.7
0.1
(24.6)
(81.5)
(97.5)
(7.5)
9.5
130.8
160.7
0.8
(31.6)
(106.6)
(125.1)
(10.1)
8.7
0.1
-10.5
0.2
(19.6)
(69.3)
(78.9)
(7.3)
59.3∗∗
212.7∗
286.0∗
13.7∗
(26.5)
(119.6)
(147.9)
(7.8)
44.7
168.8
226.2
7.3
(31.9)
(140.5)
(175.8)
(8.3)
-3.7
-90.9
-99.5
2.8
(23.4)
(79.3)
(94.7)
(6.8)
9.5
113.6
137.6
-3.5
(30.0)
(104.1)
(122.8)
(9.2)
9.7
13.0
6.2
2.8
(18.5)
(67.9)
(77.4)
(6.8)
60.2∗∗
204.5∗
270.5∗
9.5
(25.6)
(114.9)
(144.6)
(7.3)
25.7
44.1
49.6
4.8
(16.6)
(51.3)
(64.6)
(4.1)
-7.3
-0.7
4.0
-0.8
(7.9)
(25.8)
(29.6)
(2.1)
7.3
0.7
-5.7
-0.3
(6.4)
(15.6)
(18.6)
(2.1)
-3.9
3.8
7.1
-0.0
(5.0)
(13.1)
(15.3)
(1.4)
21.8∗
47.9
55.0
3.7
(12.6)
(36.1)
(45.9)
(3.5)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Notes: Table replicates the results for children below 5 in Table A15. The first four columns give the results using CO pollution, the last four using NO2 . Each
column in each panel presents the coefficients from one regression as well as the cumulative effect (sum of all four coefficients). Significance levels are indicated
by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A17: Sickness Rates of Ages 65 And Above Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Lagged Pollution

Model 1: Pollution in t
Model 1: Pollution in t-1
Model 1: Pollution in t-2
Model 1: Pollution in t-3
Model 1: Cumulative Effect
Model 2: Pollution in t
Model 2: Pollution in t-1
Model 2: Pollution in t-2

A19

Model 2: Pollution in t-3
Model 2: Cumulative Effect
Model 3: Pollution in t
Model 3: Pollution in t-1
Model 3: Pollution in t-2
Model 3: Pollution in t-3
Model 3: Cumulative Effect
Observations
Zip Codes
Days

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
0.566
0.752
1.789∗
4.217∗∗∗
(0.463)
(0.813)
(1.001)
(1.350)
-0.083
0.948
1.078
-1.249
(0.570)
(1.070)
(1.518)
(1.538)
0.727
-0.500
-1.492
0.921
(0.558)
(1.049)
(1.664)
(1.757)
-0.245
0.447
1.165
-0.043
(0.417)
(0.723)
(1.260)
(1.267)
0.964∗∗∗
1.647∗∗∗
2.540∗∗∗
3.846∗∗∗
(0.367)
(0.523)
(0.789)
(1.164)
0.517
0.600
1.684∗
4.033∗∗∗
(0.438)
(0.811)
(0.997)
(1.314)
-0.086
0.986
0.963
-1.329
(0.540)
(1.052)
(1.429)
(1.530)
0.636
-0.593
-1.423
0.839
(0.533)
(1.026)
(1.569)
(1.684)
-0.182
0.485
1.156
0.038
(0.407)
(0.705)
(1.171)
(1.225)
0.886∗∗∗
1.478∗∗∗
2.380∗∗∗
3.581∗∗∗
(0.316)
(0.483)
(0.768)
(1.092)
0.448∗∗
0.524
1.565∗∗
2.090∗∗∗
(0.222)
(0.434)
(0.642)
(0.786)
-0.264
0.043
-0.378
-0.592
(0.233)
(0.418)
(0.552)
(0.859)
0.154
-0.066
0.152
0.284
(0.252)
(0.337)
(0.480)
(0.700)
-0.122
0.048
-0.080
0.149
(0.165)
(0.222)
(0.364)
(0.441)
0.216
0.549∗
1.260∗∗∗
1.931∗∗∗
(0.158)
(0.303)
(0.474)
(0.538)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
80.9∗∗
133.8∗∗
228.0∗∗∗
389.7∗∗∗
(33.0)
(55.0)
(78.5)
(117.0)
-32.2
-29.8
-66.1
-179.6∗∗
(24.6)
(43.1)
(58.1)
(88.6)
62.4∗∗
56.6
77.4
221.3∗∗
(28.8)
(49.5)
(71.0)
(108.1)
-31.5
-21.6
-24.2
-111.8
(21.1)
(35.4)
(54.3)
(75.0)
79.6∗∗∗
139.0∗∗∗
215.1∗∗∗
319.5∗∗∗
(29.6)
(43.6)
(71.2)
(105.7)
78.9∗∗
133.6∗∗
226.7∗∗∗
386.4∗∗∗
(32.6)
(55.7)
(78.7)
(116.7)
-32.4
-25.5
-65.1
-177.7∗∗
(23.7)
(43.6)
(57.8)
(88.8)
60.1∗∗
52.5
77.9
217.9∗∗
(27.9)
(49.6)
(70.2)
(107.7)
-28.1
-14.3
-19.3
-101.5
(20.1)
(35.7)
(52.7)
(74.5)
78.5∗∗∗
146.2∗∗∗
220.3∗∗∗
325.1∗∗∗
(28.9)
(43.5)
(69.3)
(103.2)
12.3
28.5
77.3∗∗
139.6∗∗∗
(11.7)
(22.6)
(35.8)
(41.3)
-6.5
-7.7
-23.0
-42.3∗
(6.1)
(12.0)
(15.7)
(21.8)
3.1
2.6
9.6
20.3
(5.6)
(7.9)
(11.7)
(15.5)
-4.7
-4.8
-11.2
-8.1
(3.6)
(5.2)
(8.6)
(11.1)
4.1
18.6
52.7∗
109.6∗∗∗
(9.1)
(16.4)
(27.8)
(31.9)
179088
179088
179088
179088
164
164
164
164
1092
1092
1092
1092

Notes: Table replicates the results for individuals 65 and above in Table A15. The first four columns give the results using CO pollution, the last four using
NO2 . Each column in each panel presents the coefficients from one regression as well as the cumulative effect (sum of all four coefficients). Significance levels are
indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A18: Sickness Rates of All Ages Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Control Function

Model 1: Pollution
Model 1: Control Function
Model 1: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Model 2: Pollution
Model 2: Control Function

A20

Model 2: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Model 3: Pollution
Model 3: Control Function
Model 3: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Observations
Zip Codes
Days
Notes: Table replicates the results for

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
0.340∗∗∗
0.608∗∗∗
0.830∗∗∗
0.476∗∗∗
29.2∗∗∗
52.1∗∗∗
71.0∗∗∗
40.6∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.157)
(0.212)
(0.151)
(7.6)
(18.7)
(24.5)
(12.6)
-0.340∗∗∗
-0.556∗∗∗
-0.743∗∗∗
-0.439∗∗∗
-29.5∗∗∗
-51.9∗∗∗
-69.3∗∗∗
-38.6∗∗∗
(0.071)
(0.164)
(0.219)
(0.149)
(7.7)
(19.0)
(24.9)
(12.6)
9.149
-6.113
-13.807
-11.028
10695.7
32374.3
22526.0
-35707.8
(9.293)
(22.543)
(28.348)
(14.543)
(12653.1)
(30657.3)
(37422.2)
(22188.4)
0.329∗∗∗
0.593∗∗∗
0.814∗∗∗
0.445∗∗∗
28.7∗∗∗
51.4∗∗∗
70.4∗∗∗
38.9∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.161)
(0.223)
(0.137)
(7.2)
(18.3)
(24.5)
(13.1)
-0.329∗∗∗
-0.541∗∗∗
-0.728∗∗∗
-0.408∗∗∗
-29.0∗∗∗
-51.2∗∗∗
-68.7∗∗∗
-36.9∗∗∗
(0.064)
(0.168)
(0.230)
(0.134)
(7.3)
(18.6)
(24.8)
(13.1)
9.214
-6.089
-13.719
-11.113
10769.4
32419.7
22647.8
-35754.3
(9.273)
(22.532)
(28.337)
(14.542)
(12659.0)
(30621.5)
(37349.5)
(22182.0)
0.185∗∗∗
0.404∗∗∗
0.533∗∗∗
0.228∗∗
7.5∗∗
3.5
3.8
14.9∗∗
(0.054)
(0.148)
(0.198)
(0.092)
(3.6)
(9.6)
(11.6)
(6.7)
-0.185∗∗∗
-0.353∗∗
-0.445∗∗
-0.187∗∗
-7.7∗∗
-3.2
-1.9
-12.9∗
(0.055)
(0.154)
(0.204)
(0.090)
(3.7)
(9.8)
(11.7)
(6.7)
9.287
-6.247
-14.757
-13.375
10313.0
29841.6
17999.1
-36813.4∗
(9.221)
(22.727)
(28.572)
(14.723)
(12649.9)
(30694.0)
(37449.1)
(22304.9)
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
all ages in Table 3 except that we use a control function approach, i.e., we run a first stage of pollution on taxi time

and then include (i) pollution, (ii) the residual from the first stage, and (iii) the interaction of the pollution level with the residual from the first stage in the
regression. Further differences are that standard errors are obtained from 100 clustered bootstrap draws (drawing entire zip code histories with replacement).
The first four columns give the results using CO pollution, the last four using NO2 . Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A19: Sickness Rates of Ages Below 5 Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Control Function

Model 1: Pollution
Model 1: Control Function
Model 1: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Model 2: Pollution

A21

Model 2: Control Function
Model 2: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Model 3: Pollution
Model 3: Control Function
Model 3: Pollution x Control (x1000)
Observations
Zip Codes
Days
Notes: Table replicates Table A18 for
Significance levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
0.601∗∗
2.124∗
2.955∗∗
0.166∗
48.9∗
172.8
238.9∗
13.3
(0.266)
(1.095)
(1.341)
(0.098)
(26.7)
(110.3)
(139.0)
(8.5)
-0.626∗∗
-2.073∗
-2.774∗∗
-0.168∗
-50.0∗
-176.0
-240.6∗
-13.4
(0.286)
(1.141)
(1.382)
(0.098)
(27.0)
(111.9)
(140.3)
(8.4)
37.241
99.598
6.823
-0.690
52596.3
364189.6
406538.0∗
195.2
(40.199)
(145.695)
(156.744)
(12.439)
(62125.3)
(224206.6)
(243813.4)
(28533.9)
0.616∗∗
2.083∗
2.845∗∗
0.124
50.1∗∗
169.7
230.4∗
10.1
(0.248)
(1.091)
(1.353)
(0.082)
(24.8)
(104.2)
(134.8)
(8.3)
-0.641∗∗
-2.032∗
-2.665∗
-0.126
-51.2∗∗
-172.9∗
-232.1∗
-10.2
(0.264)
(1.132)
(1.391)
(0.083)
(25.0)
(105.1)
(135.4)
(8.2)
37.823
100.314
7.673
-0.693
52806.2
364899.8
407302.2∗
68.6
(40.151)
(145.634)
(156.794)
(12.484)
(62135.8)
(223666.7)
(243048.9)
(28497.3)
0.523∗∗∗
2.308∗∗∗
2.689∗∗∗
0.117
13.7
48.6
57.7
7.2
(0.176)
(0.787)
(0.989)
(0.072)
(11.3)
(59.9)
(67.1)
(4.6)
-0.551∗∗∗
-2.277∗∗∗
-2.527∗∗
-0.120∗
-14.8
-51.8
-59.2
-7.3
(0.192)
(0.818)
(1.014)
(0.072)
(11.3)
(60.2)
(66.7)
(4.5)
38.957
110.248
16.752
0.038
51801.2
365592.6
402159.4∗
801.8
(40.245)
(147.259)
(158.785)
(12.472)
(62064.9)
(224605.0)
(243733.4)
(28531.5)
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
children below 5 years of age. The first four columns give the results using CO pollution, the last four using NO2 .

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A20: Sickness Rates of Ages 65 and Above Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Control Function

A22

Effect of CO Pollution on Health Outcomes
Effect of NO2 Pollution on Health Outcomes
Acute
All
Heart
Acute
All
Heart
Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems Asthma Respiratory Respiratory Problems
Model 1: Pollution
0.925∗∗∗
1.620∗∗∗
2.528∗∗∗
3.901∗∗∗
78.2∗∗∗
135.8∗∗∗
211.1∗∗∗
325.7∗∗∗
(0.329)
(0.502)
(0.857)
(1.195)
(22.4)
(40.3)
(69.5)
(90.6)
Model 1: Control Function
-0.949∗∗∗
-1.547∗∗∗
-2.265∗∗∗
-3.589∗∗∗
-81.2∗∗∗
-134.1∗∗∗
-198.8∗∗∗
-312.3∗∗∗
(0.333)
(0.511)
(0.862)
(1.182)
(22.9)
(40.5)
(70.3)
(91.3)
Model 1: Pollution x Control (x1000)
36.269
6.249
-34.312
-97.182
66900.0
-33536.1
-221583.9
-196153.4
(35.614)
(58.718)
(109.087)
(105.297)
(60818.0)
(107220.7)
(152489.4)
(207379.5)
Model 2: Pollution
0.859∗∗∗
1.505∗∗∗
2.428∗∗∗
3.714∗∗∗
78.0∗∗∗
135.6∗∗∗
211.1∗∗∗
325.6∗∗∗
(0.269)
(0.455)
(0.814)
(1.118)
(22.5)
(41.3)
(72.2)
(94.2)
Model 2: Control Function
-0.882∗∗∗
-1.431∗∗∗
-2.166∗∗∗
-3.401∗∗∗
-81.0∗∗∗
-133.8∗∗∗
-198.8∗∗∗
-312.2∗∗∗
(0.272)
(0.463)
(0.821)
(1.104)
(23.0)
(41.5)
(72.9)
(94.8)
Model 2: Pollution x Control (x1000)
36.329
6.383
-33.540
-96.790
66914.3
-33536.2
-221530.6
-196109.1
(35.613)
(58.739)
(109.250)
(105.375)
(60832.1)
(107110.9)
(152287.7)
(207257.4)
Model 3: Pollution
0.502∗∗
0.615
1.285∗
1.711∗∗
39.2∗∗∗
38.2
63.5
125.9∗∗
(0.224)
(0.420)
(0.661)
(0.850)
(13.4)
(26.4)
(40.9)
(56.5)
Model 3: Control Function
-0.523∗∗
-0.530
-1.006
-1.371
-42.2∗∗∗
-36.1
-50.7
-112.0∗∗
(0.221)
(0.421)
(0.661)
(0.838)
(13.7)
(26.5)
(41.1)
(55.8)
Model 3: Pollution x Control (x1000)
34.310
-2.879
-47.267
-119.427
65801.1
-43647.9
-236513.7
-210573.8
(34.987)
(57.730)
(108.553)
(104.004)
(61126.1)
(106797.8)
(152713.3)
(206901.1)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table A18 for individuals 65 and above. The first four columns give the results using CO pollution, the last four using NO2 . Significance
levels are indicated by

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A21: Sickness Rates Regressed On Instrumented Pollution - Unweighted Regressions
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: CO
0.341∗∗∗
0.560∗∗∗
0.726∗∗∗
0.416∗∗∗
0.059
-0.087
-0.008
(0.068)
(0.166)
(0.224)
(0.143)
(0.053)
(0.060)
(0.018)
Model 2: CO
0.328∗∗∗
0.552∗∗∗
0.727∗∗∗
0.396∗∗∗
0.047
-0.090
-0.013
(0.062)
(0.166)
(0.227)
(0.133)
(0.052)
(0.061)
(0.018)
Model 3: CO
0.243∗∗∗
0.457∗∗∗
0.543∗∗∗
0.225∗∗∗
0.019
-0.079∗∗
-0.011
(0.048)
(0.133)
(0.179)
(0.085)
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.015)
Model 1: NO2
30.9∗∗∗
50.7∗∗∗
65.8∗∗∗
37.7∗∗∗
5.4
-7.9
-0.7
(7.1)
(18.4)
(24.6)
(13.0)
(4.7)
(5.9)
(1.6)
Model 2: NO2
30.8∗∗∗
50.7∗∗∗
65.9∗∗∗
37.6∗∗∗
5.2
-8.0
-0.8
(7.1)
(18.5)
(24.8)
(13.0)
(4.7)
(5.9)
(1.6)
Model 3: NO2
10.2∗∗∗
7.7
4.4
12.0∗∗
1.0
-1.8
0.4
(3.1)
(9.5)
(11.8)
(6.1)
(2.2)
(2.5)
(1.0)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: CO
0.601∗∗
1.179
1.672
0.226∗∗
0.030
-0.032
-0.007
(0.276)
(1.152)
(1.332)
(0.097)
(0.028)
(0.165)
(0.028)
Model 2: CO
0.638∗∗
1.263
1.757
0.197∗∗
0.033
-0.001
-0.011
(0.280)
(1.135)
(1.321)
(0.091)
(0.030)
(0.172)
(0.030)
Model 3: CO
0.765∗∗∗
2.100∗∗
2.215∗∗
0.147∗
0.032
-0.075
-0.003
(0.235)
(0.877)
(1.043)
(0.075)
(0.024)
(0.167)
(0.021)
Model 1: NO2
54.5∗∗
106.8
151.5
20.4∗∗
2.7
-2.9
-0.6
(27.8)
(110.7)
(130.0)
(9.2)
(2.6)
(14.8)
(2.5)
Model 2: NO2
55.0∗∗
108.2
153.0
20.2∗∗
2.7
-2.5
-0.7
(27.9)
(110.7)
(130.1)
(9.2)
(2.6)
(14.9)
(2.6)
Model 3: NO2
24.3∗∗
6.2
-2.6
5.0
1.7
2.5
2.6∗
(11.9)
(50.3)
(58.6)
(5.4)
(1.1)
(9.7)
(1.6)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: CO
0.932∗∗∗
1.465∗∗∗
2.216∗∗∗
3.073∗∗∗
0.419
0.306
0.026
(0.298)
(0.507)
(0.703)
(0.945)
(0.356)
(0.261)
(0.036)
Model 2: CO
0.885∗∗∗
1.394∗∗∗
2.169∗∗∗
2.980∗∗∗
0.371
0.262
0.023
(0.274)
(0.486)
(0.707)
(0.919)
(0.365)
(0.262)
(0.037)
Model 3: CO
0.624∗∗∗
0.776∗∗
1.431∗∗∗
1.749∗∗∗
0.137
0.098
-0.031
(0.213)
(0.377)
(0.549)
(0.642)
(0.300)
(0.191)
(0.036)
Model 1: NO2
84.5∗∗∗
132.8∗∗∗
200.8∗∗∗
278.4∗∗∗
38.0
27.7
2.4
(24.4)
(45.0)
(70.0)
(89.2)
(32.3)
(23.3)
(3.3)
Model 2: NO2
84.2∗∗∗
132.3∗∗∗
200.8∗∗∗
278.2∗∗∗
37.5
27.3
2.3
(24.3)
(45.0)
(70.4)
(89.5)
(32.4)
(23.4)
(3.3)
Model 3: NO2
33.2∗∗∗
19.3
33.6
80.5∗
-6.2
-1.0
-0.7
(12.7)
(24.3)
(35.0)
(45.9)
(17.9)
(11.3)
(2.0)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that regression are unweighted and only clustered at the zip code. Table
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

regresses zip-code level sickness rates (counts for primary and secondary diagnosis codes per 10 million people) on
daily instrumented pollution levels (ppb) in 2005-2007. Each entry is a separate regression. Pollution is instrumented
on airport congestion (taxi time) that is caused by network delays (taxi time at three major airports in the Eastern
United States). Model 1 assumes a uniform impact of congestion on pollution levels at all zip codes surrounding
an airport, while model 2 adds an interaction with the distance to the airport, and model 3 furthermore adds
interactions with wind direction and speed (columns (a)-(c) in Table 1). All regressions include weather controls
(quadratic in minimum and maximum temperature, precipitation, and wind speed) and temporal controls (year,
month, weekday, and holiday fixed effects) and are weighted by the total population in a zip code. Errors are
two-way clustered by zip code and day. Significance levels are indicated by

A23

∗∗∗

1%,

∗∗

5%,

∗

10%.

Table A22: Sickness Counts Regressed On Instrumented NO2 Pollution - Poisson Model
All
Heart
Bone
AppenRespiratory Problems
Stroke
Fractures
dicitis
(1c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: All Ages
Model 1: NO2
82.6∗∗∗
58.6∗∗∗
56.4∗∗∗
47.8∗∗∗
24.9
-10.6
32.4
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
Model 2: NO2
82.9∗∗∗
58.5∗∗∗
56.4∗∗∗
47.8∗∗∗
24.5
-10.6
31.0
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
Model 3: NO2
35.3∗∗∗
23.6∗∗∗
19.9∗∗∗
19.7∗∗∗
0.6
3.4
32.5
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
Panel B: Ages Below 5
Model 1: NO2
116.5∗∗∗
23.3
29.6
200.6
314.6
17.9
-76.8
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.3)
Model 2: NO2
116.6∗∗∗
22.9
29.3
198.3
315.7
18.7
-84.1
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.3)
Model 3: NO2
60.3∗∗∗
28.1∗∗∗
28.8∗∗∗
111.4
337.6∗∗
10.9
30.0
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
(0.2)
(0.0)
(0.2)
Panel C: Ages 65 and Older
Model 1: NO2
127.9∗∗∗
75.4∗∗∗
60.1∗∗∗
61.8∗∗∗
37.2
60.8∗∗
115.9
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
Model 2: NO2
127.7∗∗∗
75.3∗∗∗
60.2∗∗∗
61.9∗∗∗
37.1
60.2∗
115.5
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
Model 3: NO2
65.9∗∗∗
25.8∗
21.1∗∗
25.4∗∗
3.7
26.0
-99.8
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
Observations
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
179580
Zip Codes
164
164
164
164
164
164
164
Days
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
1095
Notes: Table replicates Table 7 for NO2 pollution. Significance levels are indicated by ∗∗∗ 1%, ∗∗ 5%, ∗ 10%.
Asthma
(1a)

Acute
Respiratory
(1b)

A24

