NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO CASH TRANSFERS IMPROVE BIRTH OUTCOMES? EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED
VITAL STATISTICS, SOCIAL SECURITY AND PROGRAM DATA
Verónica Amarante
Marco Manacorda
Edward Miguel
Andrea Vigorito
Working Paper 17690
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17690

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011


We are grateful to Uruguay’s former Minister and Deputy Minister of Social Development, Marina
Arismendi and Ana Olivera, respectively, and their staff, in particular Marianela Bertoni, Juan Pablo
Labat and Lauro Meléndez at the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, for their invaluable support, and
to other officials at the Ministry of Social Development, the Ministry of Public Health, and the Social
Security Administration (Banco de Prevision Social) for their help with the data and for clarifying
many features of program design and implementation. An incomplete earlier working paper version
was produced under the aegis of the IADB research project “Improving Early Childhood Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean”. We are grateful to the IADB for financial support and to the
research project coordinators, Jere Behrman, Cesar Bouillon, Julian Cristia, Florencia Lopez Boo and
Hugo Ñopo, for comments on the earlier version. We are also grateful to Janet Currie, Josh Graff-Zivin,
and Mindy Marks and to seminar participants at U.C. Riverside, U.C. San Diego, Universidad Autònoma
de Barcelona, the NBER Summer Institute 2011, Princeton, LSE, the IADB, the World Bank, Universidad
de la Plata, Essex, and LACEA 2010 for useful comments. Mariana Zerpa and Guillermo Alves provided
excellent research assistance. The opinions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Government of Uruguay, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the IADB. All errors
remain our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Verónica Amarante, Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Cash Transfers Improve Birth Outcomes? Evidence from Matched Vital Statistics, Social
Security and Program Data
Verónica Amarante, Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito
NBER Working Paper No. 17690
December 2011
JEL No. I38,J13,J88
ABSTRACT
There is limited empirical evidence on whether unrestricted cash social assistance to poor pregnant
women improves children’s birth outcomes. Using program administrative micro-data matched to
longitudinal vital statistics on the universe of births in Uruguay, we estimate that participation in a
generous cash transfer program led to a sizeable 15% reduction in the incidence of low birthweight.
Improvements in mother nutrition and a fall in labor supply, out-of-wedlock births and mother’s smoking
all appear to contribute to the effect. We conclude that, by improving child health, unrestricted unconditional
cash transfers may help break the cycle of intergenerational poverty.

Verónica Amarante
Universidad de la Republica
Joaquin Requena 1375
Montevideo 11200
Uruguay
vero@iecon.ccee.edu.uy
Marco Manacorda
Department of Economics
Queen Mary University of London
CEP - London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
m.manacorda@lse.ac.uk

Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
Andrea Vigorito
Instituto de Economia
Facultad de Ciencias Economicas
Universidad de la Republica
Joaquin Requena 1375
Montevideo 11200
Uruguay
andrea@iecon.ccee.edu.uy

1. Introduction
This paper estimates the impact of in utero exposure to a cash social assistance program – the
Uruguayan Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia Social (PANES), which provided
households with a sizeable transfer – on children’s early health outcomes. An unusually rich
dataset of matched micro-data from vital statistics, hospital data, social security and program
administrative records allows us to exploit multiple sources of quasi-experimental variation in the
receipt of cash assistance, allowing us to estimate the causal effect of additional disposable income
during pregnancy on birth outcomes and investigate a range of underlying mechanisms.
Children of poor parents are at disproportionate risk of ending up in poverty themselves
(Black and Devereux 2011). This is partly due to their poorer health, which both affects the
acquisition of other dimensions of human capital (e.g., education, Miguel and Kremer 2004) and
can directly impact economic outcomes later in life (Case, Fertig and Paxson 2005). There is
limited empirical evidence, though, on whether cash social assistance to poor parents improves
children’s health outcomes, potentially helping to break the cycle of intergenerational poverty. In
their comprehensive discussion of the determinants and consequences of early human capital
development, Almond and Currie (2011a, p. 1368) conclude that “research has shown little
evidence of positive effects of cash welfare on children”.
Improvements in household financial resources brought about by social assistance could, in
principle, increase children’s wellbeing through better nutrition, sanitation and health care (Case
2000, Case, Lubotsky and Paxson 2005). The reduction in maternal stress brought about by welfare
transfers might also positively impact birth outcomes. However, there is evidence that offsetting
behavioral responses might also be at work, including negative parental labor supply responses to
welfare transfers (Moffitt 2000, Hoynes 1996, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011). Even in the
absence of such responses, poor parents might favor current consumption over investments in their
children’s human capital due to credit constrains (Card 1999), myopia or self-control problems
(Banerjee and Mullainathan 2010), imperfect altruism (Udry 2004), intergenerational commitment
problems (Baland and Robinson 2000), or limited information about the technology of, or returns
to, their children’s human capital accumulation (Jensen 2010). Social assistance could even
potentially increase the consumption of certain “bads” (such as cigarettes, drugs or alcohol) that
negatively affect birth outcomes, could lead to family break-up (Moffitt 1998) with possibly
detrimental effects on child wellbeing, or could increase the fraction of children born in poor health
1

by creating incentives for women with limited financial resources to boost their fertility (Currie and
Moretti 2008).1 Ultimately, whether cash transfers to poor parents affect children’s early health
outcomes positively, negatively or at all remains an open empirical question.
In this paper, we focus on the effect of cash social assistance on a measure of early life
health: low birthweight, defined by the World Health Organization as weight under 2,500 g (or
roughly 5.5 pounds). This is a widely available measure, and a considerable body of research
shows that it is a major determinant of both short-run child health outcomes and long-run life
outcomes, including height, IQ, earnings, education and even birthweight of the next generation
(see Almond, Chay and Lee 2005, Almond and Currie 2011a, Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach
2011b, Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004, Black, Devereux and Salvanes 2007, Currie and Hyson
1999, Currie and Moretti 2007, Currie 2009, Royer 2009).
Early interventions, and in particular those in utero, have the potential to be particularly
cost-effective since their benefits extend over a longer time span, due to potential
complementarities with other inputs, and to the possibility that they permanently affect the path of
individual physiological and cognitive development (Heckman 1995, 2000). Targeting children in
utero, though, is particularly challenging as pregnancy status is often ascertained with some delay,
and this might be particularly true for women whose children are most likely to benefit from early
interventions. With a few notable exceptions, evidence on the effect of in utero exposure to cash
transfers on birth outcomes, and in particular on low birthweight, is limited. This paucity of
credible evidence results from the lack of both adequate micro-data as well as convincing sources
of exogenous variation in cash transfers. Another important open question is the stage of pregnancy
at which such programs are most effective. The main channels of impact are also poorly
understood, largely due to data limitations.
This paper contributes to filling these gaps. Beyond specifically focusing on a social
assistance program whose major component was an unrestricted cash transfer, the contribution of
this paper lies in the data set that we have assembled and the opportunities that it offers for
econometric identification of both program effects and mechanisms. We link multiple sources of
1

Indeed, it is precisely because of some of these undesirable effects that in-kind (e.g., food stamps) or conditional
social assistance is often advocated. As long as households would consume less of the good if provided with an
equivalent monetary transfer, and the goods and services transferred are not fungible for money, in-kind transfers have
the potential to increase the consumption of such goods (see Currie and Gahvari 2008). The conditionalities attached to
many recent cash transfer programs in less developed countries are similarly meant to induce specific desirable
behaviors among participants (Fiszbein and Schady 2009).

2

administrative micro-data to build a monthly longitudinal data set spanning five years of individual
women’s pregnancy and birth outcomes, clinical histories and circumstances surrounding the
pregnancy and birth; PANES program transfers; and socio-demographic characteristics and labor
market participation, earnings, and the receipt of other public benefits for the universe of female
program applicants of child-bearing age (approximately 157,000 women).
To our knowledge, this paper represents the first effort to link the universe of vital statistics
data to social assistance transfer program data at the level of individual beneficiaries. In contrast,
most existing studies (reviewed below) use either survey data with self-reported birth outcomes,
program receipt and income, or they rely on geographically aggregated program enrollment and
vital statistics data. Because of the aggregate nature of the data used in many related studies,
estimation of program effects typically relies on differential variation in program eligibility across
geographic areas and/or demographic groups. An obvious drawback of such approaches is the
difficulty of ruling out unobserved trends in outcomes that are correlated with eligibility, possibly
inducing omitted variable bias. In contrast, our data allows us to exploit variation in individual
eligibility induced by exact program assignment rules and timing, leading to arguably more
credible identification of causal program effects.
Indeed, as a way to corroborate our findings, we obtain similar program impact estimates
with multiple quasi-experimental econometric identification strategies. We first employ a
difference-in-differences (DD) estimator that compares the incidence of low birthweight among the
infants of program beneficiaries versus non-beneficiaries born before and after the PANES program
was launched. Because households entered the program at different points in time during its
national roll-out, this allows us to control for any aggregate trends in low birthweight. We then
exploit alternative sources of variation in certain subsamples. We first restrict the analysis to
mothers with more than one child and include maternal fixed effects (FE). This approach relies on
comparison of siblings who were and were not exposed to the program in utero, allowing us to
control for any unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity across mothers. Second, since PANES
program eligibility depended on a discontinuous function of a baseline predicted income score, we
next use an additional source of variation in the data. We restrict attention to children whose
households are in the neighborhood of the program eligibility threshold and compare “barely
eligible” to “barely ineligible” children using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.

3

To preview our results, we find that the program led to a roughly 15 percent decrease in the
incidence of low birthweight (1.5 percentage points on baseline incidence of 10 percent), using all
three econometric approaches. In two years, the program completely closed the pre-existing gap in
low birthweight incidence between the (worse off) mothers eligible for the cash transfer program
and the (slightly better off) mothers who applied but did not qualify. The analysis shows that
providing unrestricted cash social assistance to the poor improved early child health outcomes.
The dataset also allows us to investigate a larger set of potential mechanisms than most
other studies, including household labor supply, family structure, residential mobility, effects that
operate through risky behaviors (e.g., smoking), health care utilization, insurance coverage, other
government benefits, as well as fertility.2 These other channels could theoretically either offset or
reinforce the positive main effect of the program on infants’ wellbeing due to improved maternal
nutrition and health brought about by increased financial resources during pregnancy.
We document behavioral changes along a variety of hypothesized margins that together
contribute to the overall reduction in low birthweight. First, we find that PANES beneficiary
mothers show weight gains during pregnancy, consistent with the view that improved maternal
nutrition is a key channel. We also find a sharp reduction in smoking during pregnancy in the
treated group, which (speculatively) may be due to a reduction in stress brought about by the cash
assistance, and a sizeable reduction in out-of-wedlock births, which may also affect health
outcomes. Consistent with standard theory in labor economics, the PANES transfer led to a
reduction in maternal labor supply, though effects are modest in magnitude, and despite these
offsetting effects the program still led to sizeable increases in net household income. The reduction
in maternal labor supply could also have benefited child health by reducing mothers’ stress levels.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on the determinants of
birthweight and in particular on the effect of government transfer programs. Section 3 provides
institutional information about the program. Section 4 describes the data, section 5 discusses
multiple identification strategies and presents the main results, while section 6 investigates the
mechanisms. Section 7 presents a speculative rate of return analysis that suggests program transfers
may be an attractive policy option, and the final section concludes.

2

Using data on the universe of births also allows us to circumvent problems of endogenous reporting that might arise
in other settings, while administrative information on both program receipt and child birthweight should reduce the
measurement error that is thought to affect survey self-reports, reducing bias and increasing statistical precision.

4

2. Determinants of low birthweight and the role of income assistance
A large body of research points to maternal nutrition and both physical and mental health during
pregnancy as major determinants of birth outcomes in general, and low birthweight in particular.
Poor health, smoking and undernutrition are all known to lead to intrauterine growth retardation, as
well as possibly to shorter gestational length and prematurity (itself mechanically linked to low
birthweight).3 There is also a consensus that prenatal care, especially in the first trimester of
pregnancy, is effective at improving infant health through the opportunities it provides for early
diagnosis and for education about best practices (Kramer 1987, Alexander and Korenbrot 1995).
Recent attempts to link birthweight to household socioeconomic status and to economic
characteristics that correlate with the above risk factors have generated mixed results. There is
some evidence that higher maternal education improves infant outcomes, arguably due to its effect
on maternal behavior (for example, by reducing smoking), increased earnings, improved marriage
outcomes and reduced fertility (Currie and Moretti 2003), although other work does not
corroborate this result (McCrary and Royer 2010). There is limited evidence that mother’s
disposable income during pregnancy affects low birthweight, though an effect may be present for
specific subpopulations, such as mothers who were themselves born with low birthweight (Conley
and Bennett 2000, 2001). Aggregate macroeconomic conditions also appear to matter, with
different studies again reaching divergent conclusions, with some pointing to increases in low
birthweight during economic downturns and others to decreases (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004,
Bozzoli and Quintan-Domeque 2010). Interpretation of these aggregate results is complicated by
compositional differences in the types of mothers giving birth throughout the business cycle.
More direct - and relevant (for this paper) - evidence comes from studies that analyze
government welfare and transfer programs. A body of evidence, largely from the United States,
focuses on programs that aim to improve the nutritional and health status of pregnant women.

3

Maternal under-nutrition, anemia, malaria, infections, pre-eclampsia and cigarette smoking are typically identified as
important risk factors for intrauterine growth retardation (Kramer 1987). Almond and Mazumder (2011) show that
maternal fasting has negative effects on birthweight. Other risk factors include environmental pollution (Currie and
Schmieder 2009, Currie, Neidell and Schmieder 2009, Currie and Walker 2010), exposure to violence (Camacho 2008,
Aizer, Stroud and Buka 2009, Aizer 2010) and mother’s labor supply, possibly due to stress (del Bono et al 2008).
Kramer (1987) identifies genital tract infections, employment and physical activity, smoking behavior, stress, general
morbidity and prenatal care as the main predictors of gestational length. Recent evidence also points to the role of
mother’s nutrition (Murtaugh and Weingart 1995), anthropometric measures, genetic factors, and stress (Clausson et al.
2008, Ruiz et al. 2008, Buss et al. 2009).

5

Bitler and Currie (2004) and Hoynes, Page and Huff Stevens (2010) study the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), which provides food
and nutritional advice to pregnant women, and both find that the program reduces the incidence of
low birthweight infants. One channel through which WIC appears to have an effect is via greater
prenatal care utilization. Additional evidence comes from the conditional cash transfers literature.
Barber and Gertler (2008) evaluate the impact of the Mexican Progresa/Oportunidades program on
birthweight, exploiting the random initial assignment of the program across communities. In a
sample of 840 women, they find a very large reduction in the incidence of low birthweight as selfreported in a survey (of 4.5 percentage points on a base of around 10%) which they attribute to
better quality prenatal care and the adoption of better health behaviors.
Other studies focus on in-kind social assistance, with mixed results. Almond, Hoynes and
Schanzenbach (2011a, 2011b) find sizeable and precisely estimated effects of the U.S. Food
Stamps program on low birthweight, as well as on health outcomes later in life. They estimate that
exposure to the program in the last trimester of pregnancy reduces the incidence of low birthweight
by 7 to 8 percent for whites and 5 to 12 percent for blacks. Yet Currie and Moretti (2008) do not
find this pattern for California, a fact that they explain with increased fertility (due to the program)
among a subset of mothers more likely to have worse birth outcomes.
Evidence on the effects of unrestricted and unconditional cash transfers is scant, and one
should not automatically presume that cash and in-kind transfers have the same effect on birth
outcomes. Currie and Cole (1993) focus on participation in the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) program. Despite the fact that AFDC mothers were also more likely to receive
Medicaid, Food Stamps, and housing subsidies, all of which could improve birth outcomes (e.g.,
see Currie and Gruber 1996 on Medicaid), they find no significant effects on low birthweight.
One of the most convincing and relevant papers is Hoynes, Miller and Simon (2011), who
focus on the effect of the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) on birthweight. Exploiting the
differential effects of subsequent EITC reforms on children born at different parities, as well as
changes in state-level program generosity over time, they use a difference-in-differences approach
with grouped data to show that the EITC program led to a sizeable average reduction of 7% in the
incidence of low birthweight, with particularly pronounced effects among less educated and ethnic
minority mothers. Although the authors discuss various channels that affect birth outcomes, their
data does not allow them to directly investigate these channels empirically.
6

3. The PANES Program
The Uruguayan Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia Social (PANES) was a temporary
social assistance program targeted to the poorest 10 percent of households in the country, and was
implemented between April 2005 and December 2007.4 The program was devised by the centerleft government that took office in March 2005 following the severe economic crisis of the early
2000’s, when per capita income fell by more than 10 percent, unemployment reached its highest
level in twenty years, and the poverty rate doubled. The crisis laid bare the weakness of the
existing social safety net, which was largely focused on transfers to the elderly population, a fact
reflected in marked differences in poverty incidence by age, with nearly 50 percent of children
aged zero to five living in poverty compared to just 8 percent for the over sixty-five population
(UNDP 2008). Despite a rapid deterioration in living standards during the crisis, Uruguay remained
a good performer in terms of infant mortality, birthweight and health care utilization relative to
other Latin American countries, with levels not dissimilar to the U.S. (appendix Table A1).5

3.1 Eligibility
Following an initial program application phase (which mainly occurred in April and May 2005),
households were visited by Ministry of Social Development personnel and administered a detailed
baseline survey. Because of the large volume of applications and the time and resources needed to
administer the survey, these household visits took place throughout most of the second half of
2005, sometimes with considerable delay from the date of original application (see Figure 1 and
especially appendix Figure A1).
The baseline survey allowed program officials to calculate a predicted income score based
on a linear combination of a large number of household socioeconomic characteristics, which in
turn determined program eligibility.6 Households with a predicted income score below a

4

The program was replaced in January 2008 by a new system of family allowances accompanied by a health care
reform and an overhaul of the tax system, together called the Plan de Equidad.
5
Uruguay is a middle-income country with annual GDP per capita of US$13,189 (in 2006 PPP), and is home to 3.3
million individuals. This highly urbanized country experienced rapid economic growth in the early 20 th century, and
was among the first countries in the region with universal primary education and a generous old-age pension system.
Uruguay is still among the most developed Latin American countries according to the UNDP Human Development
Index, with relatively high life expectancy and schooling indicators.
6
The eligibility score, which was devised by researchers at the University of the Republic in Montevideo (Amarante et
al., 2005), including some of the authors of this paper, was based on a probit model of the likelihood of being below a

7

predetermined level were assigned to the program. The program was not specifically targeted to
pregnant women, nor was child-bearing an eligibility criterion.
Of the 188,671 applicant households (with around 700,000 individuals), roughly 102,000
households eventually became program beneficiaries, or approximately 10 percent of all
Uruguayan households (and 14 percent of the national population). The total cost of the program
was approximately US$250 million, i.e. US$2,500 per beneficiary household, and on an annual
basis, program spending was equivalent to 0.4% of GDP.

3.2 Program components
PANES eligible households were entitled to a monthly cash transfer whose value was originally set
at US$56 (UY$1,360 at the 2005 exchange rate, equivalent to approximately US$103 in PPP
terms) independent of household size, and was later adjusted for inflation. This amounted to
approximately 50 percent of average pre-program household self-reported income for recipient
households (and nearly 100% of pre-treatment income among those households who gave birth
during the period of analysis). The majority of households first received the cash transfer during
2005, although due to the delays in administering the baseline survey, there was considerable
variation in the timing of first payments even among the earliest applicants (appendix Figure A1).
Successful applicants were entitled to the transfer for the duration of the program until
December 2007, provided their formal sector earnings remained below a predetermined level
(approximately US$50 per month per capita).7 Although continued receipt of transfers was also, in
principle, conditioned on regular health checks for pregnant women and children (plus children’s

critical per capita income level, using a highly saturated function of household variables, including: the presence of
children from different age groups, public employees in the household, pensioners in the household, average years of
education among individuals over age 18 and its square, indicators for age of the household head, residential
overcrowding, whether the household was renting its residence, toilet facilities and an index of durables ownership.
The model was estimated using the 2003 and 2004 National Household Survey (Encuesta Continua de Hogares). The
resulting coefficient estimates were used to predict a poverty score for each applicant household using PANES baseline
survey data. Neither the enumerators nor households were ever informed about the exact variables that entered into the
score, the weights attached to them, or the program eligibility threshold, easing concerns about its manipulation (which
we further assess in appendix Figure A2). The eligibility thresholds were allowed to vary across five national regions.
Although official government documents used a predicted poverty score, in this paper we use a predicted income score,
which is simply -1 times the poverty score. This simplifies presentation, as households with higher values of the score
are better off, but it obviously makes no difference to the analysis.
7
The social security administration performed periodic checks on PANES beneficiaries’ records to enforce this
condition. As shown below, there is evidence that a non-trivial fraction of beneficiaries stopped receiving the transfer
before the end of the program, typically because of their failure to satisfy this income conditionality.

8

school attendance),8 due to limited resources and coordination across government ministries, these
conditionalities were never enforced, an issue later publicly acknowledged by the government and
confirmed by the fact that very few beneficiary households knew of their existence: in a 2007
survey, only 12% of beneficiary households were aware of the official prenatal visit condition.
A second, smaller program component only launched midway through the program, in
mid-2006, was an electronic food card, whose monthly value varied approximately between US$13
and US$30 (UY$300 to 800), or between one fourth and one half of the value of the income
transfer, depending on household size and demographic structure.9

4. Data
The analysis brings together several individual-level data sets (Figure 1). PANES administrative
records provide information from the initial survey visit for both successful (“eligible”) and
unsuccessful (“ineligible”) applicants on baseline household demographic characteristics, housing
conditions, income, labor market participation, schooling, durable asset ownership, and the
household’s exact predicted income score used to determine eligibility. These data also contain the
unique national identification number (cédula) for all household members, and allow us to identify
individuals belonging to the same household. For successful applicants, the data also provide
monthly information on the amount of the cash transfer and, if applicable, the food card.
PANES program data are matched to vital statistics natality micro-data that provide
information on all registered live births in the country (Instituto Nacional de Estadística 2009).
Vital statistics come from certificates completed by physicians at the time of birth and they contain
information on birthweight, some parental characteristics, and the reproductive history of the
mother. At 98 percent, the fraction of registered births in Uruguay is the highest in Latin America
(UNICEF 2005, Cabella and Peri 2005, Duryea, Olgiati and Stone 2006). Vital statistics data are
available every year from 2003 to 2007, and so also include the period before the start of PANES in
April 2005 (Figure 1). These data also include some information on prenatal care utilization that is
collected as the pregnancy progresses. The confidential version of the data used in this paper
includes the mother’s cédula, and this allows us to link the vital statistics to program data.

8

In particular, for pregnant women, the program officially prescribed monthly prenatal visits (and weekly visits from
week 36 on) and three mandatory ultrasounds.
9
See Appendix B for a detailed discussion of these and other aspects of the program.

9

Additional information on maternal health during pregnancy is provided by the SIP (in
Spanish, Sistema de Informático Perinatal, or prenatal information system) database, devised by
the Latin American Centre of Perinatology and collected in multiple Latin American countries
(Fescina et al. 2007). This dataset collects detailed pregnancy information, including mothers’
weight at the time of both the first and the last pre-natal visits, as well as smoking in the first
trimester of pregnancy. One drawback of the data, though, is that there is incomplete coverage
during the program period (full national coverage was only achieved in 2009), although during the
2003 to 2007 period its coverage increases. As a result, SIP data are available for a subset of
roughly one third of the births in our main analysis. Fortunately, we show below that coverage
rates are identical among PANES eligible and ineligible mothers.
Finally, we also link program and vital statistics data to Social Security records for all
members of PANES applicant households, again using the unique cédula individual number. These
data contain monthly information on income from formal employment (for both employees and the
self-employed, excluding the non-civilian labor force, i.e., the police and military), and all public
transfers, including pensions, unemployment benefits, disability and a small pre-existing child
allowance (that had negligible transfers relative to PANES). Social security data are available
starting in March 2004, and thus are available for more than a year before the launch of PANES.
The data are summarized in Table 1. The top three panels report averages for the period
January 2003 to March 2005 before the start of the program, while the bottom panel reports
information for April 2005 to December 2007. We report means for three groups of mothers: those
who applied and eventually became eligible for PANES (column 1), those who unsuccessfully
applied to the program (column 2), and those who did not apply (column 3). Roughly speaking,
these three groups correspond to increasingly higher levels of income and socio-economic status.
The data show a clear gradient in birthweight across groups (rows 1 and 2). While among
PANES eligible households the fraction of births below 2,500 grams is 10.2 percent, among nonapplicant households it is 8.4 percent, and for ineligible applicants it lies in between, at 9.3 percent.
There is also clear evidence that PANES eligible mothers had the fewest prenatal visits at baseline
(6.5 versus 7.5 for ineligible applicants and 8.3 for non-applicant mothers, row 4, although the
average number of visits is still considerable) and that they had their first prenatal visit later in the
pregnancy (in week 17 compared to week 16 for ineligible applicants and week 14 for nonapplicants, row 5). PANES eligible mothers were also more likely to live in areas with lower
10

average birthweight (row 9), more likely to give birth in public health centers (row 11) and less
likely to be privately insured (row 12).10
There is additional information on mothers’ reproductive history and parents’ sociodemographic characteristics, and as expected PANES eligibility status is negatively correlated with
mother’s education (row 13) and positively correlated with the number of previous pregnancies
(row 14). PANES eligible mothers are less likely to be married to the father’s child (row 15).11
PANES fathers also display lower levels of education (row 17).
Unsurprisingly, PANES eligible mothers are also less likely to report being employed at the
time of birth (row 18), have lower formal sector earnings during pregnancy (row 19) and belong to
households with less labor and non-labor income (rows 20 to 22). Total household monthly income
(including earnings and benefits) in the first two trimesters of pregnancy is UY$1,113 (in April
2005 UY$) for PANES mothers, and around twice as much for ineligible applicant mothers.
Although this figure is likely to underestimate true income levels among these households, as it
excludes earnings from informal employment and any non-governmental transfers, it remains very
low at approximately US$45 per mother (or US$90 PPP adjusted).
In the pre-program period, the SIP data show that a large share of mothers smoked, at 31%
in the PANES eligible group and 25% among ineligibles (row 26), and as expected, these mothers
displayed lower average body weight (rows 27 and 28). The finding of more low-weight mothers in
poor households is consistent with some under-nutrition among these mothers at baseline.
Panel D in Table 2 reports data for the program period. It is notable that the gap in low
birthweight between eligible and ineligible applicant mothers completely closes during the
program period, with the two applicant groups of mothers (columns 1 and 2) showing a low
birthweight incidence of 9.1 percent (row 29). Around 97 percent of PANES eligible mothers
received the program at some point during the period (row 30), although only around 55 percent
received it sometime in the first two trimesters of pregnancy (row 31). This gap is due both to the
staggered incorporation of households into the program (discussed above) as well as to some
beneficiaries losing eligibility due to their eventual failure to meet the income means test. Although
a small share of ineligible mothers also eventually received transfers, initial eligibility remains a

10

A universal, de facto free, health system of relatively poor quality coexists in Uruguay with mandated employerprovided private insurance. In practice, nearly all formal workers have access to private insurance.
11
This fraction is quite high in Uruguay as a whole, with nearly 60% of children born out-of-wedlock.

11

strong predictor of program receipt.12 The gap in total household income between eligible and
ineligible households closes substantially (row 39), largely due to the transfer (row 32).

5. Econometric analysis
The discussion of the program implies that for a child to have been exposed to the PANES program
in utero two conditions must be satisfied: first, the mother must be a program beneficiary, and
second, the child must have been born after the mother entered the program. This immediately
suggests a difference-in-differences (DD) strategy for estimating program effects that relies on a
comparison of birth outcomes for children born to program eligible versus ineligible mothers, both
before and after program expansion. The basic DD regression model is then:
(1)

Yimt =  + DD Timt +  1(Nm < 0) + dt + dp + uimt

where t is the month of conception of child i of mother m, Y is the birth outcome variable (e.g., low
birthweight), and T is an indicator for treatment. The terms dt and dp are, respectively, indicators
for month of conception and month at which the household received its first PANES cash payment.
An indicator for the household predicted income score, Nm, falling in the eligible range (Nm < 0) is
also included in all specifications.
Equation 1 exploits the staggered entry into the program across mothers (appendix Figure
A1), and compares the difference in birthweight between a treated child (one born after her mother
was enrolled in the program) and an untreated child to the difference between two children with
identical dates of conception who were either both treated or both untreated. By conditioning on
date of conception indicators, equation 1 controls for general trends in the incidence of low
birthweight due to, for instance, secular improvement in health care quality or living standards,
while conditioning on dp controls for the possibility that birthweight outcomes might vary across
mothers with different program entry timing, perhaps due to the selective nature of application
timing or in the length of application processing.

12

A related paper (Manacorda et al. 2011) presents evidence of nearly perfect compliance with the initial eligibility
rules. The program enrollment data used in that paper, though, only refer to the period through March 2006, plus it
excludes homeless households, who were always incorporated into PANES regardless of their predicted income score.
In the present paper, we find evidence of slightly laxer enforcement of the eligibility rules in the final six months of the
program (namely, the second semester of 2007).

12

As our data contain detailed information on weeks of gestation, we are able to measure
program exposure in terms of time elapsed since conception as opposed to the time before birth (as
is customary in most existing studies). This subtle distinction is important and allows us to
circumvent the potential selection bias that would arise if program participation affected gestational
length, where the latter is correlated with birth outcomes. A related estimation issue is that children
with shorter gestational lengths will mechanically have a shorter period of program “exposure”,
potentially biasing program impact estimates. To address this, in the analysis below we define
treatment as a child’s mother having started to receive PANES payments at any point up to six
months after conception, regardless of the timing of the birth. For children with normal gestational
length, and in the absence of program drop-outs, this measure is equivalent to in utero exposure
during the entire last trimester, which is typically regarded as a critical period for improvements in
birthweight and length brought about by income and nutritional programs (as discussed below).
A further issue relates to program drop-out driven by the income conditionality attached to
the program, which over time disqualifies a non-trivial fraction of beneficiary households. A
household economic shock during pregnancy, e.g., finding a job, might affect both birth outcomes
and household income, and hence program participation, again potentially biasing program impact
estimates. A related issue is imperfect enforcement of the eligibility rules, which we showed above
affects a moderate proportion of originally ineligible households. If such receipt among ineligible
households is correlated with their birth outcomes, i.e., if mothers who know how to “work the
system” to eventually get PANES benefits are also more determined in accessing prenatal care, this
could bias estimates. To address these issues, we instrument the PANES treatment term with an
indicator that takes on a value of one for PANES eligible women’s pregnancies in which the date of
the first cash payment occurs sometime before the end of the second trimester.
Two further issues are worth mentioning. First, fertility might be endogenous to program
eligibility and cash transfer receipt. This might be the case because the program affects the
likelihood of conception (via changing access to contraception, or evolving fertility preferences), or
of successfully completing a pregnancy through selective fetal survival or abortion.13 Endogenous
fertility choices could lead to bias if the types of mothers whose fertility is affected have different

13

Although abortion is illegal in Uruguay other than when the life of the mother is at risk, it is widely practiced. The
Centro Internacional de Investigación e Información para la Paz (CIIIP) estimates a rate of voluntary abortion of
38.5% (for the year 2000). The comparable rate in the U.S. is much lower, on the order of 20% of pregnancies.

13

risk of low birthweight. A second issue is selective program entry times, if the incidence of low
birthweight is correlated with this timing. Because of the longitudinal nature of the data, we can
address both of these concerns by further refining the difference-in-differences strategy with the
inclusion of mother fixed effects (FE), dm, in equation 2, rather than the dp terms. This allows us to
control for unobserved time-invariant mother heterogeneity to address any concerns about
compositional changes in the population of mothers.
Yimt =  + DD Timt + dt + dm + uimt

(2)

Given program assignment rules, we obtain an alternative estimate of program impacts by
comparing outcomes of “barely eligible” and “barely ineligible” children in the neighborhood of
the program eligibility threshold based on a regression discontinuity (RD) design. Following Card
and Lee (2008), we estimate the following model on data from the program period:
Yimt =  + RD Timt + f1(Nm) + 1(Nm<0) f2(Nm) + uimt ,

(3)

where f1(Nm) and f2(Nm) are two parametric polynomials in the normalized predicted income score
for mother m (Nm) such that f1(0)=f2(0)=0, and 1(.) is an indicator function. We again use 2SLS,
where we instrument Timt with 1(Nm<0). This approach allows us to address the variation in
eligibility associated with different application and entry dates.
Both of these alternative identification strategies (FE and RD) only make use of a subset of
the data, and because of this they could generate somewhat less precise estimates. For this reason
most of the analysis focuses on the full sample DD estimates. However, we show below that
coefficient estimates and, in most cases, significance levels are almost unchanged with the DD, FE
and RD approaches.

5.1 Main results
Figure 2 presents the incidence of low birthweight as a function of the time to and since the first
PANES payment, restricting attention to mothers who were (eventually) eligible and treated. Each
point corresponds to a three month period (and thus the numbers on horizontal axis correspond to
years), and the data are standardized such that zero corresponds to births with positive but less than
one full trimester of in utero exposure, meaning that the mother started receiving the program
sometime during the third trimester of pregnancy. There is a visible drop in the incidence of low
14

birthweight among children with positive program exposure relative to those born before the
mother entered the program (with negative exposure). There is an additional drop among those
whose mother entered the program in the second semester of pregnancy (who had at least one full
trimester of exposure). Beyond that, the incidence of low birthweight remains roughly constant
(with some apparent sampling variability), implying that there is no additional gain for mothers
entering the program even earlier in the pregnancy or before conception.
The right hand side panel reports (on the vertical axis) the fraction of children treated, i.e.,
those whose mother received a PANES payment starting sometime before the third trimester.
Program participation is positively associated with in utero exposure, as expected, with an increase
on the order of 90 percentage points in the first year, although program participation falls slightly
at longer exposures due to some dropping-out.
Table 2 presents 2SLS estimates of the effect of program exposure based on the DD
specification in equation 1. Each row presents results for a different dependent variable, and
standard errors are clustered at the mother level throughout. Although equation 1 could be
estimated using only PANES eligible mothers (see below), including non-PANES mothers
(unsuccessful applicants) increases precision and so they are included in most of the analysis.
Consistent with Figure 2 and Table 1, the estimates in rows 1 and 2 show that low birthweight
incidence falls by around 1.5 percentage points, while mean child birthweight increases by 23 to 30
grams (or almost exactly one ounce) following program exposure, with both estimates significant
at 95% confidence. Estimates are virtually unchanged when additional demographic controls and
controls for the month of the baseline survey visit are included in column 2.
Figure 3 reports the implied proportional change in the fraction of newborns below any
given weight level, together with the associated 95 percent confidence interval; these coefficients
are estimated based on a series of regressions similar to those in row 1, column 2 (of Table 2).
Program exposure significantly reduces the incidence of a range of birthweights below 3,000 g,
with effects again on the order of 10 to 15 percent, although estimates lose statistical significance
for weights below approximately 2,300 g due to the drop in observations in this range.
In utero program exposure marginally increases gestation length (by 0.07 weeks or roughly
half a day, an increase of just 0.2 percent on average gestational length of 38.5 weeks); we return to
this result below. There are no apparent impacts on premature births (row 4).

15

5.2 Effects by length of in utero exposure
A question in the existing literature is whether social assistance is more effective at improving birth
outcomes at particular stages of pregnancy. For example, a finding that transfers in the first
trimester of pregnancy mattered most would make it more difficult to design policies to improve
child birth outcomes in practice since many pregnancies are not detected at an early stage, and
detection may be a greater concern for mothers at higher risk of having low birthweight children.
The data allow us to estimate the differential impacts of the program at different time points
during pregnancy. Table 2, row 6 reports OLS estimates from a regression of low birthweight on
indicators for different lengths of PANES exposure (i.e., less than one trimester, one full trimester,
two full trimesters, or three full trimesters and more, the latter meaning that the mother entered the
program before conceiving). Coefficients are expressed as differences relative to zero exposure,
i.e., to children who were not eligible for the program at any time during the pregnancy. For
comparison, row 7 reports reduced form estimates that pool as “treated” those eligible starting in
either the first or second trimester. Consistent with Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2011a),
and with the evidence in Figure 2 we find a significant reduction in the incidence of low
birthweight, on the order of -1 to -2 percentage points, from entering the program at any point
during the first or second trimester, and this is consistent with full program exposure during the
third trimester mattering most. Moreover, conditional on exposure during the entire third trimester,
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the effect of PANES exposure is the same for those who began
receiving transfers in the second trimester, the first trimester, and before conception at
conventional confidence levels (not shown).
Finally, the first stage relationship is presented in row 8 of Panel B, and implies that
program eligibility increases program participation by 86 percentage points, suggesting a high
degree of compliance with assigned program status.

5.3 Alternative identification strategies
Table 3 reports additional specifications intended to test the robustness of the results. For brevity,
we focus on specifications with additional controls (as in column 2 of Table 2), although the results
also hold without controls (not shown). Row 1 presents estimates including mother fixed effects.
Despite cutting the sample size in half, including mother fixed effects leads to an estimate (-0.018)

16

that is nearly identical to the baseline estimate and is significant at 95% confidence, suggesting that
unobserved time-invariant individual heterogeneity is not generating a spurious regression result.
While the baseline difference-in-differences specifications in Table 2 include both PANES
eligible and ineligible mothers (with N=68,858), the point estimate computed only among the
sample of PANES eligible mothers in row 2 of Table 3 (N=48,891), and which exploits changes in
their eligibility over time, is nearly identical at -0.016 and significant at 95%.
As an alternative to exploiting the variation among eligible mothers, we next exploit the
variation between eligible and ineligible mothers. Figure 4 presents the proportion of low weight
births as a function of the predicted income score in the narrow range from -0.1 to +0.1 (denoting
plus or minus 10 percentage points in the likelihood that the household qualifies as PANES eligible
based on its characteristics as measured in the baseline survey) near the program eligibility
threshold, both during (Panel A) and before (Panel B) the program, as well as showing the
proportion of births in treated households (Panel C). Linear and non-parametric regression curves
estimated on both sides of the threshold (and the confidence intervals on the linear estimates) are
also presented. The data indicate a drop in the incidence of low birthweight at the eligibility
threshold during the program period on the order of 1.5 percentage points (Panel A). There is no
discontinuity in the proportion of low weight births in the pre-program period (Panel B), consistent
with the key identifying assumption that, absent PANES, low birthweight would be a continuous
function of the predicted income score. Program participation is highly discontinuous at the
predicted income score threshold, with a jump of approximately 70 percentage points, as dictated
by program assignment rules.14 The natural conclusion from Figure 4 is that PANES program
participation significantly reduces the incidence of low birthweight.
This finding is confirmed by the “fuzzy” regression discontinuity estimates in rows 3 to 5
of Table 3. The sample here is restricted to pregnancies that occurred after the program started.15

14

Appendix Figure A2 Panel A shows that the distribution of the predicted income score is smooth around the program
eligibility threshold, suggesting an absence of manipulation in the score (McCrary 2008). Panel B shows that the
distribution of birthweights is smooth around the low birthweight cut-off (2,500g), further indication of data quality.
15
Specifically, cconsistent with the difference-in-differences estimates, for eligible mothers we define treated
pregnancies as those that started no more than six months before the receipt of first program payment. For ineligible
mothers (for whom there is no comparable date of first payment) we consider pregnancies that started no earlier than
five months before the baseline visit in the sample; we choose five months since the median difference between the
date of first payment and the date of the baseline survey is one month, thus preserving the six month “lead time” we
use throughout in defining program treatment. Estimates are nearly identical when using the timing of the baseline

17

Except for indicator variables for month of entry into the program, the model includes the same
regressors as in column 2 of Table 2, and the treatment variable is instrumented with an indicator
equal to one for mothers with a predicted income score that makes them eligible for PANES
(namely, those with negative predicted scores, as the threshold is normalized to zero). The point
estimate in row 3 that uses all available observations is similar to the baseline estimate, at -0.013,
and significant at 95% confidence. The estimate in row 4 that restricts the analysis to observations
in the narrow range near the eligibility threshold, from -0.1 to +0.1, is virtually unchanged (-0.014)
and significant at 90% confidence; standard errors increase here with the substantially smaller
restricted sample, which falls by more than half. We further estimate the model with a linear
polynomial control in the predicted income score (in row 5), and the point estimate remains similar
(-0.014) although it is no longer statistically significant, which is not surprising since, by further
saturating the model, the econometric identification becomes highly localized and there are
effectively fewer observations driving the estimates.
To address the possibility that program entry dates could be correlated with individual
trends in low birthweight, in row 6 we allow the instrumental variable for treatment to be an
indicator that takes on a value of one for all pregnancies among eligible mothers that started no
earlier than January 2005, regardless of the actual date of the respondent’s entry into the program.
This classifies all children of PANES-eligible mothers born in the second trimester of 2005 or later
as program participants. This is a conservative assumption that introduces some measurement error
in actual program participation dates but eliminates any bias due to selective entry timing. The
coefficient estimate on PANES participation is once again similar, at -0.020, and significant at 95%
confidence, easing concerns about bias due to endogenous entry times.

6. Mechanisms underlying the reduction in low birthweight
The richness of the dataset allows us to investigate many potential behavioral channels that could
be behind the finding that the program reduced the incidence of low birthweight, including those
related to changes in income and labor supply (section 6.1), gestational length, medical care and
mothers’ health during pregnancy (6.2), family structure (6.3), cash versus in-kind transfers (6.4),
and fertility choices and selective child survival (6.5). Multiple mechanisms appear to contribute to

survey to define treated births among eligible households although somewhat less precise (not shown), presumably in
part due to the mis-measurement of treatment this approach generates.

18

the overall reduction in low birthweight, and there is no evidence of the adverse behavioral changes
that have been hypothesized.

6.1 Income and labor supply
Standard theory in labor economics predicts that welfare programs will tend to reduce labor supply,
due to both a substitution effect (induced by means-tested benefits) and an income effect (see
Moffitt 2002 for a discussion of the evidence). Such labor supply responses would dampen the
increase in expenditures generated by welfare transfers. However, the effect of this change on birth
outcomes is ambiguous, since by allowing pregnant women to withdraw from the labor market,
welfare transfers could reduce physical and psychological stress, improving birth outcomes.
Panel A of Table 4 estimates program effects on household and mother socioeconomic
measures during the pregnancy. The dependent variable in row 1 is the average value of the
PANES cash transfer over the first six months following conception. The estimated coefficient is
UY$1040, or approximately US$40 at the 2005 exchange rate. This number is roughly 30 percent
lower than the program transfer (UY$1,360), consistent with the imperfect compliance with
program assignment documented above.
Row 2 reports the effect of eligibility for the food card. Eligibility is associated with in-kind
food card transfers during pregnancy of UY$191 per month, or US$7. As with income transfers,
this is substantially below what in-kind transfers would have been with full take-up, given both
imperfect compliance and the fact that the food card component was rolled-out mid-program
(appendix Figure A1, panel D). Row 3 shows there was no significant increase (or decrease) in the
total amount of other government benefits received as a result of program treatment.
Rows 4 and 5 specifically examine mother earnings and household earnings, respectively.
There is evidence that PANES mothers and their households earned somewhat less in the formal
labor market than their non-eligible counterparts, but the differences are relatively small (at UY$40
and 175 for mothers and households, respectively, or approximately US$2 and 8). Consistent with
this finding, row 6 shows there was a moderate fall of 1.3 percentage points in mother’s labor
supply during pregnancy, as reported in the birth records. Despite these negative labor supply
effects, program eligible households experience a large increase in total household income, by
UY$968 per month (row 7), where this figure includes all sources of formal sector income and
transfers as recorded in the Social Security database during the first six months after conception.
19

As a conservative counterfactual, using the fact that total household income between July 2006 and
December 2007 (when the program had completely rolled out) among unsuccessful applicants was
roughly UY$3,650 (or just over US$140 per month), this implies that the program increased total
household income by at least 25 percent. Recall that pre-program total household income among
PANES eligible households was UY$1,113 per month, but this is a questionable “base” figure for a
counterfactual given mean reversion, and the recovering Uruguayan economy during this period.
We also investigate whether residential mobility increased due to the transfer, and
specifically whether it led households to move to neighborhoods with better average health
outcomes. There is no indication (row 8) of an improvement in the average health in households’
residential area (as proxied by pre-PANES average birthweight) among program households.
6.2 Gestational length, medical care, and mothers’ health during pregnancy
Table 2 showed that the program led to a small increase in gestational length. A different question
is the extent to which greater gestational length can account for the program’s reduction in low
birthweight incidence. In row 7 of Table 3 we re-estimate equation 1 restricting the sample to nonpremature births (defined as 38 or more weeks): the estimate of -0.009 is significant at 99%
confidence, although somewhat smaller than the baseline result, suggesting that greater gestational
may be playing some role. We also report the effect of the program on the probability of being in
the bottom decile of the birthweight distribution conditional on gestational length (in row 5 of
Table 2): there is a sharp reduction in being in the bottom decile, with a drop of 1.6 percentage
points, suggesting that the effect of the program on low birthweight also works through boosting
intrauterine growth per unit of time in utero rather than only through gestational length.
The fall in low birthweight is accompanied by an increase in the number of prenatal visits
overall, and especially in the third trimester (rows 9 through 12 of Table 4), which again could
partially be the result of greater gestational length. The effect on the total number of visits is
relatively small though, at 0.144, i.e. an increase of just 2 percent relative to baseline. Moreover,
there is no evidence that the week of first visit (row 13) or the total number of visits in the first
trimester (row 10) – which are considered crucial for the detection and treatment of pregnancy risk
factors – improve. Taken together, these patterns imply that improvements in prenatal care are
unlikely to be driving the low birthweight effects unless there was a sharp improvement in the
quality of care received at each visit.
20

While we have no direct information on the quality of prenatal care, there is little evidence
of improvements in the quality of medical care at birth and delivery for PANES beneficiary
mothers. Neither the proportion of births assisted by a doctor (row 14), nor the fraction of births in
public hospitals, which are generally of lower quality (row 15), nor the average (pre-PANES)
birthweight at the mother’s health center (row 16) were affected by program participation.16
Despite the lack of clear changes in prenatal or delivery care, a number of maternal health
and nutrition measures do improve during pregnancy. Most importantly, mother’s weight is higher
among eligible mothers and it improves significantly during pregnancy. We find that mothers are
0.5 kg (approximately one pound) heavier than untreated mothers (row 18), although this effect is
not significant at conventional levels. By the final prenatal visit, the average weight gain for treated
mothers is 0.95 kg (approximately two pounds, row 19). These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that the higher household income generated by the PANES transfer led to improved
maternal nutrition, and thus greater child growth in utero.17
A second notable health outcome in the SIP dataset is the sharp reduction in maternal
smoking during the first trimester, with a drop of 3.2 percentage points (row 20, significant at 95%
confidence), on a base of roughly 31% in the pre-program period. Smoking is strongly linked to
low birthweight in the medical literature (Kramer 1987). While any explanation for this drop in
smoking is necessarily speculative, a plausible factor is falling stress in PANES beneficiary
households as a result of their improved economic circumstances.18

6.3 Family structure
One theoretical possibility is that welfare transfers could reduce the incentives for marriage, either
because of the conditionalities associated with program receipt (i.e., if the income conditionality
includes the husband’s income) or the additional financial resources they make available to
women. Growing up in a “broken” family, in turn, could possibly have negative consequences on
children’s wellbeing through material, social or psychological channels. Although the existing
evidence from the U.S. points to zero or only modest negative effects of welfare transfers on single

16

PANES did not involve the creation of new health centres or any other health supply intervention.
As expected, there is no “impact” on treated mothers’ height (point estimate 0.43 cm, s.e. 0.34).
18
Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) discuss why “temptation goods” like cigarettes might constitute a particularly
large share of consumption among the poor.
17

21

motherhood and marital stability, economic theory yields ambiguous predictions on the sign of
these effects (Bitler, Gelbach, Hoynes and Zavodny 2004).
Rows 21 and 22 of Table 4 report that PANES led to a large and statistically significant
reduction in the proportion of children born to unmarried parents, as well as in the proportion
without a father named on the birth certificate. Contrary to what is often presumed, welfare
transfers lead to a moderate increase in martial stability, with a drop of 2.1 percentage points (on a
base of 80%) in out-of-wedlock births. To the extent that intact marriages and the presence of the
father have positive impacts on mother and child, this could partly explain the program effects on
low birthweight. The increase in marriage rates and identified fathers could be due to multiple
factors, including the possibility that the income transfer led to greater relationship stability
(perhaps by reducing stress), that it made the mother a more attractive marriage partner, or that the
improvement in economic circumstances simply allowed the couple to feel secure enough to get
married. In any case, there is no evidence of the adverse behavioral responses with respect to
marriage that have been hypothesized.

6.4 Cash versus in-kind transfers
To disentangle the roles of cash versus in-kind transfers, Table 3 reports results from regressions
that exploit the fact that the food card was only rolled out starting in the second half of 2006
(appendix Figure A1) and that the date of entry into this program component did not coincide with
the first payment of the cash transfer. Row 8 restricts the sample to births that occurred before June
2006, i.e., before any food cards were distributed, while row 9 explicitly controls for the date of
first receipt of a food card payment, to assess if it has any additional effect. In both instances, the
effect of the cash transfer on low birthweight is nearly identical to the baseline specification and
statistically significant at 95 and 99% confidence, respectively, indicating that the cash transfer
alone leads to a reduction in low birthweight incidence. The additional receipt of the food card on
top of the income transfer does not affect low birthweight incidence (although the point estimates
are imprecisely estimated, not shown).

6.5 Fertility choices and selective fetal survival
Another possibility is that the program affected fertility or fetal survival among mothers at risk of
having low birthweight children. Cash transfers could theoretically lead to either higher or lower
22

fertility: if children are a normal good, the cash transfer could increase fertility (Becker 1960),
although it might also lead to increased investment in child quality while reducing overall
fertility.19 The existing empirical evidence is mixed (Moffitt 1998).
As a first check on fertility impacts, row 10 of Table 3 presents estimated program impacts
on low birthweight among the subsample of pregnancies that started before the first PANES
payment was made. This sample restriction should largely control for endogenous fertility
responses since these pregnancies reflect choices made before exposure to the program (unless
individuals could accurately predict the exact timing of their incorporation into the program, which
seems highly unlikely given the uncertainties surrounding this new program, which was the first of
its kind in Uruguay). Results are similar (at -0.019) to the baseline estimates and significant at 95%
confidence, suggesting that bias due to endogenous fertility is unlikely to explain the main results.
We next investigate fertility patterns directly. Using the universe of PANES applicant
women of child-bearing age (12 to 50 years old), we create a quarterly panel that spans the period
January 2003 to December 2008. For each trimester, we construct an indicator variable equal to
one if the woman gave birth and zero otherwise. Overall, we have information on approximately
157,000 women over 24 quarters, with more than 3 million individual-quarter observations, who
have an average monthly fertility rate of 0.73 percent
The leading challenge in estimating the fertility response to PANES is the fact that program
eligibility depended in part on the number of children in the household at the time of the baseline
survey, implying that mothers who gave birth just before the survey were considerably more likely
to be eligible than otherwise identical mothers giving birth just afterwards.20 This eligibility rule
coupled with negative state dependence in childbearing (i.e., the probability of giving birth to a
child today conditional on a child having been born in the previous nine months is basically zero),
mechanically leads to a fall in observed fertility among eligible mothers after the launch of the
program, which might be erroneously considered a causal program effect. This is simply regression
to the mean, which arises in many other contexts, for example, in analyses of the effect of job
training on wages (Ashenfelter 1978, Card and Sullivan 1988). Consistent with this mechanism,

19

See Becker and Lewis (1973). An additional effect might arise if program generosity is conditioned on the number
of children (e.g., Stecklov et al 2006). However, PANES consisted of a fixed transfer per household.
20
This is confirmed by Panel A in appendix Figure A3, which shows a clear discontinuity in the probability of
household PANES treatment as a function of the child’s date of birth.

23

the difference in fertility rates between PANES eligible and ineligible applicants (Figure 5) displays
a sharp drop precisely at the time of the baseline survey used to determine program eligibility.21
An immediate way to correct for any bias induced by this compositional effect is to reweight observations for PANES ineligible mothers so that the distribution of pre-program
characteristics is the same as for eligible mothers. We use past fertility (births between January
2003 and the baseline survey) and mothers’ observable characteristics in the reweighting.22
Differences in fertility rates between eligible and ineligible women after reweighting are displayed
in Panel B of Figure 5, where by construction, pre-program differences are zero. Visually, there
appears to be a slight increase in fertility among PANES-eligible women during the program.
Estimation results are reported in Table 4, panel E, where a fertility indicator is the
dependent variable (in the 2SLS specification). Consistent with the graphical evidence in Figure 5,
fertility increases slightly among eligible mothers after the program begins: the point estimate
implies a significant rise in fertility of 0.0013 (row 23), and with pre-program average monthly
fertility among eligible mothers of around 0.008, this is equivalent to roughly a 16 percent rise in
fertility. As a bound, in the extreme and unrealistic case where this rise in fertility was entirely
driven by individuals with exactly zero probability of giving birth to low weight children, this
change in fertility could account for the roughly 16 percent drop in the incidence of low
birthweight documented above. However, under more realistic assumptions, the increase in fertility
would explain only a small fraction of the overall effect.
Because any change in fertility induced by the program would take at least nine months to
materialize, an arguably cleaner test is provided by restricting attention to the first year of the
program. Row 24 of Table 4 restricts the analysis to births that took place within one year of the
baseline survey, and yields an effect in fertility of just 0.0002, implying a rise of around 3 percent,
though this small effect is not significant at conventional levels. Yet the estimated program impact

21

A similar result is obtained if we plot fertility rates as a function of time to and since the first payment for PANES
eligible households only, similar to Figure 2. This series is plotted in appendix Figure A3, panel B. Panel C reports
fertility rates as a function of time to and since baseline (as in Figure 5), plotted separately by eligibility status.
Unsurprisingly, among eligible households the data show a similar pattern to that in Panel B, while, among
unsuccessful applicant households, there is no clear time pattern. That the compositional differences between eligible
and ineligible households is driving the results in Figure 5 is confirmed in panels D to F, which successively plot
fertility rates for eligible and ineligible applicants separately by the number of children born between January 2003 and
the administration of the baseline survey (namely, 0, 1, or 2 or more children). Conditional on households’ past fertility
history, fertility patterns during the program appear nearly identical for eligible and ineligible applicants.
22
In practice, we define cells based on mother’s age (in years), mother’s years of education, month of baseline survey,
and number of pregnancies at different lags (1-3 months, 4-6 months etc.) from the baseline survey.

24

on the incidence of low birthweight during exactly the same time period (in row 11 of Table 4) is
again virtually identical to the baseline estimate at -0.012, providing another piece of evidence that
endogenous fertility changes cannot explain the main birthweight result.

6.6 Treatment effect heterogeneity
We next explored some obvious dimensions of maternal heterogeneity to determine if the effects of
cash transfers are more pronounced among particular subgroups. We first find that the reduction in
low birth weight is particularly large among the roughly one fifth of our sample who are teen
mothers, with a drop of 2.9 percentage points (relative to 1.6 percentage points among non-teen
mothers, Table 3, rows 12 and 13) and among married mothers, with a drop of 2.8 percentage
points (versus 1.3 points for unmarried mothers, rows 14 and 15). However, these differences are
not significant at conventional confidence levels (with p-values of 0.37 and 0.19, respectively).
Finally, since the magnitude of the income transfer was fixed regardless of household size,
households with fewer members effectively received a larger per capita transfer than larger
households. We divide the sample of mothers into those in smaller households (three or fewer
members) and larger ones (at least four members) to test if this led to larger gains in smaller
households but find no evidence that it did, with identical estimated reductions of 1.8 percentage
points in both groups (rows 16 and 17). There are many possible explanations, including the fact
that there is limited variation in household size in the sample overall (given low fertility rates in
Uruguay, even among the poor). Imperfect income pooling among adults in the household would
also serve to dampen the effect of household size on the magnitude of the program treatment effect.

7. Estimating a lower bound on the internal rate of return
A standard way to assess the attractiveness of an investment is to compute its internal rate of return
(IRR). This section carries out a simple exercise that yields a bound on the IRR for the PANES
program. There are a range of plausible but hard to quantify benefits of child health investments,
including the individual utility gains of simply feeling better by avoiding illness, as well as the cost
savings in early life medical care and hospital costs of the kind documented in Almond, Chay and
Lee (2005). The benefits to the parents of the children and other household members, as well any
social benefits (due, for example, to reduced health care utilization) are also disregarded entirely
below. We adopt a narrower and highly conservative approach, focusing only on the estimated
25

future wage benefits of the intervention when the children who benefited reach adulthood. Thus the
IRR estimates below are clearly lower bounds on the true social returns.
Since the PANES program was only carried out during 2005 to 2007 and the children born
have not yet reached adulthood, we obviously do not have actual measures of their adult labor
market outcomes, and need to make assumptions about the likely returns to reducing low
birthweight. We use the estimated reduction in low birthweight from Table 2 (row 1, column 2) in
the current paper, namely, a 1.7 percentage point reduction for children of mothers who received
the transfer throughout most of their pregnancy. Following Currie and Moretti’s (2007) U.S. study
(in their Table 6), we further assume that low birthweight reduces adult earnings by 2.6 percent,
although returns are plausibly higher in a poor Uruguayan population, again making this a
conservative assumption. We assume that individuals work from 18 to 65 years of age with
earnings at the level of Uruguayan per capita income, and that the country’s average per capita
income growth rate of 2.3 percent during 1989-2009 continues over the coming decades.23 In terms
of costs, we assume the social cost of the program is the deadweight loss incurred on the tax
revenue raised to fund the PANES transfers, which we assume is 20 percent.24
Under these assumptions, a lower bound on the IRR (in real terms) is positive and moderate
at 3.2 percent per annum, which is somewhat higher than current real interest rates in Uruguay. As
this is a highly conservative lower bound given all of the plausible benefits that are excluded, this
exercise suggests that the child investments made through PANES may indeed be an attractive
public policy in Uruguay. Needless to say, this remains a highly speculative calculation in the
absence of actual earnings data.

8. Conclusion
This paper studies the impact of a social assistance program on the incidence of low birthweight in
Uruguay, an upper middle income Latin American country. The program consisted principally of a
cash transfer that was targeted to households in the bottom decile of the income distribution, a

23

The source of the per capita income data is the World Development Indicators database
(http://data.worldbank.org/country/uruguay). Note that this is arguably a conservative assumption given Uruguay’s
much faster growth rates in the recent past.
24
We are not aware of any Uruguay-specific deadweight loss estimates but a recent paper estimates that the marginal
cost of public funds in other developing countries is on the order of 17% (Auriol and Warlters 2012).

26

population with an incidence of low birthweight of around 10 percent, similar to rates found among
poor populations in the U.S.
The analysis shows that the program led to a considerable reduction in low birthweight
incidence. Using a unique matched micro-dataset with vital statistics, program, hospital and social
security records, our estimates imply a fall in the incidence of low birthweight on the order of 15
percent, allowing beneficiaries to entirely close the baseline gap in low birthweight incidence with
the ineligible program applicants. The estimated impacts are similar using three distinct
econometric approaches: a difference-in-differences estimator, a mother fixed effects specification,
and a regression discontinuity design that exploits an eligibility threshold in the program’s design.
A back-of the envelope internal rate of return calculation suggests that it could be an attractive
public policy option.
We also explore the mechanisms behind these effects. Many different channels
hypothesized in the literature appear to contribute to the overall reduction in low birthweight,
including improved maternal nutrition and reduced smoking. While there is an increase in prenatal
visits, it appears too small to explain much of the birthweight effect. Although we find some
evidence of minor offsetting household labor supply responses (most likely induced in part by the
means-tested nature of the program), we show that PANES receipt increased eligible mothers’ total
net household income by at least 25 percent. The modest reduction in mother’s work hours during
pregnancy, with the associated reduction in stress, may have contributed to the birthweight result.
There was also a marked reduction in out-of-wedlock births among program beneficiaries, which
may have further reduced maternal stress and positively affected birth outcomes.
Taken together, our results imply that cash social assistance may help to break the cycle of
intergenerational poverty by improving child health. The offsetting behavioral effects that could in
theory limit the benefits of such transfers (e.g., increased drinking or smoking, or family break-up)
appear to be of second-order importance in our setting. The findings appear relevant not just for
Latin American countries but also to wealthier societies given Uruguay’s generally good infant
health measures (which are similar to those observed in poor populations in the U.S.), and the
nearly universal access to prenatal care in the country.

27

References
Aizer, A. (2010), “Poverty, Violence and Health: The Impact of Domestic Violence during
Pregnancy on Newborn Health”, mimeo, Brown University.
Aizer, A., J. Currie and E. Moretti (2007), “Does Managed Care Hurt Health? Evidence from
Medicaid Mothers”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 89(3): 385-399, 04.
Aizer, A., L. Stroud and S. Buka (2009), “Maternal Stress and Child Well-Being: Evidence from
Siblings”, mimeo, Brown University.
Alexander, G. and Korenbrot C. (1995), “The role of prenatal care in preventing low birthweight”.
The Future of Children 5: 103-120.
Almond, D., K. Chay and D. Lee (2005), “The Costs of Low Birthweight”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(3): 1031-1083.
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011a), “Human Capital Development before Age Five”, in Handbook
of Labor Economics (D. Card and O. Ashenfelter ed.s), Vol. 4.
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011b), “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis”, mimeo,
Columbia University.
Almond, D. H. W. Hoynes and D. Schanzenbach (2011a), “Inside the war on poverty: ‘The impact
of food stamps on birth outcomes”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (2): 387-403.
Almond, D. H. W. Hoynes and D. Schanzenbach (2011b), “Childhood Exposure to the Food Stamp
Program: Long‐run Health and Economic Outcomes”, mimeo, Columbia University.
Almond, D. and B. Mazumder (2011), “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of
Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy”, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, forthcoming.
Amarante, V., R. Arim and A. Vigorito (2005), Criterios de selección de la población beneficiaria
del PANES, report prepared for MIDES, Montevideo.
Amarante, V., G. Burdín, M. Manacorda and A. Vigorito (2008), Informe de evaluación intermedia
del PANES, report prepared for MIDES, Montevideo.
Amarante, V., M. Ferrando, M. Manacorda, A. Vernengo and A. Vigorito (2009), Informe final de
evaluación del PANES. Report prepared for MIDES, Montevideo.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978), “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 60, 47-57.
Auriol, E. and M. Warlters (2012), “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds and Tax Reform in
Africa", Journal of Development Economics, vol. 97, n. 1, 58-72.
Baland, J.M and J Robinson (2000), “Is Child Labor Inefficient?”, Journal of Political Economy,
108(4), 663-679.
Banerjee, A. and S. Mullainathan (2010), “The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the
Economic Lives of the Poor”, mimeo, MIT.
Barber, S. and P. Gertler (2008), “Empowering women: how Mexico's conditional cash transfer
program raised prenatal care quality and birthweight”, mimeo, U.C. Berkeley.
Barker, D.J.P. (1990), “The fetal and infant origins of adult disease”, British Medical Journal,
301(6761): 1111.
Becker, G. (1960), “An Economic Analysis of Fertility”, in Demographic and Economic Change in
Developed Countries. Princeton, NJ: NBER.
Becker, G. S. and H. G. Lewis, (1973), “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of
Children”, Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), S279-S288.
Behrman, J. and M. Rosenzweig (2004), “Returns to Birthweight”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86(2): 586-601.
28

Bitler M.P, J. B. Gelbach, H.W. Hoynes, and M. Zavodny (2004), “The Impact of Welfare Reform
on Marriage and Divorce”, Demography, 41(2): 213–236.
Bitler, M. and Currie, J. (2004), “Does WIC Work? The Effect of WIC on Pregnancy and Birth
Outcomes”, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23, 73-91.
Black, S., P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2007), “From the cradle to the labor market? The effect
of birthweight on adult outcomes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 409-439.
Black, S., and P. Devereux. (2011). “Recent Developments in Intergenerational Mobility”,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, Part B.
Bozzoli, C. and C., Quintana-Domeque (2010), “The Weight of the Crisis: Evidence from
Newborns in Argentina”, mimeo, University of Alicante.
Case, A. (2000), “Health, Income and Economic Development”, mimeo, Princeton University.
Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson (2005), “The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstances”, Journal of Health Economics, 24, 365–389.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky and C. Paxson (2005), “Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The
Origins of the Gradient”, American Economic Review, 92(5), 1308–1334
Cabella, W. and Peri A. (2005), El sistema de estadísticas vitales en Uruguay: elementos para su
diagnóstico y propuestas para su mejoramiento. Report prepared for the project
‘Mejoramiento del Sistema Estadístico Nacional’, convenio Facultad de Ciencias SocialesInstituto Nacional de Estadística, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Camacho, A. (2008), “Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2), 511–515.
Card, D. (1999), “The causal effect of education on earnings”, in Handbook of Labor Economics
(D. Card and O. Ashenfelter ed.s), Vol. 3.
Card, David, and Daniel Sullivan (1988), “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs
on Movements In and Out of Employment”, Econometrica, 56(3), 497-530.
Clausson, B., P. Lichtenstein S. and Cnattingius (2000), “Genetic influence on birthweight and
gestational length determined by studies in offspring of twins”, International Journal of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 107(3, March): 375–381.
Conley, D. and N. Bennett (2000), “Is biology destiny? Birthweight and life chances”, American
Sociological Review 65: 458-467.
Conley, D. and N. Bennett (2001), “Birth Weight and Income: Interactions across Generations”,
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 42 (December): 450–465.
Currie, J. (2009), “Healthy, wealthy and wise: socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood and
human capital development”, Journal of Economic Literature, 47: 87-122.
Currie, J. and N. Cole (1993), “Welfare and child health: the link between AFDC participation and
birthweight”, American Economic Review, 86(4): 971-985.
Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996), “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women”, Journal of Political Economy, 104(61), 12631296.
Currie, J. and R. Hyson (1999), “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic
Status? The Case of Low Birthweight”, American Economic Review, 89(2): 245-250.
Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2003), “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4): 1495-1532
Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2007), “Biology as Destiny? Short and Long-Run Determinants of
Intergenerational Transmission of Birthweight”, Journal of Labor Economics, 25:231-264.
29

Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2008), “Did the Introduction of Food Stamps Affect Birth Outcomes in
California?”, in Making Americans Healthier, (Schoeni, House, Kaplan, and Pollack eds.),
Russell Sage Foundation.
Currie, J., M. Neidell and J. Schmeider (2009), “Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons from
New Jersey”, Journal of Health Economics, 28(3, May), 688-703.
Currie, J. and J. F. Schmieder (2009), “Air Pollution and Health around the World. Fetal Exposures
to Toxic Releases and Infant Health”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings
299 (2): 177–183.
Currie, J. and R. Walker (2010), “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-Z Pass”,
mimeo, Columbia University.
Currie, J. and F. Gahvari (2008), “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the Data”, Journal
of Economic Literature, 46 (2), 333–383.
Dehejia, R., and A. Lleras-Muney (2004), “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119(3), 1091-1130.
Del Bono, E., J. Ermisch and M. Francesconi (2008), “Intrafamily resource allocations: a dynamic
model of birthweight”. IZA Discussion Papers, 3704.
Duryea, S., A. Olgiati and L. Stone (2006), “Registro inexacto de nacimientos en América Latina”,
RES Working Papers, 4444, Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department.
Washington DC.
Fescina R., Butrón R., De Mucio B., Martínez G., Diaz-Roselló JL., Simini F., Camacho and
Mainero L (2007). Sistema de Informatico Perinatal. Historia clínica perinatal: instructivo
de llenado y clarificación de términos . CLAP/SMR 1563. Pan American Health
Organization, Latin American Centre of Perinatology and Women Health.
Fiszbein, A. and N. Schady (2009), Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
Poverty, World Bank Publications.
Heckman, J. (1995), “Lessons from the Bell curve”, Journal of Political Economy, 103(51), 10511120.
Heckman, J. (2000), “Policies to foster human capital”, Research in Economics, 54(1), 3-56.
Hoynes, H. W. (1996), “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation Under the AFDC-UP Program”, Econometrica, 64(2), 295-332.
Hoynes, H. W., D. L. Miller and D. Simon (2011), “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
Infant Health”, mimeo, U.C. Davis.
Hoynes, H. W., M. Page, and A Huff Stevens (2011), “Can targeted transfers improve birth
outcomes? Evidence from the introduction of the WIC program”, Journal of Public
Economics, 95: 813–827.
Hoynes, H. W. and D. Schanzenbach (2009), “Consumption Responses to In-Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program”, American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 1(4), 109–139.
Hoynes, H. W. and D. Schanzenbach (2011), “Work Incentives and the Food Stamp Program”,
Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística (2009), Las Estadísticas Vitales, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Jewell, T. and Triunfo P. (2007), “El peso al nacer de los niños de la principal maternidad del
Uruguay: 1995-2004.” Desarrollo y Sociedad, Nº 59, March, Universidad de los Andes
Kramer, M.S. (1987), “Determinants of low birthweight: methodological assessment and metaanalysis”, Bulletin World Health Organization, 65(5): 663–737.

30

Manacorda M., E. Miguel E. and A. Vigorito (2011), “Government Transfers and Political
Support”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 1-28.
Matijasevich, A., C. Barros, J.L. Díaz-Rosselló, E. Bergel and C. Forteza (2004), “Factores de
riesgo para muy bajo peso al nacer y peso al nacer entre 1.500-2.499 gramos. Un estudio
del sector público de Montevideo, Uruguay”, Archivos Pediatricos Uruguayos, 75(1): 2635.
Murtaugh, M. and J. Weingart (1995), “Individual Nutrient Effects on Length of Gestation and
Pregnancy Outcome”. Seminars in Perinatology. 19 (3), 197-210
McCrary, J. (2008), “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A
density test”, Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698-714.
McCrary, J. and H. Royer (2010), “The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant Health:
Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. (2004). “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities”, Econometrica, 72(1), 159-217.
Ministerio de Salud Publica (2011), Estadísticas Vitales, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Moffitt, R. (1998), “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility”, in Welfare, the Family, and
Reproductive Behavior (R. Moffitt ed.). Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 50-97.
Moffitt, R. (2002), “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply”, in Handbook of Public Economics (A.
J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein eds.)
Nichols, A. (2011), rd 2.0: Revised Stata module for regression, Statistical Software Components
S456888, Boston College.
Royer, H. (2009), “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birthweight.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 49–85.
Stecklov, G., P. Winters, J. Todd and F. Regalia (2006), “Demographic Externalities from Poverty
Programs in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Latin America”, American
University Working Papers Series, 2006-1.
UNDP (2005), Informe Nacional de Desarollo Humano. Montevideo, Uruguay.
UNICEF (2004), Low Birthweight. Country, Regional and Global Estimates, New York.
Udry, C. (2004), “Child Labor”, mimeo, Yale University.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (2010), Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United
States. 2009. Current Population Report. U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and
Statistics Administration.
United Nations Children's Fund (2009), Global database on low birthweight.
World Bank (2011), World Development indicators. The World Bank, Washington.
World Health Organization (2009), World Health Statistics, Geneva.
World Health Organization (2010), World Health Statistics, Geneva.

31

Figure 1: Timing of PANES program activities and data collection
PANES application

Household visit

April 2005 

April 2005 

Administrative
decisions on eligibility

Income transfer

Food card

Program ends

May 2005 

April 2006 

December 2007

PRE-PROGRAM PERIOD

PROGRAM PERIOD
time
Administrative program data
May 2005 - December 2007

Baseline survey
April 2005 

Social security data
April 2004 - December 2007
Vital statistics data
Prenatal information system (SIP) data
January 2003 - December 2007

32

Figure 2: Fraction of low birthweight and treated births as a function of time to/since first income transfer
B: Y-axis: Treated (0/1)

0

-.02

.25

0

.5

.02

.75

.04

1

A: Y-axis: Low birthweight

-3

-2

-1
0
Program exposure at birth

1

2

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

diff

Notes. Panel A reports the fraction of low weight births as a function of the difference between the time of birth and the time of first payment of the cash transfer
(for PANES eligible mothers only). Data are expressed as differences with respect to positive program exposure in utero of less than a full trimester (denoted by a
vertical line). Dotted lines denote 95 percent confidence intervals. Panel B reports a similar graph where the variable on the vertical axis is the fraction of births
with at least one day of PANES program exposure in the first two trimesters of pregnancy.

33

-.3

-.15

0

.15

.3

Figure 3: Estimated proportional program effects by birthweight

1500

2000

2500

3000
3500
weight

4000

4500

5000

Notes. The figure reports the estimated percentage change in the probability of being below each level of birthweight as a result of treatment. Each point comes
from a separate 2SLS regression including controls (as in column 2 of Table 2). 95 percent confidence intervals around the estimates also reported. See also notes
to Table 2.

34

Figure 4: Proportion of low birthweight and treated births as a function of the predicted income score
B: Low birthweight, pre-program period

C: Treated

-.1

-.05

0
Income score

.05

.1

0

.05

.05

.2

.4

.09

.09

.6

.8

1

.13

.13

A: Low birthweight, program period

-.1

-.05

0
Income score

.05

.1

-.1

-.05

0
Income score

.05

.1

Notes. Panel A reports the proportion of low weight births among PANES applicant mothers as a function of the normalized income score during the program
period (see text for details). A vertical line corresponds to PANES the eligibility threshold at a normalized predicted income score of zero. The figure also reports
two estimated curves on either side of the threshold: a linear polynomial in the income score (solid line) and local linear regression (dashed line) computed using
the Stata command “rd” with optimal bandwidth (Nichols 2011), as well as the 95% confidence intervals around the estimated linear prediction (thin dotted
lines). Panels B and C report similar graphs where the variables on the vertical axis are, respectively, the proportion of low weight births in the pre-program
period, and the fraction on mothers in receipt of the income transfer during the first two trimesters of pregnancy (during the program period). The size of the
points in these figures is proportional to the number of observations in that cell.

35

Figure 5: Fertility rates as a function of time to/since the baseline visit, difference between PANES eligible and ineligible women

0

0

.005

.005

.01

.01

.015

B: Adjusted fertility difference

.015

A: Actual fertility difference

-3

-2

-1
0
time to since baseline visit (in years)

1

2

-3

-2

-1
0
time to since baseline visit (in years)

1

2

Notes. Panel A reports the difference in fertility rates between eligible and ineligible PANES applicant women of child bearing age as a function of the time to
and since the baseline survey. Panel B reports the same difference reweighted by the fraction of eligible mothers in each cell defined by mother’s fertility history,
age and education measured in the baseline survey. See text for details. Dotted lines are the 95% confidence interval.

36

Table 1: Descriptive statistics, all births in Uruguay (2003-2007)

Pre-program period (January 2003 – March 2005)
Panel A: Birth outcomes
1. Low birthweight
2. Birthweight (g)
3. Gestational length
Panel B: Prenatal and natal care
4. Total number of prenatal visits
5. Week of first prenatal visit
6. Number of visits, first trimester
7. Number of visits, second trimester
8. Number of visits, third trimester
Panel C: Socio-economic indicators
9. Average birthweight area of residence
10. Average birthweight health center
11. Public health center delivery
12. Birth delivery paid by private health insurance
13. Mother incomplete primary education
14. Number of previous pregnancies
15. Out-of-wedlock birth
16. Missing child father information
17. Father incomplete primary education
18. Mother works
19. Mother earnings during pregnancy ±
20. Household earnings during pregnancy ±
21. Household benefits during pregnancy ±
22. Household total income during pregnancy ±
23. Mother age
24. Father age
25. Birth assisted by doctor
26. Mother smoker in first trimester ^
27. Mother weight (kg), first prenatal visit^
28. Mother weight (kg), final prenatal visit^

PANES Applicants
Eligible
Ineligible
(1)
(2)

Non-applicants
(3)

0.102
3141.05
38.50

0.093
3161.35
38.50

0.084
3217.92
38.56

6.53
17.50
0.31
1.61
4.61

7.53
16.24
0.40
1.92
5.22

8.28
14.16
0.63
2.19
5.46

3193.53
3170.43
0.77
0.06
0.12
2.37
0.80
0.61
0.10
0.12
107.29
591.85
521.65
1113.50
25.43
30.77
0.49
0.31
56.36
63.26

3196.20
3185.76
0.55
0.14
0.05
1.44
0.72
0.51
0.04
0.18
283.68
1669.11
807.75
2476.86
24.78
29.62
0.55
0.25
60.18
68.48

3200.88
3207.59
0.33
0.43
0.04
1.26
0.52
0.31
0.02
0.43
27.50
31.93
0.71
0.16
61.81
71.20

Panel D: Program period (April 2005 – December 2007)
29. Low birthweight
0.091
0.091
0.082
30. Ever received income transfer
0.97
0.11
31. Income transfer during pregnancy (0/1)
0.55
0.06
32. Amount of income transfer during pregnancy
607.52
69.21
33. Ever received food card
0.80
0.12
34. Food card during pregnancy (0/1)
0.33
0.04
35. Amount of food card during pregnancy
134.45
12.06
36. Mother earnings during pregnancy ±
132.81
340.96
37. Household earnings during pregnancy ±
808.28
1979.12
38. Household benefits during pregnancy ±
683.46
874.04
39. Household total income during pregnancy ±
2233.80
2934.43
Observations, vital statistics sample
50,939
20,872
163,370
Observations, SIP sample
15,093
6,905
57,477
Notes. The table reports means for three groups of individuals: PANES eligible (column 1), ineligible (column 2), and
the rest of the Uruguayan population (non-PANES applicants, column 3). Pre-program period (Panels A, B and C)
refers to births occurring between January 2003 and March 2005, while program period (panel D) refers to births
occurring between April 2005 and December 2007. ±: data available only since March 2004. The earnings and transfers
variables are in monthly terms. ^: data available only for SIP sample.

37

Table 2: PANES program effects on birth outcomes, 2SLS estimates
Dependent variable:
Panel A: 2SLS
1. Low birthweight
2. Birthweight
3. Gestational length (in weeks)
4. Premature birth
5. In bottom decile of weight per gestational length
Panel B: Reduced form and first stage results
6. Low birthweight, by length of exposure – reduced form
Entered 3rd trimester
Entered 2nd trimester
Entered 1st trimester
Entered before conception
7. Low birthweight – reduced form
8. Income transfer during pregnancy (0/1) – first stage
Controls

(1)

(2)

-0.015***
(0.005)
23.774**
(10.440)
0.077**
(0.038)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.016***
(0.006)

-0.017***
(0.005)
29.721***
(9.871)
0.084**
(0.037)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.017***
(0.005)

-0.011
(0.008)
-0.022***
(0.007)
-0.026***
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.013***
(0.005)
0.864***
(0.005)
No

-0.007
(0.007)
-0.020**
(0.007)
-0.024***
(0.007)
-0.010**
(0.005)
-0.014***
(0.004)
0.867***
(0.005)
Yes

Notes. Number of observations: 68,858. Each cell refers to a separate regression. Entries in the panel A are estimated
coefficients from a 2SLS regression of each dependent variable on an indicator for receipt of the income transfer
during the first two trimesters since conception, where receipt of the transfer is instrumented by an indicator for mother
eligibility for PANES during pregnancy (see text for details). Row 5 reports the probability of being in the bottom
decile of the weight distribution conditional on gestational length. Row 6 reports coefficients form an OLS regression
of low birthweight (as in row 8) on indicators for in utero exposure of less than one full trimester, one full trimester,
two full trimesters, three full trimesters, and before conception. Rows 7 and 8 report the reduced form and first stage
estimates, respectively. All regressions control for month of conception indicators, indicators for month of entry into
the program (which takes on a value of zero for ineligible individuals) and an indicator for the PANES income score
being below the eligibility threshold. Controls in column (2) include indicators for mother’s age and education, sex of
the child, an indicator for multiple pregnancies (e.g., twins), for the number of previous pregnancies, month of the
baseline survey visit, and month of program enrollment. Standard errors clustered by mother. ***, **, *: significant at
99, 95 and 90% level.

38

Table 3: PANES program effects on low birthweight, additional specifications
1. Mother fixed effects (FE) estimates
2. Eligible mothers only
Regression discontinuity (RD) estimates
3. All observations
4. Predicted income score range (-0.1, 0.1)
5. Predicted income score range (-0.1, 0.1), linear polynomial
6. Fixed time of first payment (independent of actual entry date)
7. Among non-premature births
8. Pre-food card period only
9. With controls for food card roll-out
10. Among pregnancies initiated before first payment
11. Among births within one year from baseline

Coefficient estimate (s.e.)
-0.018**
(0.009)
-0.016**
(0.003)

Obs.
24,346

-0.013**
(0.006)
-0.014*
(0.008)
-0.014
(0.018)
-0.020**
(0.008)
-0.009**
(0.003)
-0.017**
(0.008)
-0.022***
(0.007)
-0.019**
(0.008)
-0.012*
(0.007)

20,675

48,891

9,529
9,529
68,858
55,621
50,953
68,858
37,054
54,250

By subgroup:
12. Teen mothers

-0.029**
13,986
(0.013)
13. Non-teen mothers
-0.016**
54,872
(0.005)
14.Married mother
-0.028**
12,231
(0.012)
15. Single mother
-0.013**
56,627
(0.006)
16. Smaller households (three or fewer household members)
-0.018*
19,593
(0.010)
17. Larger households (at least four household members)
-0.018***
49,265
(0.006)
Notes: 2SLS estimates of the effect of PANES participation on low birthweight, in a specification equivalent to Table
2, column (2). Row 1 includes mother fixed effects. Row 2 restricts to program eligible mothers only. Rows 3 to 5
present regression discontinuity estimates on program period data only. Row 3 uses a broad neighborhood around the
eligibility threshold, while rows 4 and 5 restrict to predicted income scores in the narrow range -0.1 to +0.1. Row 5
additionally includes a linear polynomial in the income score interacted with an eligibility indicator. Row 6 defines as
eligible all pregnancies starting after January 2005 to mothers with an income score below the eligibility threshold.
Row 7 restricts to non-premature births (38 weeks or more). Row 8 restricts to children conceived before November
2005, who were either in the 3rd trimester or already born when the food card was introduced. Row 9 includes an
indicator for receipt of the food card during the first two trimesters of pregnancy, instrumented by an indicator of
eligibility, and also controls for month of first food card payment. Row 10 restricts to pregnancies that started before
the date of first program payment. Row 11 restricts to pregnancies concluded within one year from baseline. Rows 12
through 17 report results by subgroups (using baseline marital status and household size). See also notes to Table 2.

39

Table 4: PANES program effects on additional outcomes, 2SLS estimates
Dependent variable:
Panel A: Socio-economic indicators during pregnancy
1. Value of income transfer during pregnancy
2. Value of Food Card during pregnancy
3. Other household government benefits during pregnancy ±
4. Mother formal sector earnings during pregnancy ±
5. Household formal sector earnings during pregnancy ±
6. Mother works during pregnancy
7. Household total income during pregnancy ±
8. Average birthweight in area of residence (g)
Panel B: Prenatal and delivery care
9. Total number of prenatal visits
10. Number of prenatal visits, first trimester
11. Number of prenatal visits, second trimester
12. Number of prenatal visits, third trimester
13. Week of first prenatal visit
14. Birth assisted by medical personnel
15. Public hospital delivery
16. Average pre-PANES birthweight in health center (g)
Panel C: Prenatal maternal health information (SIP dataset)
17. Maternal health data in SIP dataset
18. Mother weight, kg (conditional on week of pregnancy),
first weighing visit (avg: week 16)
19. Mother weight, kg (conditional on week of pregnancy),
final weighing visit (avg: week 35)
20. Mother smoked during first trimester of pregnancy
Panel D: Marital status and paternity
21. Out-of-wedlock birth
22. Missing child father information

Coefficient estimate (s.e.)

Obs.

1040***
(5)
191***
(2)
-15
(24)
-40***
(15)
-175***
(047)
-0.013**
(0.006)
968***
(55)
1.080
(0.729)

68,858

0.144**
(0.059)
-0.025*
(0.013)
0.049
(0.024)
0.132***
(0.045)
-0.061
(0.134)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.009
(0.008)
1.461
(1.301)

67,863

0.003
(0.007)
0511
(0.384)
0.966**
(0.406)
-0.032**
(0.015)

68,858

-0.021***
(0.007)
-0.016*
(0.009)

68,763

68,858
39,870
39,870
39,870
68,858
39,870
65,541

67,883
67,877
67,875
63,721
68,858
68,450
68,855

21,374
21,374
21,374

68,858

Panel E: Fertility
23. All births

0.0013***
1,037,793
(0.0003)
24. Births within one year from baseline
0.0002
377,562
(0.0005)
Notes. 2SLS estimates of the effect of PANES participation on various dependent variables, in a specification
equivalent to Table 2, column (2). Regressions in rows 18 and 19 additionally control for the week of first and last
visit, respectively. ±: data available only since March 2004. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.

40

SUPPLEMENTARY ONLINE APPENDIX – NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION
Appendix A: Additional tables and figures

Appendix Table A1: Child birth outcomes and income levels in Uruguay, U.S. and Latin America/Caribbean
Country/Region
Uruguay
United States
Latin America/Caribbean

Low birth
weight,
% (a)

Infant
mortality rate
(per 1000) (b)

Births assisted
by health
personnel, %(c)

At least one
prenatal visit,
%(c)

Per capita GDP
(PPP US$)(d)

8
8
9

11
7
19

99
99
96

97
99
95

13,189
45,989
10,575

Notes:
(a) Source: United Nations Children's Fund (2009) and Ministerio de Salud Publica (2011) for Uruguay. The column reports the fraction of low weight births
defined as children weighting less than 2.5 kg per 100 births.
(b) Source: Pan American Health Organization, reported in World Health Organization (2009). The column reports the probability of dying between birth and
one year per 1,000 births.
(c) Source: World Health Organization (2011).
(d) Source: World Bank (2011). The column reports PPP-adjusted GDP per capita in US$.

i

Appendix Figure A1: The timing of PANES program milestones

2006m1

2006m7

2007m1

2007m7

2008m1

.4
2005m1

2006m1

2006m7

2007m1

2007m7

2008m1

2005m1

E: Baseline survey–Application (months)

2005m7

2006m1

2006m7

2007m1

2007m7

2008m1

F: First income transfer–Baseline survey (months)

2005m1

.4
.3
.2

Fraction

.3

2005m7

2006m1

2006m7

2007m1

2007m7

2008m1

.1
0

0

0

.1

.2

.2

Fraction

Fraction

.4

.4

.6

.5

D: First payment of food card

2005m7

.5

2005m7

0

.2

Fraction

.4
2005m1

0

.2

Fraction
0

.2

Fraction

.4

.6

C: First income transfer payment

.6

B: Baseline survey

.6

A: Application

0

6

12

18

24

0

6

12

18

24

Notes. The figure reports the distribution of key program dates: application date (A), date of baseline survey (B), date of first payment of income transfer (C),
date of first payment of the food card (D). Panels E reports the distribution of the differences between the variables in panels B and A, and Panel F reports the
distribution of the differences between the variables in Panels C and B.

ii

Appendix Figure A2: Data integrity checks for the predicted income score (panel A) and birthweight (panel B)
Panel B: Distribution of the birthweight measure (in grams)

0

4
0

2

5

Percent

10

6

8

15

Panel A: Distribution of the standardized PANES predicted income score,
McCrary (2008) test

0

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

1000

2000
3000
Birth weight

4000

5000

Notes. Panel A reports the frequency distribution of the income score and a smoothed kernel density estimator on either side of the threshold with the associated
confidence interval. Panel B presents a histogram of birthweights in our sample, as recorded in the Uruguay vital statistics system data.

iii

Appendix Figure A3: Fertility rates and fraction treated as a function of time to/since key program dates
C: Fertilty rate as a function of time to/since baseline
visit, by PANES eligibility status
.03

B: Fertilty rate as a function of time to/since first
income transfer

eligible

ineligibile

.02

fertility rate

.025

fertility rate

.7
.6

-400

-300

-200

-100
0
100
200
date birth - date baseline

300

400

500

.25

D: Fertilty rate as a function of time to/since baseline
visit by PANES eligibility status – no children in the
baseline survey

-2
-1
0
1
Years before / after the first PANES payment

eligible

-2
-1
0
1
Years before / after the baseline survey visit

-2
-1
0
1
Years before / after the baseline survey visit

2

E: Fertilty rate as a function of time to/since baseline
visit by PANES eligibility status – two or more
children in the baseline survey
eligible

ineligibile

fertility rate

ineligibile

2

0

0

-3

-3

2

D: Fertilty rate as a function of time to/since baseline
visit by PANES eligibility status – one child in the
baseline survey

fertility rate

ineligibile

0

fertility rate

eligible

-3

.25

-500

.25

.3

.02

.01

.4

.5

fraction treated

.8

.9

1

.03

A: Fraction of children whose household was ever
treated, as a function of date of birth relative to date
of baseline survey visit

-3

-2
-1
0
1
Years before / after the baseline survey visit

2

-3

-2
-1
0
1
Years before / after the baseline survey visit

2

Notes. Panel A reports the proportion of children of applicant mothers whose household ever benefitted from the program as a function of the child’s date of birth
relative to date of the baseline survey. Panel B reports the proportion of PANES eligible mothers giving birth as a function of the time before/after the first
payment. Panel C reports the fraction of PANES mothers giving birth as a function of the time before/after the baseline survey, separately for eligible and PANES
ineligible women. Panels D, E and F report the same series as in Panel C separately by number of children born between January 2003 and the baseline survey.

iv

Appendix B: PANES Program components
The program also contained a variety of other minor components. Around 15% of PANES
households had one member attending training and educational activities organized by local NGOs
(Rutas de Salida) with the aim of fostering social inclusion by recovering the lost work habits of
participants, promoting knowledge of rights, strengthening social ties and, in some cases,
promoting good health and nutrition practices. Around 16% of PANES households had one
member participating in a workfare program (Trabajo por Uruguay). Some participants were also
incentivized to undergo routine medical checks (smear tests, prenatal visits and mammography for
women and prostate exam for men) and were offered dental care and prostheses and eye surgery.
Households in the treatment group received the monthly income provided they were not involved
in public works employment (Trabajo por Uruguay), which paid a monthly salary of UY$2,720 in
lieu of the cash transfer. Participation in this employment scheme was voluntary and, among
households who applied for jobs, participants were selected by lottery. In the paper we define
program beneficiaries those receiving either the Ingreso Ciudadano (Citizen Income, the cash
transfer) or Trabajo por Uruguay. As of spring 2007, nearly all eligible households declared
having received the cash transfer at some point during the program, 71% reported having received
the Food Card while only a minority (17.6%) benefited from public works employment. Additional
components of the PANES program included: regularization of beneficiaries’ connection to public
utilities networks (water and electricity) for a nominal fee, in-kind transfers of building materials
for home improvements; health care including free dental and eye care (e.g., cataract surgery
performed in Cuba) and prostheses; micro-finance loans and technical assistance for small
entrepreneurial activities; and temporary accommodation for homeless households. Overall, around
13% of beneficiary households reported having received at least one of these additional
components. PANES also encompassed schooling and health investments (additional school
teachers in disadvantaged neighborhoods and public health investments). These affected
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households equally. Although an Emergency health plan (Plan de
Emergencia Sanitaria) was also originally conceived as an integral part of PANES, this was not de
facto implemented.

v

