NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTIVITY
IN INDIA
Sean Dougherty
Verónica C. Frisancho Robles
Kala Krishna
Working Paper 17693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17693
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

We would like to thank TCA Anant (Indian Ministry of Statistics) and Alok Sheel (Indian Ministry
of Finance) for their support of this project, which was partially carried out while Sean Dougherty
was visiting the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (New Delhi, India) and Veronica Frisancho
Robles was an external consultant to the OECD. Useful feedback was received from colleagues at
the OECD, The Pennsylvania State University and the Paris School of Economics. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NBER, the OECD
nor its member countries or partners.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17693.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Sean Dougherty, Verónica C. Frisancho Robles, and Kala Krishna. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Employment Protection Legislation and Plant-Level Productivity in India
Sean Dougherty, Verónica C. Frisancho Robles, and Kala Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 17693
December 2011
JEL No. D24,F16,J5,J8,K31
ABSTRACT
Using plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for the fiscal years from 1998-99
through 2007-08, this study provides plant-level cross-state/time-series evidence of the impact of employment
protection legislation (EPL) on total factor productivity (TFP) and labor productivity in India. Identification
of the effect of EPL follows from a difference-in-differences estimator inspired by Rajan and Zingales
(1998) that takes advantage of the state-level variation in labor regulation and heterogeneous industry
characteristics. The fundamental identification assumption is that EPL is more likely to restrict firms
operating in industries with higher labor intensity and/or higher sales volatility. Our results show that
firms in labor intensive or more volatile industries benefited the most from labor reforms in their states.
Our point estimates indicate that, on average, firms in labor intensive industries and in flexible labor
markets have TFP residuals 14% higher than those registered for their counterparts in states with more
stringent labor laws. However, no important differences are identified among plants in industries with
low labor intensity when comparing states with high and low levels of EPL reform. Similarly, the
TFP of plants in volatile industries and in states that experienced more pro-employer reforms is 11%
higher than that of firms in volatile industries and in more restrictive states; however, the TFP residuals
of plants in industries with low labor intensity are 11% lower in high EPL reform states than in states
with lower levels of EPL reform. In sum, the evidence presented here suggests that the high labor costs
and rigidities imposed through Indian federal labor laws are lessened by labor market reforms at the
state level.
Sean Dougherty
OECD Economics Department
2, rue Andre Pascal
75775 Paris Cedex 16
France
sean.dougherty@oecd.org
Verónica C. Frisancho Robles
Department of Economics
306 Kern Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
vfrisancho@psu.edu

Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu

1

Introduction

It is well known that India’s formal Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) is among the most
stringent in the world. Many believe that this is one of the main reasons behind the stagnant share
of manufacturing output in India’s GDP during the last 40 years (OECD, 2007). Although the
country has recorded impressive output growth rates since the 1970s, the share of manufactures in
total output has remained between 14% and 18%. Though infrastructure and product market regulation have been major challenges, strict labor laws have been blamed in particular for the poor
performance of large-scale labor intensive manufactures despite India’s labor abundance (Panagariya, 2008; Conway and Herd, 2009; Dougherty et al., 2009). According to the Indian Ministry of
Commerce and Industry (2011), the top five goods exported during 2010-11 represented almost 50%
of the country’s total exports and they were all relatively capital intensive goods such as petroleum
products, gems and jewelry, transport equipment, machinery and instruments, and pharmaceutical
products. In contrast, ready-made garments, traditionally an unskilled-labor intensive export, has
seen its share in total Indian exports decline from 12.5% to 6% between 2000 and 2010. In 2009,
India was the fifth largest exporter of apparel with 3.6% of the world’s exports (WTO, 2010).
Industrial relations in India fall under the joint jurisdiction of central and state governments, an
arrangement that has generated a degree of variation in labor regulations across states. Although all
states had essentially the same starting point under the License Raj, each state has independently
amended labor regulations, rules and practices during the post-Independence period. In the last
decade, this “natural experiment” setting has been exploited by several empirical studies that have
tried to assess the effects of labor regulation on output, employment, and productivity.1 However,
and despite increasing interest in the topic, the evidence for India is still inconclusive and mostly
limited to industry-level analysis.
One of the most influential studies of India is Besley and Burgess (2004), which constructs
an index summarizing state-level amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) between 1949
and 1992. The index, henceforth referred to as BB, is used along with several control variables to
explain state-level outcomes corresponding to the organized manufacturing sector using industrylevel panel data for 1958-92. The authors identify a negative impact of pro-worker regulation on
output, investment, employment, and labor productivity among registered manufacturing firms.
1

One must keep in mind that the state-level amendments may not have been as exogenous as a true natural
experiment would require.

1

Several papers that also rely on the BB index reach similar conclusions.2
Nonetheless, the validity of the BB index and the econometric methodology used to identify the
effect of excessive pro-worker regulation have been extensively criticized. The main concerns with
the use of this index are related to problems in the coding of labor laws and its exclusive focus on
formal reforms to the IDA. This study tries to overcome the shortcomings of the previous empirical
evidence in the tradition of Besley and Burgess (2004) to evaluate the effect of labor regulation
on the Indian organized manufacturing sector. We make use of a more comprehensive measure of
labor market regulations proposed in OECD (2007) and elaborated in Dougherty (2009). We argue
that this index is superior to the BB index as it includes information on formal and informal labor
market reforms, not only to the IDA but in seven additional areas: the Factories Act, the State
Shops and Commercial Establishments Acts, the Contract labor Act, the role of inspectors, the
maintenance of registers, the filing of returns and union representation.
Using this comprehensive EPL measure and plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for all the fiscal years between 1998-99 and 2007-08, we evaluate whether labor market
regulation differences across Indian states led to a differential response in industrial performance.3
However, differences across states in terms of labor regulation may be endogenous. A higher number
of pro-employer reforms in a given state may be driven by the characteristics of the firms located
in that state.
Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we focus on the details of the theoretical mechanisms at
play. As we will show below, unit labor costs increase with more stringent EPL, and more so for
firms operating in industries with higher labor intensity. This implies that firms in industries with
higher labor shares will suffer the most from the additional costs of hiring and firing workers. Thus,
we implement a difference-in-difference estimator that exploits both the variation in EPL by state,
as well as the variation in industry-specific characteristics related to labor intensity and volatility.
In addition, to the extent that such costs act as adjustment costs, they will have more of an effect
in more volatile industries so that the productivity of firms in more volatile sectors should be more
affected by strict labor laws. By focusing on a specific mechanism through which EPL reform
operates (labor intensity or volatility), this approach provides stronger evidence of causality.
Previous studies have also exploited the variation in state and industry characteristics4 but
2

See Aghion et al. (2008) and Ahsan and Pagés (2006) as examples.
In this paper, EPL is used as a shorthand to refer to a customized measure of state-level labor regulation
reforms in India as presented in OECD (2007) and elaborated in Dougherty (2009). The official OECD measure is
country-specific and has a longstanding standardized definition, as most recently elaborated in Venn (2009).
4
See Gupta et al. (2009) and Bassanini et al. (2009).
3

2

their focus was at the industry level. To our knowledge, this is the first study of India to evaluate
the effect of labor regulation on plant-level productivity using a longitudinal sample,5 and is one
of only a few studies on any country to examine labor regulation effects at the plant level.
The evidence presented here shows that firms in industries with higher labor intensity or higher
sales volatility benefited the most from labor market reforms in their states. The positive effect of
relaxed EPL on organized manufacturing firms in labor intensive industries is experienced through
higher total factor productivity (TFP) although there is no consistent effect on labor productivity
measured as value added per worker. Similarly, firms in more volatile industries that experience
pro-employer labor reforms tend to have higher levels of TFP. We also identify a heterogeneous
effect of EPL in labor intensive industries by plant size and ownership type. In particular, we find
that smaller firms and private firms with a high usage of labor inputs tend to benefit the most from
relaxation of state labor laws. In general, our results suggest that state-level reforms can help to
mitigate the detrimental effects that strict federal labor laws have on industrial outcomes in the
organized Indian manufacturing sector.
Our paper contributes to two strands of literature. First, its adds to the literature that focuses
on the effect of labor and product regulation on industrial outcomes and economic performance, of
which Besley and Burgess (2004) has been one of the most influential studies. It also contributes
to some recent studies on the potential links between labor markets and comparative advantage
that have received special attention in the trade literature. Within this literature, our study is
particularly related to Cuñat and Melitz (2007) and Krishna and Levchenko (2009), who highlight
the role of firm-level volatility in determining the pattern of comparative advantage.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sketches out the major findings in the
literature. Section 3 describes the data as well as some basic stylized facts. The empirical strategy
is described in Section 4 while Section 5 displays the results. Some robustness checks are presented
in Section 6. Section 7 concludes and describes the limitations of the study, as well as directions
for future research.

2

Previous Literature

Despite increasing interest in the effect of institutions and regulation in industrial performance, the
theoretical and empirical evidence to support or negate the beneficial effect of EPL relaxation is
5
Harrison et al. (2011) use a similar dataset also based on the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) to examine
market share reallocations; however they focus on trade policy reforms.

3

still limited. Although labor market equilibrium models such as Garibaldi’s (1998) and Mortensen
and Pissarides’s (1999) predict a negative effect of stricter EPL on job mobility, its effects on
productivity are not that straightforward.
Stricter labor regulation increases the costs of hiring and firing workers, making it more difficult
for the firm to react to demand or supply shocks that require labor reallocation or staff reduction.
The restriction of labor movement even in more productive firms or sectors can thus result in
lower productivity levels. Poschke (2009) develops a model that takes into account firm dynamics
and where firms receive idiosyncratic productivity shocks. He shows that selection eliminates the
active firms with the lowest productivity, and entrants imitate more productive survivors. In this
setting, strict EPL ends up reducing firm value, discouraging not only entry but also the exit of
less productive firms. Moreover, growth losses tend to be larger when productivity is more volatile.
This latter result is in line with previous findings of worse effects of strict EPL for firms operating
in more turbulent sectors (see Bentolila and Bertola, 1990).
Negative effects of EPL on productivity can also be expected to act through lower worker efforts
due to a lower threat of getting fired. Product or technology innovation can also be discouraged if
the firm has to face high labor costs and high layoff costs in case of failure.
Another branch of the literature suggests that the net effects of EPL on productivity may be
positive. Workers may be more willing to invest in human capital specific to the firm if their
jobs are better protected. Firms may also be willing to invest more to increase labor productivity
as an alternative to downsizing. Bassanini et al. (2009) provide an extensive discussion of these
theoretical results suggesting that there might be an “optimal” level of EPL.
A recent paper by Cuñat and Melitz (2007) studies the link between volatility, labor market
flexibility, and international trade. They develop a model and test it using country-industry level
data and find that countries with more flexible labor markets fare better in more volatile industries,
where their ability to adjust to unexpected shocks is more important. This implies that labor
market reforms might have differential effects across industries and that their effects might be more
beneficial among sectors with a higher dispersion of within-industry shocks.
The empirical literature available is quite inconclusive and has tried to measure the effects
of EPL on industrial outcomes using cross-country studies with industry-level data or industrystate-level data. Among the first group of papers, Micco and Pagés (2007) implement a differencein-differences estimator in a cross-section of industry-level data for a sample of developed and
developing countries. They are able to identify the effect of EPL by arguing that sector differ4

ences in the intrinsic volatility of demand and supply shocks can lead to differential responses to
labor regulation. Their results show that EPL reduces turnover, employment, and value added
in more volatile industries but they only find weak evidence of a negative relationship between
labor regulation stringency and labor productivity. Similarly, Bassanini et al. (2009) use aggregate
cross-country/time-series data on OECD countries to measure the differential effects of countrylevel EPL on industry-level productivity. They find that dismissal regulations tend to generate
larger TFP growth loses among industries with a high layoff propensity relative to industries where
firms rely less on layoffs to adjust labor-inputs’ usage.
A recent strand in the empirical literature focuses on India, one of the countries with the
strictest labor regulation in the world. Although Indian labor laws were strongly influenced by the
British model inherited on independence, it is clear that Indian labor regulation is substantially
more protective than the UK’s present system, as shown in Figure 1. The gap between these
countries broadens after 1979, which is when a conservative government committed to labor market
deregulation was elected in the UK. India fares even worse when compared to the US. However, the
Indian case is particularly interesting and a nice setting for empirical studies given the ability of
state governments to introduce formal and informal amendments to the labor laws. Consequently,
changes in the application of the law at the state-level have resulted in important variations in the
stringency of EPL within the same country.
First promoted by Besley and Burgess (2004), most studies focusing on India tend to use crossstate and intertemporal variation in labor legislation as measured by state IDA amendments. These
studies find that changes towards more flexible labor regulation are correlated with higher levels
of manufacturing output, employment, and labor productivity in the organized industrial sector.
For example, Aghion et al. (2006) find that, following delicensing, industries located in states with
pro-employer labor regulations grew more quickly than those in pro-worker environments. Ahsan
and Pagés (2009) also use the BB index but decompose it into amendments that reduce transaction
costs of initiating and sustaining industrial disputes and those that increase job security and reduce
labor flexibility. Their results suggest that regulations that increase the cost of settling disputes
are more costly for employment than the restrictions directly imposed by the IDA.
Focusing on rural India, Adhvaryu et al. (2009) develop a partial equilibrium model where
agriculture exists alongside industry. They use use rainfall fluctuations to measure exogenous unobserved demand and cost shocks, and analyze the response of states with different labor regulations
as measured by the BB index. Their results show that the change in employment is significantly
5

15
10
0

5

Labor Regulation Index

20

25

Figure 1: Evolution of Labor Law in India, UK, and the US

1970

1975

1980
UK

1985

1990
US

1995

2000

2005

India

Source: Deakin, Simon, Priya Lele, and Mathias Siems. 2007. “The Evolution of Labor Law: Calibrating and
Comparing Regulatory Regimes”, International Labor Review, 146: 133-162.
Notes: The laws reported for India are mostly federal laws. The authors also report some state-level variations in
case law, especially for the most heavily industrialized states. The labor regulation index is a score obtained out of
40 possible points, where higher values indicate more stringent regulation.

greater in states with laxer labor laws. However, shocks do not generate a differential response in
output or profits. This is explained by a greater adjustment of the use of capital and materials in
pro-worker states.
Despite its extended use in the empirical literature, the BB index has been heavily criticized.
Bhattacharjea (2006, 2009) claims that the Besley and Burgess (2004) scoring system can erroneously classify a state as pro-employer or pro-worker with just one or two amendments to the IDA
in the 50 years covered by the index. Nagaraj (2004) points out that the BB index focuses only
on the IDA, abstracting from several other labor laws that affect industrial performance. Another
important critique is its exclusive focus on formal amendments, which ignores changes in the actual
practices and enforcement of the labor laws. In fact, most recent changes in state-level practices
have resulted from judicial interpretations of the laws by the Supreme Court. It is thus not surprising updates of the BB index, using Malik (2006), show very few changes in labor regulation
after 1992. Bhattacharjea (2006, 2009) also emphasizes the fragility of Besley and Burgess’ (2004)
econometric results. In particular, he criticizes the use of irrelevant state-level control variables
and inadequate tests for robustness as well as the fragility of their results once state-specific time
trends are introduced in their model.

6

A recent study by Gupta et al. (2009) tries to overcome some of the BB index’s measurement
problems by using a simple majority rule across three EPL measures available in the empirical
literature, including the BB index. They argue that this approach has the advantage of weeding
out any measurement error, unless there are systematic mistakes in coding the states across different
indicators. Using this state-level composite measure of EPL, they exploit industry-level variation
in labor usage to test the differential impact of product and labor market regulations. They find
that labor intensive industries in states with flexible labor regulation have higher levels of value
added.
Bhattacharjea (2009) departs from Besley and Burgess’ (2004) work by focusing on the legislative content of the state-level amendments as well as on the judicial interpretations to Chapter V
of the IDA.6 Although his proposed index is better in the sense that it includes information on
practices at the ground level, he still focuses on only one labor law. His results on the effect of
state-level labor regulation reform on the number of factories, value added, and share of contract
labor are mixed but he highlights that his main contribution lies on his critique of the earlier
literature.
All in all, the evidence on the effects of EPL on TFP and/or TFP growth in India is still scarce.
This gap in the literature is even larger when we focus on the evidence available at the plant or firm
level. Besides the well known difficulties involved in TFP estimation at the plant level, the fact
that state-level changes in the labor regulation may be endogenously determined requires additional
sources of variation in the data to identify the effect of EPL on plant-level productivity.
In particular, we expect labor regulation differences to have heterogenous effects on productivity across industries with different levels of labor intensity. Assuming there is a Cobb-Douglas
production function specific to each manufacturing industry, Y = ALα K 1−α , the unit cost function
(which is inversely related to A, multifactor productivity) will be given by:
1
c=
A



wRs
α

α 

r
1−α

1−α

where w and r are the labor and capital input prices. Employment protection legislation is captured
through the constant Rs which multiplies wages in state s to capture the effective cost of labor.
Whenever labor legislation imposes additional costs through layoff regulation or hiring restrictions,
Rs will be above 1.
6

This chapter relates to firms’ requirements to obtain government permission for layoffs, retrenchments, and
closures.

7

The percentage change in the unit cost with respect to Rs will be given by:
∂ log c
α
=
∂Rs
Rs

(1)

which is positive and increasing in α. In other words, the percentage change in the unit cost is
higher as EPL becomes stricter and more so for labor intensive industries. Our study will then
identify the effect of EPL by taking advantage of the state-level variation in labor regulation as
well as the industry-level variation in labor intensity as measured by an estimate of α.

3

Data

The data used in this study comes from the Indian Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), conducted
by the Indian Ministry of Statistics (MOSPI). We use ASI data from the 1998-99 through 2007-08
fiscal years to obtain an unbalanced panel of registered manufacturing plants. Previous studies
using the same data source have been unable to build a plant-level panel due to the lack of factory
identifiers that have only been made available recently.7 We differ from virtually all of them in
that we make use of a subsample of plants that constitute a panel.8
The ASI sampling frame includes all factories employing 10 or more workers using power, or 20
or more workers without using power. In general, the ASI’s basic strategy over the years has been
to divide the survey frame into census and sample sectors, where the census sector includes larger
plants. Although this strategy has remained intact, the definition of census and sample sectors
has undergone some changes over the years. Between the 1998-1999 and 2007-2008 rounds, the
size threshold for the census sector fluctuated between 50 and 200 workers, so that only plants
employing 200 or more workers are always surveyed during the years analyzed.9 The remaining
plants are randomly sampled. For more details about the sampling design changes as well as a
detailed description of the data problems present in ASI see Bollard et al. (2010); Harrison et al.
(2011) discuss the new longitudinal sample.
ASI data provides factory reports on output, value added, fixed capital, investment, materials,
fuel, labor, and labor expenditures. It also provides information on the type of ownership, the type
of organization, as well as the start-up year of each plant. The ASI reports the book value of fixed
7

We thank India’s Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) for providing us the data we use for this study. The
confidentiality of the unit level data was maintained and adequate precautions have been taken to avoid disclosing
the identity of the units directly or indirectly.
8
A notable exception is Harrison et al. (2011), which uses the ASI panel to examine the role of market-share
reallocations in aggregate productivity growth in India’s organized manufacturing sector between 1985 and 2004.
9
All industrial units belonging to the five least industrially developed states (Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Tripura and Andaman & Nicobar Islands) were also included in the census sector.

8

capital both at the beginning and at the end of the fiscal year, net of depreciation. Our measure of
fixed capital will be the average of the net book value of fixed capital at the beginning and at the
end of the fiscal year, while all other variables are measured at the end. The data collected from
the ASI are at current prices and must be corrected for price changes over time. Details on the
specific deflators used for each variable can be found in Appendix A.
Table 1: Percentage of missing observations in each ASI round
Year
1998-1999
1999-2000
2000-2001
2001-2002
2002-2003
2003-2004
2004-2005
2005-2006
2006-2007
2007-2008
Total

Total Obs.a/
23,620
24,684
31,053
33,387
33,800
45,429
39,714
43,675
43,304
38,439

Missing Obs.b/
4,290
6,944
8,349
8,579
8,625
12,483
11,503
10,039
12,812
10,777

% Missing
18.2
28.1
26.9
25.7
25.5
27.5
29.0
23.0
29.6
28.0

357,105

94,401

26.4

a/

After removal of non-operative plants and plants with nonpositive values of output and fixed capital stock. Only 7% of all
observations are dropped for these reasons.
b/
Observations are coded as missing when the factory does not
have data on output, value added, materials, fuels, fixed capital,
labor, or labor expenditures.

The raw data consist of about 384,000 observations over 10 years, with an average of about
38,000 plants surveyed each year. We remove observations corresponding to non-operative plants
(26,553) and plants with non-positive values of output and negative values of fixed capital stock
(499). Table 1 shows that following this, on average, 26% of the observations in each round have
missing values for output, value added, materials, fuels, fixed capital, or labor. After removing these
observations, we also drop 3 manufacturing industries (2-digit NIC) with too few observations: other
mining and quarrying, recycling, and office, accounting, and communication equipment. Following
Aghion et al. (2008) and Gupta et al. (2009), we also drop “other” manufacturing industries. This
category groups different activities which are likely to vary across states, making it incomparable
across states. Finally, we also drop the states and union territories of Jammu & Kashmir, Chandigarh, Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Pondicherry,
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands due to lack of information on employment legislation. We also
exclude Lakshadweep due to lack of data in the ASI and Goa given its economy’s dependence on

9

tourism.
The final sample consists of 239,921 plant-year observations with data on 103,478 plants in 20
states. Almost 60% of the observations and 74% of the plants in our data come from the sample
sector. Moreover, almost 50% of the plants appear in only one round of the survey. As expected,
these are smaller plants, with an average of 48 workers. This is an important limitation of the ASI;
since plants in the sample sector are not deliberately followed over time, entry and exit for smaller
plants is missed. Due to changes in the census threshold size, exit and entry is only consistently
observed for census plants with at least 200 workers. We call this sample the restricted census
sample which contains 49,895 plant-year observations on 11,343 plants. Basic statistics on the final
sample are presented in Table B.1 in Appendix B.
We rely on the restricted census sample to obtain TFP estimates but use information on all the
plants surveyed to measure the effect of EPL on productivity. To take into account simultaneity and
selection biases, we obtain production function estimates using the Olley-Pakes estimator. Since
this approach uses information on plants’ exits and lagged values of some variables, we only apply
it to the restricted census sample. We then apply estimates of the production function’s parameters
to the full sample of plants and obtain TFP residuals for all plants in ASI’s census and sample
sectors.
An additional problem posed by ASI data is the substantial number of outliers. To reduce their
influence in our estimates, we “winsorized” the data, following Bollard et al. (2010). This procedure
basically implies top-coding and bottom-coding the 1% tails for each plant-level variable. In other
words, for each year and each variable we replace outliers in the top 1% tail (bottom 1% tail) with
the value of the 99th (1st ) percentile of that variable. This procedure was applied separately to
each 2-digit industry.10
Our measure of labor reform comes from the OECD index which summarizes state-level indicators of procedural changes to the implementation of labor laws either through formal amendments
or through de facto practices (Dougherty, 2009). The OECD, with the support of the All-India
Association of Employers (AIOE), surveyed 21 Indian states in 2007. The EPL index reflects the
extent to which procedural or administrative changes have reduced transaction costs in relation to
labor issues. It is constructed using data from a survey instrument developed to identify areas in
which Indian states have experienced specific changes to the implementation and administration
10
We do not remove these outliers because we would have generated an additional loss of 59,896 observations, about
25% of the complete sample.

10

of labor laws. The survey covered 50 specific subjects of possible reform in 7 major areas of labor
regulation in addition to the IDA: the Factories Act, the State Shops and Commercial Establishments Acts, the Contract Labor Act, the role of inspectors, the maintenance of registers, the filing
of returns and union representation. We use the ordinal EPL count index, rebased and rescalled
from zero to one, which is essentially the p of areas in which pro-employer labor reform occurred.
It is worth emphasizing that, although the OECD index can be separated by its subcomponents,
we rely on the aggregate measure of labor reform since the index was designed to capture a state’s
general stance towards labor regulations more than the character of specific reforms.
To add state-level controls to our estimates, we gathered time series data on population, telephone availability, installed electric capacity, and paved road length. State population comes from
census population data for 1991, 2001, and 2011, and it is linearly interpolated for other years.
Time series data on fixed and mobile phones per 100 population comes from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’s (MOSPI) website. Installed electric capacity, measured as
kilowatts per million people on the state, is obtained from the Annual Report of the Indian Ministry
of Power for the years 1997-98, 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06, and 2007-08.
State-wise surfaced road length is obtained from two sources: i) the Basic Road Statistics of India
report from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for the years 2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-07,
and 2007-08, and ii) the Planning Commission’s 9th and 10th Five Year Plans. Road density is
measured as paved kilometers per thousand people in the state.
We also include an OECD measure of state-level product market regulation as a time-invariant
control to take into account the potential role of product regulation as a complement (or substitute)
of labor market laws. The product market regulation index is taken from Conway and Herd
(2008) and it contains information on state intervention and legal or administrative barriers to
entrepreneurship.
In our robustness checks, we will also make use of the BB index that we update through 2008
using Malik (2010) as well as Gupta et al.’s (2009) labor market regulation composite index. The
latter is based on a simple majority rule across the EPL indicators proposed in Besley and Burgess
(2004), Bhattacharjea (2006), and Dougherty (2009). States are coded as pro-labor, pro-business,
or neutral if the majority of the studies considered classified them as such. Additionally, we check
the robustness of our results using industry-level layoff propensity instead of the measure of labor
intensity captured by the estimated αs. Layoff propensities are measured for the US between 2002
and 2003 with data from the 2004 CPS Displaced Workers Supplement (see Table A.3 in Bassanini
11

et al., 2009).11 Using these propensities, we construct a dummy variable for above and below the
median industry.
We must emphasize that the ASI only provides data on organized manufacturing plants. In a
country where the informal sector constitutes a majority of the labor force and the unorganized
sector produces a third of total manufacturing value added, there is also a need to understand how
EPL reforms have affected unorganized plants. A source of data on these plants is the National
Sample Survey Organization’s (NSSO) survey but it is only carried out every five years. This
lack of data comparable to the ASI forces most researchers to focus exclusively on the registered,
or organized sector. However, this focus is also appropriate since labor market rigidities in the
organized sector constrain the absorption of formal workers, who tend to be more productive, receive
higher wages, and face better working conditions than workers in the informal sector (Gupta et al.,
2009). Moreover, Goldar and Aggarwal (2010) provide some evidence on the effects of labor market
reforms in the unorganized manufacturing sector. Using the OECD labor market reform index for
Indian states, they find a negative and significant relationship between labor laws’ flexibility and
the probability of being a casual worker both in the formal and informal manufacturing sector,
although the effect in the organized sector is far stronger.

3.1

Basic Patterns

Using the OECD index, we classified states as having flexible EPL when they were above the
median state according to the degree of labor regulation reforms carried out. Figure 2 plots the
cumulative distribution of output and employment by labor laws’ rigidity. Panel (a) suggests that
the variation in labor standards across states may have allowed some states to fare better than
others; the distribution of output in states with flexible labor laws first order dominates that of
states with more stringent regulation. However, panel (b) of Figure 2 suggests that EPL does not
seem to influence formal employment. Although these patterns are suggestive, we need to control
for the states’ total population to get a better idea of the general picture.
Figure 3 plots output and employment per capita at the state level in 2000 against our EPL
reform indicator.12 Each observation in the scatter plot represents a state. Even after controlling
for the state’s population, Panel (a) in Figure 3 shows that there is a modest positive relationship
between output per capita and the preponderance of labor law reforms in the state. However, this
11

The industry classification in this data (ISIC Rev. 3) does not exactly match the 2-digit industry classification of
the ASI, so in some cases we had to merge Indian industries to make them comparable to those in the United States.
12
The OECD labor reform index has been re-scaled so that 0 corresponds to the lowest level of reform and 1
indicates the highest level of reform at the state level.

12

pattern is much weaker for formal employment per capita as shown in panel (b).

1
.8
Cum. Density
.4
.6
.2
0

0

.2

Cum. Density
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 2: Output, employment, and EPL in 2000

5

8

Log(Output)

11

Inflexible Labor Markets

14

0

Flexible Labor Markets

2

4
6
Log(Employment)

Inflexible Labor Markets

(a) Output

8

10

Flexible Labor Markets

(b) Employment

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08 rounds.

15

−5

0

Output per capita in 2000 (Rupees)
0
5
10

Formal Workers per 1000 Pop in 2000
5
10

15

Figure 3: Output and employment per capita and EPL in 2000

0

.2

.4
.6
Labor Reform Index

Confidence interval (95%)

.8

1

0

Linear Prediction

.2

.4
.6
Labor Reform Index

Confidence interval (95%)

(a) Output

.8

1

Linear Prediction

(b) Employment

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08 rounds.

However, differences in the number of plants in each state may be driving these patterns. To
deal with this, Figure 4 decomposes total output and employment by EPL flexibility into their
extensive and intensive margins. While the extensive margin is captured by the number of plants
(N ), the intensive margin is measured by the average output or average employment per plant
(Q/N or L/N ). Both in terms of output and employment, states with more flexible regulation fare
13

better than plants operating in more restrictive labor markets. However, most of this “advantage”
seems to be explained by the evolution of the extensive margin. On average, intensive margin
differences explain about 36% of the output gap and 9% of the employment differences between
flexible and inflexible states.13

2000

2001

2002

2003

Q, Inflexible EPL
Q/N, Inflexible EPL
N, Inflexible EPL

2004

2005

2006

2007

50
100
150
200
250
Average Employment per Firm (workers)
Number of Firms (Hundreds)

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

2008

0

500

Employment (Thousands of workers)

0
1999

0

50
100
150
200
250
Average Output per Firm (Millions Rs.)
Number of Firms (Hundreds)

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
0

500

Output (Billions of Rs.)

Figure 4: Labor market regulations and manufacturing production and employment

1999

Q, Flexible EPL
Q/N, Flexible EPL
N, Flexible EPL

2000

2001

2002

2003

L, Inflexible EPL
L/N, Inflexible EPL
N, Inflexible EPL

(a) Total output

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

L, Flexible EPL
L/N, Flexible EPL
N, Flexible EPL

(b) Total employment

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.

Figure 5 plots the distribution of TFP and labor productivity by EPL and labor intensity. We
obtain TFP estimates separately for each industry (so that scaling is not an issue) using the OlleyPakes approach in the subsample of ongoing plants in ASI’s panel. Sub-section 4.1 below describes
the details of the estimation of TFP residuals, which yields unbiased estimates of the production
function coefficients. In particular, we rely on the output elasticity with respect to labor, α,
estimated in the panel and identify labor intensive industries as those with an α̂ above the median
industry. Following Besley and Burgess (2004), we also show labor productivity measured as value
added per employee, net of industry fixed effects. Panels (a) and (b) show that industries with high
labor intensity experience a greater improvement in their TFP distribution from the relaxation of
labor laws’ enforcement when compared to less labor intensive industries. Additionally, panels (c)
and (d) show that, irrespective of the industry’s labor usage, the distribution of labor productivity
13

Let the subscripts 0 and 1 correspond to outcomes in inflexible and flexible labor markets, respectively. Output
differences can be decomposed in the following way:
 
 
 
  
 
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
N1 −
N0 =
−
N1 +
[N1 − N0 ]
N 1
N 0
N 1
N 0
N 0
where the first term in the right hand side captures output differences coming from the intensive margin for a fixed
number of plants. The second term fixes output per plant to capture extensive margin differences.

14

in flexible states is always to the right of that of states with stricter EPL but the distance between
distributions is larger in labor intensive industries.
So far, this preliminary evidence suggests that labor intensive industries benefit the most from
EPL relaxation in Indian states. Section 5 below will test if the patterns identified for productivity
remain relevant after a more rigorous analysis.

1
.8
.6
Density
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

Density

.6

.8

1

Figure 5: Labor market regulation, labor intensity, and productivity

−1.5

−1

−.5

0

.5

TFP

1

1.5

Inflexible Labor Markets

2

2.5

3

−1.5

−1

Flexible Labor Markets

−.5

0

.5

TFP

1

1.5

Inflexible Labor Markets

2.5

3

Flexible Labor Markets

.8
.6
Density
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

Density

.6

.8

1

(b) TFP: Low labor intensity

1

(a) TFP: High labor intensity

2

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0
VA/L

1

Inflexible Labor Markets

2

3

4

5

−5

Flexible Labor Markets

−4

−3

−2

−1

0
VA/L

Inflexible Labor Markets

(c) Labor productivity: High labor intensity

1

2

3

4

5

Flexible Labor Markets

(d) Labor productivity: Low labor intensity

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.

4

Empirical Strategy

The main objective of this study is to assess the effect of employment regulation reform in India
on TFP and labor productivity between 1998-99 and 2007-08. The basic specification proposed to
evaluate productivity performance is similar to the one used by Aghion et al. (2006), in the sense

15

that we take advantage of state-level variation in labor regulation, but we extend it to incorporate
industry-level variation. Our fundamental assumption is that EPL reform is more likely to restrict
plants operating in industries with higher labor intensity, or alternatively higher volatility.
Consider the partial equilibrium effect of a change in EPL derived in (1). The impact on
productivity is expected to be larger in industries where plants rely more on labor than in industries
in which this input is relatively less important. We can also think of more volatile industries having
a harder time adjusting their labor input usage when strict labor regulations are in place. To capture
the effect of labor regulation reform, we use a difference-in-differences estimator inspired by Rajan
and Zingales (1998). By comparing cross-industry differences in states with different levels of labor
reform we can evaluate the effect of EPL changes towards pro-employer legislation on productivity
levels. Labor intensive industries will be more constrained by labor regulation so the impact of
EPL reform is identified using industries with a lower output elasticity with respect to output as
a control group. Relaxation in labor regulation may also interact with industry-level differences
in the dispersion of plant-level shocks to generate larger TFP gains among sectors with a higher
dispersion of these shocks.
Below, we briefly describe the TFP estimates used in this study. Next, we proceed to describe
the econometric model used to measure the impact of labor reform on manufacturing plants.

4.1

TFP Measures

When trying to estimate a production function using observed plant-level variables, obtaining TFP
measures from the residuals encompasses several measurement and econometric problems. On
one hand, measurement of outputs and inputs generates an aggregation problem, especially in
multiproduct plants. Another measurement issue relates to capital usage; since it is very tough to
obtain data on capital consumption as an input in the production process, the researcher has to
settle for the book value of total capital and machinery involved in the production process.
Although the previous problems are complex enough, there is not much the empirical researcher
can do about them but try to collect better quality and more detailed micro data. In addition to
these problems, several econometric difficulties arise when estimating production functions at the
plant level. Two of the most prominent and serious problems are simultaneity and selection biases.
Assume a Cobb-Douglas production function like the one described below:
Yit = Ait Lαit Kitβ Mitγ Fitλ
where Yit are physical units of output and Lit , Kit , Mit , and Fit measure labor, fixed capital,
16

materials, and fuels, respectively. Since Ait enters the right hand side in a multiplicative way,
affecting all the other factors’ marginal product simultaneously, it represents the TFP. Taking
logarithms allows us to use a linear estimation model described by:
yit = αlit + βkit + γmit + λfit + uit

(2)

where small letters are used for logs.
From the estimation of equation (2), we can retrieve the error term uit , which is the log of
plant-specific Ait , provided that the coefficients on the inputs are consistently estimated. OLS
estimation does not yield consistent estimates if plants’ choices on exit and on factor demands
(when they continue operating) depend on their productivity. This fact generates both a selection
and a simultaneity problem in the estimation of production functions.
Olley-Pakes (1996) deals with the simultaneity problem by using the firm’s investment decision
to proxy for unobserved productivity shocks. It is assumed that a higher value of the productivity
shock observed by the firm (but unobserved by us) will induce higher investment today. The OlleyPakes approach also offers a correction for selection bias due to exit. In the first stage, a probit of
survival is estimated as a function of a polynomial of capital and investment and the fitted values
from this regression are used in the second stage to consistently estimate the production function
parameters.14
Since this technique requires information on exit and lagged values of some variables, we estimate
the parameters in (2) using Olley-Pakes in the restricted census sample, for which panel data is
available. We estimate the coefficients for capital, labor, materials, and fuels separately for each
industry and assume that these estimates are applicable to plants in the census as well as in the
sample sector. We can then obtain TFP as a residual for all the plants using the industry-specific
coefficient estimates. Estimating TFP using industry-specific regressions allows for differences in
the production function’s coefficients, including a constant term, which yields unit-free productivity
residuals that are comparable across industries. In the end, TFP residuals are obtained as the
exponential of the residual in (2).15
14
See Olley and Pakes (1996). Their approach assumes a strictly monotonic relationship between output and
investment so that all observations with zero investment are dropped. An alternative approach to deal with the
simultaneity bias is offered by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), who use intermediate inputs as a proxy for investment
to avoid losing observations. However, only 4% of the plant-year observations in the restricted census sample used to
estimate TFP have zero investment. Moreover, unlike Olley-Pakes, Levinsohn-Petrin methodology does not offer a
correction for selection bias. For more details on the problems faced when estimating productivity as well as available
solutions, see Arnold (2005).
15
Notice that since the error is mean zero, this explains why the mean of the TFP distribution in Figure 5 is so
close to 1.

17

To estimate TFP at the plant level, we use real gross output instead of value added as the
dependent variable. According to Basu and Fernald (1997) and Carlsson et al. (2011), the use of
value added is only valid for TFP estimation under perfect competition and constant returns to
scale.16 Labor is measured in number of workers and fixed capital is measured as the average of
the net book real value of fixed capital at the beginning and at the end of the fiscal year. The
amount of fuels and materials consumed is used to measure the usage of these inputs. Investment is
measured by the gross value of additions to fixed capital. All the variables are measured in rupees
at the end of the period and in 1993-94 constant prices, unless otherwise noted.

4.2

Econometric Model

Our analysis of the impact of labor reform on manufacturing outcomes relies on this basic model:
log(Wf ist ) = θ0 + θ1 LIi + θ2 Rs + θ3 (LIi × Rs ) + ηt + εf ist

(3)

In equation (3), Wf ist is some performance outcome for plant f , in industry i and state s,
at year t. We analyze TFP and labor productivity (measured as value added per worker), but
Appendix B also provides some evidence on total gross output and total value added. LIi denotes
industry’s i labor intensity measure while state labor reform is captured by Rs .
Our indicator of Rs is a dummy variable based on the normalized count of EPL reforms in each
state. We label states as having flexible regulation when their labor reform index is at or above
the median state in terms of the proportion of state-level reforms (using the count index). We
adopt this dummy specification because the OECD measure of labor reform cannot be considered
a continuous variable but is closer to an ordinal or categorical variable. However, there are too
many categories to use it as such and the dummy specification eases presentation of the results.
To measure LIi , we construct a dummy variable for above and below the median labor intensive
industry based on the α̂s obtained from the estimation of (2).17 We believe that the use of α̂ to
measure the intrinsic labor intensity in each industry is superior to the use of the share of labor
expenditures in total output. The use of the estimated output elasticity with respect to labor
overcomes the potential biases that the ratio of labor expenditures to output may have due to the
endogeneity of the plant’s input choices. Moreover, since our TFP estimation using Olley-Pakes’
methodology takes into account year fixed effects, α̂ provides a clean estimate of the underlying
16

See Appendix C in Carlsson et al. (2011). They show that a residual measure of TFP that comes from value
added is not independent of the use of intermediate inputs and factor input growth when there are increasing or
decreasing returns to scale.
17
Again, this specification follows the one of Rs and facilitates the exposition of the results.

18

labor intensity of each industry that is not biased by exogenous demand or supply shocks in the
inputs markets.
An alternative specification of (3) uses industry volatility measures instead of labor intensity. In
that case, we follow Krishna and Levchenko (2009) and measure industry volatility by the standard
deviation of the annual growth rate of plants’ output. We then construct a dummy variable for
above and below the median volatile industry.
Since our measure of EPL reform is time invariant and measured at the state level, we cannot
include state fixed effects. Similarly, our labor intensity indicator is fixed at the industry level so
it restrains us from including industry fixed effects.18 We control for year fixed effects, denoted by
ηt in equation (3), and add a plant-specific trend.19 Robust variance estimates are used to adjust
standard deviations for within-state correlation. We also incorporate additional controls in our
estimates to make sure we take into account the effect of state-level characteristics.
The coefficient θ3 on the interaction between LIi and Rs will capture the heterogeneous effect of
EPL reform on industries with different labor intensity. Given that Rs is higher when state labor
reforms make EPL more flexible, a positive coefficient on the interaction implies that plants in
industries that use labor more intensively fare better in states with pro-employer labor regulation.
In the alternative specification, which uses industry volatility measures instead of labor intensity,
the interaction term should also have a positive coefficient since more volatile plants are expected
to benefit the most from laxer labor regulations.

5

Results

The results presented in Table 2 provide initial evidence of a beneficial effect on multifactor and
labor productivity for labor intensive industries in states with higher levels of pro-employer labor
reform. The positive and significant interaction of LIi and Rs in column 1 shows that manufacturing
plants with high labor requirements that operate in states moving towards more flexible regulation
exhibit larger TFP gains than plants in less labor intensive industries. The interaction in the value
added per worker equation is also positive but it is not significant.
The point estimates from Table 2 imply that there are important multifactor productivity
gains from conducting more labor reforms, particularly for plants in labor intensive industries.
In 2008, the ratio of the geometric mean of TFP for plants in states with flexible labor markets
18

Full collinearity restrains us from including industry-year, state-year, or industry-state fixed effects.
Of course, this trend is only relevant for plants present in multiple years and its removal does not quantitatively
or qualitatively affect the results.
19

19

Table 2: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and labor productivity by labor intensity
Constant
High labor intensity
Pro-employer EPL reform
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
Year FE

log(TFP)
0.943***
(0.031)
0.016
(0.051)
0.013
(0.035)
0.145**
(0.061)
224,634
0.043
yes
yes

log(VA/L)
-0.463***
(0.064)
-0.115*
(0.060)
0.260**
(0.109)
0.119
(0.079)
213,147
0.043
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

over the geometric mean of TFP for plants in states with inflexible labor markets is 1.17 in labor
intensive industries, but it is close to one in industries with lower α̂s.20 In other words, a plant in
a labor intensive industry that moves from an inflexible to a flexible state would get an average
TFP improvement of about 17% while TFP gains are close to zero in industries with lower labor
intensity.
To check the robustness of our findings, we add a number of control variables to take into
account state characteristics. These include both time-variant as well as time-invariant controls
at the state level. Among the first group, we use the log of fixed and mobile phones’s availability
per 100 population, log of the installed electric capacity per million people, and the log of road
density. Information on telephones, installed electric capacity, and road density are reasonable
proxies for the general conditions of infrastructure, which are expected to be positively related to
manufacturing output. We also include the OECD product market regulation index from Conway
and Herd (2008) that measures how much regulations restrict competition.
Table 3 shows that the positive effect identified for labor intensive plants in flexible labor
markets is still present for TFP once we control for state characteristics. The interaction between
EPL reform and high labor intensity is positive and significant. Once state-level controls are
introduced, our point estimates indicate that, on average, plants in labor intensive industries and
20

Using the parameter estimates from Table 2, the mean values of the trend, and the year dummy corresponding
to 2008, we predict log(TFP) for 4 groups: i) plants in states with high levels of EPL reform and high α̂s, ii) plants
in states with low levels of EPL reform and high α̂s, iii) plants with high levels of EPL reform and low α̂s, and iv)
plants with low levels of EPL reform and low α̂s. To obtain 1.17, for example, we get the difference between the
predictions of log(TFP) for group i) and ii) and exponentiate it to get the ratio of their TFP in levels.

20

operating in flexible labor markets have a TFP residual that is 14% higher than it is among plants
in states with low levels of EPL reform and high α̂s. Among plants in industries with low α̂s,
TFP gains from EPL reform are negligible. Although the interaction of EPL reform and labor
intensity is not significant in the value added per worker equation, there are slightly larger gains
among plants in labor intensive industries. While plants in industries with low α̂s see their labor
productivity increase by 28% where EPL reforms are more extended, the effect of EPL reform in
labor intensive industries translates into VA/L increases of 45%.
Table 3: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and labor productivity by labor intensity, with state-level
controls
Constant
High labor intensity
Pro-employer EPL reform
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.274***
(0.278)
0.004
(0.054)
-0.023
(0.044)
0.153**
(0.063)

log(VA/L)
-1.026
(1.012)
-0.118*
(0.062)
0.248**
(0.092)
0.124
(0.075)

0.043**
(0.019)
-0.018
(0.021)
0.014
(0.014)

0.031
(0.044)
0.019
(0.115)
-0.027
(0.065)

-0.032
(0.050)
224,634
0.048
yes
yes
yes

0.060
(0.292)
213,147
0.044
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

Next, we try to identify differential effects by plant size and type of ownership. Let Xf ist denote
a specific plant characteristic, such as size or ownership type. We extend the model in (3) in the
following way:
log(Wf ist ) = θ0 + θ1 LIi + θ2 Rs + θ3 (LIi × Rs )
+ θ4 Xf ist + θ5 (LIi × Xf ist ) + θ6 (Rs × Xf ist ) + θ7 (LIi × Rs × Xf ist ) + ηt + εf ist

21

Although θ3 will still give us the average effect of the interaction of labor intensity and labor
reform on productivity, the coefficient θ7 becomes particularly important since it will capture any
heterogeneous effects due to differences in Xf ist .
In the case of plant size, Xf ist will be a matrix of 4 size dummies. These are constructed using
number of workers with cutoffs at 50, 100, and 250. The first cutoff responds to the presence of a
few labor laws that are enforced starting at this establishment size. The second cutoff is consistent
with IDA’s national threshold set in 1982. The last cutoff is in line with empirical evidence for
India, above which plant TFP was observed to be substantially higher (Dougherty et al., 2009).
This check is particularly important since larger plants are subject to stricter labor regulation but
are also more likely to subcontract workers to evade labor laws.
Let the share of contract labor in total expenditures for each plant be given by:
h∗f ist = δXf ist + νi + νs + νt − µf ist
where νi , νs , and νt denote industry, state and year fixed effects. From this latent variable, we
construct a categorical variable, hf ist , such that hf ist = 1 if the plant hires no contract labor,
hf ist = 2 when the plant spends 20% or less of their labor costs on indirect labor, and hf ist = 3 when
the plant spends more than 20% of total labor expenditures on hiring labor through contractors.
Let the cutoffs for h∗f ist be given by ξ0 = −∞, ξ1 = 0, ξ2 = 0.2, and ξ3 = ∞. The probability of
hf ist = H is given by:
Pr(hf ist = H|Xf ist ) = Pr(ξH−1 < h∗f ist < ξH |Xf ist )
= Φ(δXf ist + νi + νs + νt − ξH−1 ) − Φ(δXf ist + νi + νs + νt − ξH )
where Φ is the normal cumulative distribution with mean zero and variance σ 2 .
Table 4: Interval regression results for the share of contract labor in total labor expenditures
Plant size (base: < 50 workers)
[50 − 100[
[100 − 250[
250 or more
Observations
Log likelihood
σ
Year FE
Industry FE
State FE

δ
S.E.
0.268*** 0.004
0.300*** 0.003
0.317*** 0.003
229693
-165507.27
0.384***
yes
yes
yes

Table 4 reports δ estimates from an interval regression model like the one above. We find that
larger plants are more likely to hire labor indirectly: the share of contracted labor increases by
22

a factor of 0.317 when we compare plants with 250 or more workers to plants with less than 50
workers. Similarly, relative to the smallest plants, medium size plants with 50 to 99 workers and
100 to 249 workers see their share of contract labor expenditures increased by a factor of 0.268 and
0.3, respectively. Clearly, the tendency of larger plants to hire more workers through contractors
helps them partially bypass labor legislation. Consequently, we expect them to benefit less from
the state-labor reforms.
Table 5 confirms our initial prediction. The coefficient on the interaction between flexible
EPL and labor intensity is now positive and significant both for TFP and labor productivity (θ3 ).
Moreover, the coefficient on triple interaction between EPL, labor intensity, and plant size (θ7 ) is not
significant for medium size plants but it is negative and significant for larger plants in both columns.
Both in terms of TFP and labor productivity, plants with more than 250 workers in industries with
high labor intensity earn much less than their smaller counterparts from pro-employer labor reforms.
This result is consistent with the fact that larger plants face higher restrictions in inflexible labor
regulation settings. Since many norms and regulations apply only to them, it looks like they have
found a way out by reducing their dependence on a permanent workforce and relying more on
temporary labor hired through contractors as suggested by Table 4. It has been well documented
that casual or contract labor in India provides unskilled labor at wages below the minimum wage
and without benefits, so the substitution of regular labor for casual labor can help larger plants
reduce the labor costs imposed by more stringent EPL.
We also estimated the effects of flexible EPL separately for publicly and privately owned plants,
where Xf ist is a dummy that is equal to one when the plant is publicly owned. In the sample
periods analyzed, publicly owned plants tend to have lower rates of job destruction and creation
than privately owned plants. Although public plants tend to have a lower turnover rate than
privately owned plants, their net contribution to employment is highly negative in half of the
rounds analyzed. A proposed explanation for this lies in voluntary retirement schemes (VRS),
which are used as a mutually agreeable mechanism for downsizing. Since VRS has allowed public
plants to bypass labor regulation and adjust their labor usage it may be possible that the effect of
EPL within them is smaller than among private plants.
Table 6 presents the results obtained by ownership type. Public plants in labor intensive
industries tend to have higher multifactor productivity but lower labor productivity as shown by
the interaction of the ownership dummy and the labor intensity dummy. Moreover, the interaction
between pro-worker EPL reform and labor intensity is positive and significant for both TFP and
23

Table 5: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and labor productivity by labor intensity and plant size,
with state-level controls
Constant
High labor intensity
Pro-employer EPL reform
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform
Plant Size (Base: <= 50 workers)
]50 − 100]
]100 − 250]
> 250
High labor intensity x ]50-100]
High labor intensity x ]100-250]
High labor intensity x >250
Pro-employer EPL reform x ]50-100]
Pro-employer EPL reform x ]100-250]
Pro-employer EPL reform x >250
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform x ]50-100]
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform x ]100-250]
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform x >250
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE
Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

24

log(TFP)
1.371***
(0.261)
-0.049
(0.066)
-0.032
(0.034)
0.161**
(0.068)

log(VA/L)
-0.757
(0.995)
-0.125**
(0.047)
0.202**
(0.096)
0.187***
(0.054)

0.127
(0.074)
-0.023
(0.054)
0.049
(0.059)
-0.075
(0.096)
0.094
(0.130)
0.278***
(0.072)
-0.063
(0.074)
0.077
(0.059)
0.020
(0.064)
0.105
(0.099)
-0.034
(0.138)
-0.154*
(0.085)

0.069
(0.139)
0.290**
(0.105)
0.604***
(0.174)
0.257
(0.178)
0.118
(0.125)
-0.133
(0.221)
0.042
(0.148)
-0.038
(0.156)
0.269
(0.175)
-0.115
(0.187)
-0.130
(0.160)
-0.398*
(0.229)

0.044**
(0.018)
-0.028
(0.021)
0.020
(0.014)

0.033
(0.043)
-0.018
(0.112)
-0.007
(0.063)

-0.026
(0.048)
224,634
0.065
yes
yes
yes

0.089
(0.279)
213,147
0.090
yes
yes
yes

Table 6: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and labor productivity by labor intensity and ownership
type, with state-level controls
Constant
High labor intensity
Pro-employer EPL reform
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform
Public plant
High labor intensity x Public plant
Pro-employer EPL reform x Public plant
High labor intensity x Pro-employer EPL reform x Public plant
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE
Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

25

log(TFP)
1.339***
(0.279)
-0.048
(0.051)
-0.042
(0.049)
0.213***
(0.060)
0.007
(0.047)
0.208**
(0.088)
0.069
(0.051)
-0.243**
(0.090)

log(VA/L)
-0.568
(0.910)
-0.056
(0.064)
0.184*
(0.098)
0.162*
(0.082)
0.735***
(0.120)
-0.274**
(0.101)
0.203
(0.135)
-0.179
(0.122)

0.044**
(0.019)
-0.022
(0.022)
0.016
(0.014)

0.040
(0.041)
-0.019
(0.104)
-0.004
(0.059)

-0.038
(0.051)
224,535
0.053
yes
yes
yes

0.005
(0.256)
213,018
0.130
yes
yes
yes

VA/L, which shows that the average beneficial effect of labor reform on labor intensive industries is
higher. As we expected, the triple interaction for EPL reform, labor intensity, and public ownership
is negative and significant for both TFP and labor productivity, though only significant for the
former. This implies that labor intensive public plants in flexible markets exhibit lower TFP gains
from EPL reform, which is in line with the use of VRS among public plants as a strategy to
circumvent labor regulation. Through this strategy, constrained public plants have been able to
ameliorate the negative effects of inflexible regulation on productivity so that pro-employer labor
reforms have smaller relative effects among them.
In general, the results show that there are important TFP and some labor productivity gains
for labor intensive plants that operate in states with laxer EPL. Moreover, the different strategies
used by plants to overcome the constraints imposed by labor regulation generate differential effects
of state-level labor reform both by plant size and type of ownership.

5.1

Volatility

We now test if laxer labor regulation benefits volatile industries relatively more as suggested by
Poschke (2007) and others. Our measure of volatility is similar to the one used by Krishna and
Levchenko (2009): the standard deviation of the annual growth rate of plants’ output in a given
industry. Notice that we need a plant-level growth measure to quantify volatility, so we are will
obtain a proxy for each industry from the restricted census sample, average it over all the ASI
rounds we use, and apply it to the complete sample of plants. We then construct a dummy variable
which classifies industries as highly volatile when they are at or above the median industry in terms
of the average standard deviation of annual growth rate of output.
Panels (a) and (b) in Figure 6 presents preliminary evidence on the existence of a comparative
advantage among more volatile plants in flexible markets. State-level labor reforms seem to shift
the TFP distribution to the right only in more turbulent industries, which is in line with Cuñat and
Melitz’s (2007) findings. However, as panels (c) and (d) show, the comparative advantage identified
in terms of TFP among plants in more volatile sectors is not present for labor productivity. The
difference between the distributions of value added per worker across states with different levels
of labor reform does not seem to vary by industry-level volatility, although plants in more flexible
states always have better (VA/L) distributions.
Table 7 confirms these patterns. The interaction between EPL and volatility is positive and
significant only in the TFP equation, which implies that plants in more volatile industries that

26

1
.8
.6
Density
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

Density

.6

.8

1

Figure 6: Labor market regulation, volatility, and productivity

−1.5

−1

−.5

0

.5

TFP

1

1.5

Inflexible Labor Markets

2

2.5

3

−1.5

−1

Flexible Labor Markets

−.5

0

.5

TFP

1

1.5

Inflexible Labor Markets

2.5

3

Flexible Labor Markets

.8
.6
Density
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

Density

.6

.8

1

(b) TFP: Low volatility

1

(a) TFP: High volatility

2

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0
VA/L

Inflexible Labor Markets

1

2

3

4

5

−5

Flexible Labor Markets

−4

−3

−2

−1

0
VA/L

Inflexible Labor Markets

(c) Labor productivity: High volatility

1

2

3

Flexible Labor Markets

(d) Labor productivity: Low volatility

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.

27

4

5

operate in flexible labor markets have a comparative advantage in terms of multifactor productivity.
The larger costs of hiring and firing people imposed by strict EPL seem to be particularly restrictive
in sectors with higher volatility, generating an unequal distribution of the productivity gains that
come from labor market deregulation.
Table 7: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and labor productivity by volatility, with state-level controls
Constant
High volatility
Pro-employer EPL reform
High volatility x Pro-employer EPL reform
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.411***
(0.324)
-0.052
(0.108)
-0.116
(0.078)
0.225*
(0.116)

log(VA/L)
-1.078
(1.039)
0.097
(0.097)
0.379***
(0.125)
-0.151
(0.101)

0.042**
(0.019)
-0.020
(0.022)
0.016
(0.015)

0.030
(0.044)
0.018
(0.114)
-0.027
(0.065)

-0.058
(0.057)
224,634
0.051
yes
yes
yes

0.041
(0.283)
213,147
0.044
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

6

Robustness Checks

In the previous section, we showed that plants in more labor intensive and/or more volatile industries are the big winners of pro-worker labor reforms in India. The interactions between higher
levels of EPL reform and labor intensity as well as between pro-worker EPL reform and volatility
were positive and significant even after the introduction of state-level controls. Moreover, Tables
B.3 and B.4 in Appendix B show that our results are not sensitive to a different specification of
the labor intensity measure. Including labor intensity in the model either as the value of α̂ or the
relative ranking of each industry implied by α̂ does not affect the results presented above.

28

This section provides additional robustness tests of the impact of labor regulation on organized
manufacturing plants. First, we try out two alternative measures of EPL available in the literature.
We use Gupta et al.’s (2009) EPL index as well as the BB index updated through 2008 using
Malik (2010). The former uses the BB index, Bhattacharjea (2006)’s indicator — which takes into
account legislative and judicial interventions affecting Chapter VB of the IDA — and Dougherty’s
(2009) index to construct a composite measure of labor regulation. This composite measure, which
we call EPL-G, classifies states into inflexible, neutral, and flexible in terms of their EPL strictness.
We also check if our results hold when we use industry layoff propensity instead of labor intensity.
According to Bassanini et al. (2009), the firm’s natural propensity to adjust through layoffs will
influence the size of the costs imposed by EPL so we would expect that plants that operate in
industries that are more likely to adjust through layoffs will benefit the most from more flexible
labor laws, especially those pertaining to retrenchment and firing of workers.
Table 8 shows the results using Gupta et al.’s (2009) EPL indicator.21 If we focus on the
interaction effect identified for states classified as flexible by EPL-G, the results are very similar
to those obtained with our measure of EPL reform. In terms of TFP gains, Table 3 reported an
interaction effect of 0.153 while this effect amounts to 0.143 when EPL-G is used. Although still
insignificant, the interaction effect of EPL-G and labor intensity in the labor productivity equation
(0.120) is very close to the effect identified in Table 3 using our EPL measure (0.124).
When the BB index is used, the positive effects of labor regulation previously identified among
plants in labor intensive industries go away. Table 9 shows that when the cumulative BB index
is used, the interaction between EPL reform and labor intensity is negative and significant in
the case of TFP though it remains insignificant for value added per worker. These results are
not too surprising if we consider that the BB index only captures formal amendments to the
IDA, which have been scarce in recent years. In fact, there were only four pro-worker reforms
registered in Gujarat (in 2004) and two pro-employer reforms in Madhya Pradesh (in 2003) after
1999. Moreover, the correlation between BB and Dougherty’s (2009) proportional index is -0.25,
which could be indicating that the lack of reforms to the IDA post-1990 were compensated by
formal or informal state-level changes in industrial practices on the ground.
We conclude by testing if plants in industries with a higher layoff propensity benefit the most
from labor reforms as suggested by Bassanini et al. (2009).22 The evidence provided in Table 10
21
Compared to our final sample of states, Gupta et al. (2009) misses 2 states/union territories, Delhi and Himachal
Pradesh, which represent 6.2% of the plant-year observations in our complete sample.
22
Due to lack of adequate US data, tobacco industries were dropped from our original sample. This generates a

29

shows that, indeed, plants in industries with higher α̂s are the ones who experience the largest
TFP improvements from state-level labor reforms. The magnitude of the interaction effect of EPL
reforms and layoff propensities implies that, on average, plants in industries with a high layoff
propensity are 20% more productive in flexible states than in inflexible states.
Table 8: Effect of EPL-G on productivity and output by labor intensity, all plants
Constant
High labor intensity
Neutral EPL-G
Flexible EPL-G
High LI x Neutral EPL-G
High LI x Flexible EPL-G
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.059**
(0.380)
0.055***
(0.007)
0.006
(0.025)
-0.027
(0.025)
0.052
(0.036)
0.143***
(0.042)

log(VA/L)
-0.085
(1.657)
-0.104***
(0.026)
-0.293
(0.177)
-0.269
(0.166)
0.144
(0.089)
0.120
(0.086)

0.038
(0.024)
0.005
(0.030)
0.001
(0.018)

0.082
(0.078)
0.003
(0.119)
-0.034
(0.064)

-0.065
(0.050)
215,208
0.047
yes
yes
yes

-0.215
(0.329)
204,129
0.045
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

7

Conclusions and Extensions

This paper studies the extent to which the effects of EPL on productivity among registered manufacturing plants change by labor intensity. To do this, we rely on a difference-in-differences strategy
that includes state-level EPL reforms and industry-level labor intensity interactions. Our main finding is that there are important positive gains in terms of multifactor productivity for labor intensive
loss of 1.35% of the plant-year observations.

30

Table 9: Effect of EPL measured by BB index on productivity and output by labor intensity, all
plants
Constant
High labor intensity
Neutral EPL (BB)
Flexible EPL (BB)
High labor intensity x Neutral EPL (BB)
High labor intensity x Flexible EPL (BB)
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.173***
(0.326)
0.193***
(0.050)
0.011
(0.031)
0.022
(0.029)
-0.063
(0.055)
-0.137**
(0.051)

log(VA/L)
0.100
(1.320)
-0.005
(0.115)
0.080
(0.152)
0.338*
(0.170)
0.059
(0.130)
-0.098
(0.116)

0.040**
(0.018)
-0.008
(0.028)
0.007
(0.017)

0.093
(0.067)
-0.037
(0.101)
-0.010
(0.050)

-0.061
(0.047)
224,634
0.048
yes
yes
yes

-0.226
(0.282)
213,147
0.046
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

plants that operate in states with laxer labor regulation. This effect remains after the addition of
state-level controls as well as various sensitivity checks. Our point estimates indicate that, on
average, plants in labor intensive industries and in flexible labor markets have TFP residuals 14%
higher than those registered for their counterparts in states with more stringent labor laws. However, EPL reform does not seem to have any important effect on plants with lower levels of labor
intensity. Similarly, the TFP of plants in more volatile industries and in states that experienced
pro-employer reforms is 11% higher than that of plants in volatile industries and in more restrictive
states. Among plants in less volatile industries, EPL reform seems to drive a 11% reduction in TFP
residuals. In the case of labor productivity, we fail to find robust evidence in favor of a differential
effect of EPL reform by either labor intensity or volatility.
We also find that the different strategies used by plants to overcome the constraints imposed
31

Table 10: Effect of EPL on productivity and output by layoff propensity, all plants
Constant
High layoff propensity
Flexible EPL
High layoff propensity x Flexible EPL
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.169***
(0.259)
0.080
(0.065)
-0.027
(0.042)
0.213***
(0.071)

log(VA/L)
-1.023
(1.001)
-0.179**
(0.082)
0.251***
(0.087)
0.179*
(0.096)

0.041*
(0.020)
-0.013
(0.019)
0.009
(0.013)

0.033
(0.044)
0.018
(0.114)
-0.026
(0.065)

-0.028
(0.045)
224,634
0.104
yes
yes
yes

0.065
(0.289)
213,147
0.044
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

by labor regulations generate heterogeneous effects of state-level labor reform both by plant size
and type of ownership. Given the extensive use of contract labor among large plants and voluntary
retirement schemes among public plants, smaller plants and private plants tend to accrue the largest
productivity gains from state-level labor reforms.
Our study is particularly important for three reasons. This is the first study that makes use
of plant-level information from the ASI to evaluate the effect of EPL in India. Second, we take
advantage of the recently available ASI panel data to obtain plant-level TFP measures that control
for simultaneity and selection bias using the Olley-Pakes approach. This feature is unique to our
study since previous papers on the topic have only measured the effects of EPL on labor productivity
measured as value added per worker or on aggregate measures of TFP at the industry-level. Finally,
our measure of labor regulation is much more comprehensive and appropriate for the years analyzed
than the BB index, popular in the EPL literature in India. In particular, our EPL reform index
takes into account both formal and informal amendments to the labor laws at the state level.
Although the coverage of our EPL reform indicator is a plus, we acknowledge the important data
32

limitations posed by the OECD index. Our analysis could greatly benefit from a time series version
of the labor reform indicator that could allow us to evaluate short versus long-term effects as well as
to include fixed effects at the state level. However, our attempts to collect a time-varying state-level
EPL indicator have not yet been successful. Since the index goes beyond formal amendments to
cover informal changes to labor rules and practices, many of which are not systematically notified
in a consolidated publication, it is very difficult to track the exact dates in which these practices
actually changed at the state level.
Although we are able to take advantage of the longitudinal data available in the ASI, we are
aware that assuming that the production function estimates from the restricted census sample
are applicable to the complete sample is a little extreme. Unfortunately, this is the only way in
which we can implement the Olley-Pakes methodology to obtain clean estimates of plant-level TFP
residuals. We believe that relying on OLS estimates of multifactor productivity in the complete
sample would be even more problematic than the approach we undertake here.
Preliminary evidence shows that the effect of labor regulation reforms might be non-linear,
which could potentially be explained by endogenous relocation of plants from states with more
stringent regulation to states with more flexible EPL. Our future agenda includes the development
of a partial equilibrium model that can help us explain this pattern.

33

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen J. Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2008), “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India”, American
Economic Review, 98(4): 1397-1412.
[2] Ahsan, Ahmad and Carmen Pagés (2009), “Are all labor Regulations Equal? Evidence from
Indian Manufacturing”, Journal of Comparative Economics, 37(1): 62-75.
[3] Arnold, Jens Mathias (2005), “A short note on Productivity Estimation at the Firm Level. A
Practical Guide”. Working paper, Bocconi University.
[4] Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Amalavoyal Chari, and Siddharth Sharma (2011), “Firing Costs and
Flexibility: Evidence from Firms’ Labor Adjustments to Shocks in India”, Working Paper.
[5] Bassanini, Andrea, Luca Nunziata, and Danielle Venn (2009), “Job protection legislation and
productivity growth in OECD countries”, Economic Policy, CEPR, CES, MSH, 24: 349-402.
[6] Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald (1997), “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates
and Implications”, Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 249-283.
[7] Bentolila, S. and Bertola, G. (1990), “Firing Costs and labor Demand: How Bad is Eurosclerosis?”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 57: 381-402.
[8] Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess (2004), “Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? Evidence from India”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 91-134.
[9] Bhattacharjea, Aditya (2006), “labor Market Regulation and Industrial Performance in India:
A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence”, The Indian Journal of labor Economics, 49(2):
211-32.
[10]

(2009), “The Effects of Employment Protection Legislation on Indian Manufacturing”, Working paper, Center on Democracy, Development, and The Rule of Law Freeman
Spogli Institute for International Studies, Stanford University.

[11] Bollard, Albert, Peter J. Klenow, and Gunjan Sharma (2010), “India’s Mysterious Manufacturing Miracle”, Stanford University, Manuscript.
[12] Carlsson, Mikael, Julián Messina and Oskar Nordström Skans (2011), “Wage Adjustment and
Productivity Shocks”, IZA Working Paper No. 5719.
[13] Conway, Paul and Richard Herd (2009), “How Competitive is Product Market Regulation
in India? An International and Cross-state Comparison”, OECD Economic Studies, 45(1):
149-174.
[14] Cuñat, Alejandro and Marc Melitz (2007), “Volatility, labor Market Flexibility, and the Pattern
of Comparative Advantage”, NBER Working Paper No. 13062.
[15] Deakin, Simon, Priya Lele, and Mathias Siems (2007), “The evolution of labor law: calibrating
and comparing regulatory regimes”, International labor Review, 146:133-162.
[16] Dougherty, Sean (2009), “Labor Regulation and Employment Dynamics at the State Level in
India”, Review of Market Integration, 1(3): 295-337.
34

[17] Dougherty, Sean, Richard Herd and Thomas Chalaux (2009), “What is Holding Back Productivity Growth in India? Recent Microevidence”, OECD Economic Studies, 45(1): 59-80.
[18] Garibaldi, Pietro (1998), “Job flow dynamics and firing restrictions”, European Economic
Review, 42(2): 245-75.
[19] Goldar, Bishwanath and Suresh Chand Aggarwa (2010), “Informalization of Industrial labor
in India: Are labor market rigidities and growing import competition to blame?”, Institute for
Economic Growth, New Delhi, Manuscript.
[20] Goldar, Bishwanath (2011), “Growth in Organised Manufacturing Employment in Recent
Years”, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. XLVI, No. 5.
[21] Gupta, Poonam, Rana Hasan, and Utsav Kumar (2009), “Big Reforms but Small Payoffs:
Explaining the Weak Record of Growth in Indian Manufacturing”, MPRA Working Paper,
University Library of Munich, Germany.
[22] Harrison, Ann, Leslie Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj (2011), “Learning versus Stealing: How
Important are Market-Share Reallocations to India’s Productivity Growth?”, NBER Working
Paper No. 16733.
[23] Krishna, Pravin and Andrei Levchenko (2009), “Comparative Advantage, Complexity, and
Volatility”, NBER Working Paper No. 14965.
[24] Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin (2003), “Estimating Production Functions using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables”, Review of Economic Studies, 70: 317-341.
[25] Malik, P.L. (2006, 2010), Industrial Law: A Manual of Central labor and Industrial Laws
Incorporating State Amendments with Rules, Regulations and Select Notifications, Lucknow:
Eastern Book Company.
[26] Micco, Alejandro and Carmen Pagés (2007), “The Economic Effects of Employment Protection:
Evidence from International Industry-Level Data”. Research Network Working Papers 592,
Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department.
[27] Ministry of Commerce and Industry (2011), Annual Report 2010-2011, New Delhi.
[28] Mortensen, D.T. and C.A. Pissarides (1999), “Unemployment responses to ‘skill biased’ shocks:
the role of labor market policy”, Economic Journal, 109: 242-65.
[29] Nagaraj, R. (2004), “Fall in Organised Manufacturing Employment: A Brief Note”, Economic
and Political Weekly, 39(30): 3387–90.
[30] OECD (2007, 2011), OECD Economic Surveys of India, Paris: OECD Publishing.
[31] Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996), “The Dynamics Of Productivity In The Telecommunications Equipment Industry”, Econometrica, 64: 1263-1297.
[32] Panagariya, Arvind (2008), India: the Emerging Giant, New York: Oxford University Press.
[33] Poschke, M. (2009), “Employment protection, firm selection, and growth”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(8): 1074–85.

35

[34] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial dependence and growth”, American
Economic Review, 88: 559-86.
[35] Venn, Danielle (2009), “Legislation, collective bargaining and enforcement: Updating the
OECD employment protection indicators”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper 89.
[36] World Trade Organization (2010), International Trade Statistics 2010, Geneva.

36

A

Appendix A: Construction of Price Deflators

Output and value added were deflated by the appropriate wholesale price index (WPI) by industry
groups and subgroups with base 1993-94. Although the detailed categories for which the WPI
data is available do not exactly match the 2-digit industry classification of the ASI, a close and
detailed comparison of the groups was undertaken to select suitable price deflators. Fixed capital,
investment, and invested capital were deflated using the WPI for machinery and equipment while
real expenditures in fuels were obtained using the WPI for fuel, power lights, and lubricants, both
with base 1993-94. To deflate intermediate materials, several deflators were used. For each factory,
the ASI gives detailed quantity and expenditure data on all intermediate goods consumed for
five broad groups: basic materials (including imports), chemicals and auxiliary materials, packing
materials, consumable stores, and materials consumed for repair and maintenance. Basic inputs and
imports are identified by 5-digit ASICC codes. Consumption of basic materials was deflated using
the WPI for the category that best matched 2-digit ASICC codes with base 1993-94. Imports were
deflated using the Unit Value Index (UVI) for imports with base 1993-94 that best matched 2-digit
ASICC codes. For chemicals and auxiliary materials the WPI of chemicals and chemical products
is used. For packing materials, a weighed average of the WPI for paper products, wood and wood
products, and jute, hemp, and mesta textiles is obtained. Consumable stores are deflated using
a weighted average of WPI for wood and wood products, basic metals alloys and metal products,
and chemicals and chemical products. Materials consumed for repair and maintenance are deflated
using WPI for machinery and machine tools.

37

B

Appendix B: Additional Tables
Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics: All years
(a) All plants
Variable
Output
Value added
Fixed capital
Number of workers
Investment
Fuel expenditures
Intermediate inputs
Share of contract labor
Age of the plant
Plant size dummies (based on ] workers)
< 50
[50 − 100[
[100 − 250[
≥ 250
Public ownership (dummy)
TFP (Olley-Pakes residuals)
Labor productivity (VA/L)
Volatility (S.D. of annual growth rate of output)

Obs
239921
239921
239921
239921
239921
239921
239921
239726
239088

Mean
330.24
38.47
111.22
175.76
14.87
7.32
136.33
0.09
20.92

239921
239921
239921
239921
239785
238961
222363
239921

0.52
0.13
0.16
0.18
0.23
1.05
0.00
0.71

S.D
3075.47
213.83
722.22
420.85
128.99
39.16
878.74
0.20
19.61

Min
0.01
-157.29
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Max
320327.70
26969.15
56809.98
21637.00
17713.72
2639.63
66449.92
1.00
208.00

0.47
1.02
0.20

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-6.96
-5.00
0.31

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
5.29
4.79
0.98

S.D
6642.43
446.22
1518.57
745.19
267.54
81.24
1868.66
0.18
25.34

Min
0.02
-157.29
0.00
200.00
0.00
0.00
0.14
0.00
0.00

Max
320327.70
26969.15
56809.98
21637.00
17713.72
2639.63
66449.92
1.00
208.00

0.49
1.10
0.19

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-6.96
-4.14
0.31

0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
4.04
4.79
0.98

(b) Restricted Census sample
Variable
Output
Value added
Fixed capital
Number of workers
Investment
Fuel expenditures
Intermediate inputs
Share of contract labor
Age of the plant
Plant size dummies (based on ] workers)
< 50
[50 − 100[
[100 − 250[
≥ 250
Public ownership dummy
TFP (Olley-Pakes residuals)
Labor productivity (VA/L)
Volatility (S.D. of annual growth rate of output)

38

Obs
49895
49895
49895
49895
49895
49895
49895
49873
49880

Mean
1290.73
154.63
455.01
646.61
58.33
29.34
513.08
0.10
28.88

49895
49895
49895
49895
49864
49879
46204
49895

0.00
0.00
0.15
0.85
0.59
1.10
0.44
0.72

Table B.2: Effect of EPL reforms on total output and total value added by labor intensity, adding
state-level controls
Constant
High labor intensity
Flexible EPL
High labor intensity x Flexible EPL
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(Q)
-3.564**
(1.614)
-0.149
(0.161)
0.253*
(0.139)
0.184
(0.165)

log(VA)
-4.325***
(1.470)
-0.152
(0.115)
0.390***
(0.128)
0.190
(0.120)

-0.007
(0.101)
0.228
(0.170)
-0.149
(0.098)

-0.018
(0.081)
0.237
(0.145)
-0.147*
(0.084)

-0.149
(0.433)
217,379
0.196
yes
yes
yes

0.136
(0.419)
229,863
0.179
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Note: Output (Q) and value added (VA) are net of industry fixed effects.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

39

Table B.3: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and VA/L by labor intensity, adding state-level controls
(LIi as the value of α̂)
Constant
Labor intensity (α̂)
Flexible EPL
Labor intensity (α̂) x Flexible EPL
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.432***
(0.332)
-0.067
(0.047)
-1.681***
(0.345)
1.485***
(0.425)

log(VA/L)
-0.998
(1.011)
0.242**
(0.092)
-0.499*
(0.278)
0.638
(0.431)

0.055***
(0.017)
-0.014
(0.025)
0.015
(0.015)

0.029
(0.044)
0.016
(0.115)
-0.026
(0.065)

-0.052
(0.060)
224,634
0.031
yes
yes
yes

0.055
(0.289)
213,147
0.043
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

40

Table B.4: Effect of EPL reforms on TFP and VA/L by labor intensity, adding state-level controls
(LIi as a ranking based on α̂)
Constant
Labor intensity (ranking)
Flexible EPL
Labor intensity (ranking) x Flexible EPL
Time-variant state controls
Log(Telephones/100 pop)
Log(Installed electricity capacity/million pop)
Log(Paved roads/1000 pop)
Time-invariant state controls
Product Market Regulation
Observations
R-squared
Firm trend
State-level controls
Year FE

log(TFP)
1.282***
(0.283)
-0.114
(0.068)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.016**
(0.007)

log(VA/L)
-0.992
(1.010)
0.235**
(0.111)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.006
(0.007)

0.043**
(0.019)
-0.017
(0.022)
0.014
(0.014)

0.030
(0.045)
0.018
(0.116)
-0.026
(0.065)

-0.030
(0.050)
224,634
0.045
yes
yes
yes

0.056
(0.290)
213,147
0.043
yes
yes
yes

Source: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 1998-99 to 2007-08.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1

41

