                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ECONOMICS OF RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY
                               GENERATION

                                           Severin Borenstein

                                         Working Paper 17695
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17695


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2011




I am grateful to Judd Boomhower for excellent research assistance. I also benefited from the comments
of David Autor, Duncan Callaway, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Michael Greenstone, Bill Hogan,
Chad Jones, Paul Joskow, Chris Knittel, John List, Karen Notsund, Richard Schmalensee, and Tim
Taylor. This research was supported in part under a research contract from the California Energy Commission
to the Energy Institute at Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Severin Borenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity Generation
Severin Borenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17695
December 2011
JEL No. L94,Q42,Q48

                                             ABSTRACT

Generating electricity from renewable sources is more expensive than conventional approaches, but
reduces pollution externalities. Analyzing the tradeoff is much more challenging than often presumed,
because the value of electricity is extremely dependent on the time and location at which it is produced,
which is not very controllable with some renewables, such as wind and solar. Likewise, the pollution
benefits from renewable generation depend on what type of generation it displaces, which also depends
on time and location. Without incorporating these factors, cost-benefit analyses of alternatives are
likely to be misleading. However, other common arguments for subsidizing renewable power – green
jobs, energy security and driving down fossil energy prices – are unlikely to substantially alter the
analysis. The role of intellectual property spillovers is a strong argument for subsidizing energy science
research, but less persuasive as an enhancement to the value of installing current renewable energy
technologies.


Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
borenste@haas.berkeley.edu
I. Introduction

  The primary public policy argument for promoting electricity generation from solar,
wind, and other renewable sources is the unpriced pollution externalities from burning
fossil fuels. Some parties advocate for renewable electricity generation to improve energy
security, price stability, or job creation as well, but these arguments are more difficult
to support in a careful analysis, as I discuss later. Even comparing the higher costs
of renewables with the environmental benefits, however, is not straightforward. This is
because the market value of electricity generation is very dependent on its timing, location
and other characteristics, and because quantification of the non-market value from reduced
emissions is difficult and controversial.

  Since Pigou’s seminal work (Pigou, 1920), economists have understood that pricing ex-
ternalities is likely to be the best way to move behavior towards efficiency. In the context
of electricity, this means taxes on emissions or a tradable permit system, but such market-
based policies have garnered limited political support in the U.S. and elsewhere. Instead,
many governments have created policies to promote renewable electricity generation di-
rectly, through either subsidies or mandates. But how well do these alternative policies
substitute for pricing the negative externalities of generation from fossil fuel generation?

  In this paper, I discuss the market and non-market valuation of electricity generation
from renewable energy, as well as the costs and the subsidies that are available. On a
direct cost basis, renewables are expensive, but the simple calculations don’t account for
many additional benefits and costs of renewables. I begin by briefly discussing studies of
the costs of renewables and conventional generation, highlighting the primary cost drivers
and their current impacts. I then discuss the many critical adjustments that are necessary
to account for the time, location, and other characteristics that vary across and within
generation technologies. Many such adjustments are idiosyncratic, differing substantially
by individual project, but broader technology characteristics also play an important part
in their determinations.

  The next steps in the analysis, evaluating the benefits of reducing externalities with
renewables, are more difficult than they may at first seem. The timing and location of
renewable generation will impact what generation is displaced, as will the pre-existing (in
the short-run) or counter-factual (in a longer run analysis) mix of fossil fuel generation in
the system.

  I then turn to other potential market failures that may affect the value that renewable

                                             2
energy offers and may change justifications for government policy, including job creation,
industry building, energy security, and moderating swings in energy prices. I argue that
these justifications are generally not supported empirically and in some cases are based on
faulty economic reasoning.

  In normative analyses of renewable electricity generation, there is often confusion about
which economic actors are included in the welfare being evaluated. For instance, should a
small town that is considering installing solar panels on city hall count federal subsidies as
a benefit or just a transfer? Though economic analyses often draw a bright line between
private and public benefits, renewable energy demonstrates that in practice there is a
continuum of perspectives. Each may be appropriate for answering a different question.
Evaluating the incentives of participants in a market generally requires doing the analysis
from many perspectives.

  I do not attempt here to rank order the benefit-cost ratios for the major generation
technologies, which vary with the decision-maker’s preferences, the perceived costs of en-
vironmental externalities, and the state of technology. Technological progress, as well as
ongoing research on externalities, would make any such table obsolete shortly after it is
printed. However, the microeconomic tools to carry out and to critique such analysis are
longer lived. In this paper, I use the current issues in renewable energy cost analysis to
illustrate the use, and occasional misuse, of those tools.


II. Generation Costs of Conventional and Renewable Energy
  Though renewable sources other than hydro-electricity have grown very quickly in the
last decade, they were starting from a miniscule base, and they remain a very small share
of total generation today due primarily to their high direct cost. Table 1 presents the share
of electricity generated from conventional and renewable sources for regions of the world
and selected countries during 2007, the most recent year for which comparable worldwide
data are available. Coal is the dominant generation source worldwide, with natural gas,
hydro-electricity and nuclear power also playing major roles.

  Coal and natural gas remain the lowest-cost technology for new generation in most parts
of the world. These cost comparisons, however, show remarkable variance, with renewable
generation far from competitive in some studies and quite economical in others. Nearly all
of these studies calculate a levelized cost of electricity, but as I discuss below, the exact
economic assumptions made can drive enormous variation.


                                              3
Table 1: Electricity Generation By Source
Units are billion kWh. Data are for 2007.

Region/Country                           Total       Natural      Coal Nuclear     Hydro- Oil and           Wind       Geo-     Solar  Other
                                                        Gas                       electric    other                 thermal       Renewables
OECD                                                                                       liquids*
 OECD North America                     5,003           20%       44%       18%      13%        3%           0.8%      0.4%     0.0%      1.3%
  United States                             4,139       22%       49%       19%       6%        2%           0.8%      0.4%     0.0%      1.3%
  Mexico                                     244        37%       18%        4%      11%       26%           0.0%      2.9%     0.0%      1.2%
 OECD Europe                            3,399           22%       29%       26%      15%        2%           2.9%      0.3%     0.1%      3.1%
 OECD Asia                              1,747           23%       40%       22%       7%        6%           0.3%      0.3%     0.0%      1.4%
  Japan                                     1,063       28%       31%       24%       7%        8%           0.2%      0.3%     0.0%      2.1%
   Total OECD                          10,149           21%       38%       21%      12%        3%           1.4%      0.4%     0.1%      1.9%

Non-OECD
 Non-OECD Europe and Eurasia            1,592           36%       25%       17%      18%        4%           0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.1%
  Russia                                     959        40%       23%       15%      18%        3%           0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.2%
 Non-OECD Asia                          4,779           10%       69%        2%      14%        4%           0.4%      0.3%     0.0%      0.3%
  China                                     3,041        2%       80%        2%      14%        2%           0.2%      0.0%     0.0%      0.1%
  India                                      762         6%       71%        2%      16%        3%           1.4%      0.0%     0.0%      0.3%
 Middle East                              674           57%        5%        0%       3%       35%           0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%
 Africa                                   581           25%       45%        2%      17%       11%           0.2%      0.2%     0.0%      0.2%
 Central and South America              1,009           15%        6%        2%      65%        9%           0.1%      0.3%     0.0%      2.6%
    Total Non-OECD                      8,634           20%       47%        5%      20%        7%           0.2%      0.2%     0.0%      0.5%

Total world                            18,783           21%       42%       14%      16%        5%           0.9%      0.3%     0.0%      1.3%

* includes petroleum‐derived fuels and non‐petroleum‐derived liquid fuels, such as ethanol and biodiesel, coal‐to‐liquids, and gas‐to‐liquids.
Petroleum coke, which is a solid, is included. Also included are natural gas liquids, crude oil consumed as a fuel, and liquid hydrogen.

** includes biomass and other waste energy sources.

Source: EIA International Energy Outlook 2010, Tables H11 ‐ H20
A. A Brief Guide to Levelized Cost of Electricity Estimates

    The levelized cost of electricity for a given generation plant is the constant (in real terms)
price for power that would equate the net present value of revenue from the plant’s output
with the net present value of the cost of production.2 Levelized cost estimates depend
on numerous engineering factors that vary with the technology being reviewed, but these
are not usually the main drivers of variation in estimates for a given plant. Current
technological specifications for a plant are comparatively easy to establish with reasonable
precision; for the most part, researchers agree on what inputs are going in and what
outputs result. Economic variables are usually behind large discrepancies among levelized
cost estimates. These include assumptions about inflation rates, real interest rates, how
much the generator is used, and future input costs, including fuel costs. Engineering factors
also interact with these economic considerations; for example, the optimal usage of a plant
will depend on the marginal cost of production, the speed with which its output can be
adjusted, and the market price (plus other compensation, such as marginal subsidies) that
the generator receives. The best levelized cost studies state these assumptions clearly, but
many do not.

    Because generation plants are heterogeneous in location, architecture, and other factors,
even plants with similar technology will not have the same levelized cost of electricity.
The variation tends to be relatively small for coal and gas plants because the fuel is fairly
standardized and the plant operation is less affected by location. Even these plants’ costs,
however, are affected by idiosyncratic site characteristics (including property values), local
labor costs, environmental constraints, access to fuel transportation, and access to electric-
ity transmission lines, as well as variation in technical efficiency of operation. Production
from solar and wind generation is largely driven by local climate conditions, which greatly
increases the variance across projects in levelized cost.

    The variation in levelized cost across plants with the same technology raises an important
caveat: levelized cost studies are usually based on the average outcome at existing or recent

2   If a plant lasts N periods and produces qn in period n, then discounting future cash flows at the real
    cost of capital r, the levelized cost of electricity is defined by

                                                                                PN
              X
              N
                          LCOE      X Cn (q1 , .., qN )
                                     N
                                                                                   n=0
                                                                                       Cn (q1 ,..,qN )
                                                                                         (1+r)n
                    qn ·
                         (1 + r)n
                                  =
                                        (1 + r)n
                                                              ⇐⇒     LCOE =       P  N      qn
              n=1                   n=0                                              n=1 (1+r)n


    where Cn (q1 , .., qN ) is the real (in period 0 dollars) expenditures in period n to produce the stream of
    output (q1 , .., qN ). As [1] suggests, some capital costs are borne before any production can take place.


                                                          4
plants, but they are generally intended to guide future investment decisions. Technological
progress, learning-by-doing and economies of scale in building multiple plants will tend to
make the cost of the marginal plant lower than the average of existing or recent facilities,
but scarcity of high-quality locations will tend to cause the cost of a new plant to be
higher than the pre-existing average. Some studies are explicitly prospective, evaluating
the levelized cost of a technology that the authors assume will be installed in some future
year. These are necessarily the most speculative, forecasting future technological progress,
which gives the authors great latitude to make varying assumptions that yield widely
varying levelized cost estimates.

    The lack of comparability in levelized cost analyses is particularly troubling because
these cost figures are frequently the central focus of policy discussions about alternative
technologies. These figures can potentially be quite useful benchmarks, but they must be
thoughtfully adjusted for the attributes of the power produced and other impacts of the
generation process.

    I consider here only studies for U.S. generation. Costs vary around the world, both due
to varying technologies and expertise, and because fuel costs and regulations differ.

B. Estimates of Levelized Costs of Electricity

    With those cautions, Figure 1 presents levelized cost estimates for major electricity gen-
eration technologies. The notes to figure 1 presents details of the calculations.3 Clearly,
the range of estimates can be significant and the details in the notes demonstrate why.
Many of the studies include subsidies and tax benefits to the generator itself. With suffi-
cient subsidy, of course, any technology can appear to have a low cost. Nonetheless, these
calculations can still be relevant for private decision making. A separate issue, which I
discuss below, is accounting for upstream subsidies to fuel supply or transportation.

    Coal and natural gas – the two leading sources of electricity generation – are fuel-
intensive technologies (in terms of cost share) relative to all others, with natural gas being
the most fuel-intensive of the major generation technologies.4 Thus, forecasts of future fuel
prices play a large role in levelized cost estimates. These forecasts have high variance due to
uncertainty about the exhaustability of the resource, technological progress in exploration

3   Also see Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group III (2011) for discussion of re-
    newable energy technologies and Annex III for levelized cost estimates.
4   Oil-fired generation is even more fuel intensive, but has a very small share of grid-connected generation
    in the United States due to its high cost.


                                                      5
                                                                                             Figure 1. Levelized cost estimates
                        500
                                                  Borenstein 2008
                        450                       Klein/CEC 2010
                                                  Du & Parsons 2009
                        400                       EIA 2011
                                                  EPRI 2008
                   Wh




                        350
                                                  Fthenakis et al 2009
        d cost, $/MW




                                                  Lazard 2008
                        300
                                                  Cory and Schwabe 2009
                                                  UCS 2011
                        250
Levelized




                        200


                        150


                        100


                         50


                         0
                                         erized




                                                                                                                             uclear




                                                                                                                                      Biomass




                                                                                                                                                            Solar PV
                                                                    CCGT
                                                                  ntional




                                                                                                                                                                                  ntional
                                                                                                                                                                                  e cycle
                                                                                                                    power




                                                                                                                                                   ar CSP
                                                                                    nshore




                                                                                                      hermal




                                                                                                               Hydrop




                                                                                                                            Nu
                              Coal - Pulve




                                                                                                                                                Sola
                                                                            Wind - on
                                                       Gas – conven




                                                                                                                                                                       Gas – conven
                                                                                                  Geoth




                                                                                                                                                                             simple
 Notes to figure 1: Details for Levelized Cost of Energy Estimates

1. Borenstein   Inflation: All calculations use 2007$; Interest: 3% real annual interest rate; Lifetime: 25 years; Capacity factor: 16%; Subsidies: None; Online: 2007; Notes: Capacity
   2008a        factor is for AC production, based on production simulation for Sacramento, CA. LCOE in real 2007$

2. Klein 2010   Inflation: About 1.6% per year, plus 0.5% escalation for O&M costs; Interest: 4.67% WACC for publicly‐owned utilities; Carbon cost: None; Local pollutant cost: None;
                Online: 2018; Notes: LCOE given is in nominal terms. Used “average” case. Used publicly‐owned utility estimates.
                           Gas CCGT: Lifetime: 20 years; Fuel: $6.56/MMBtu in 2009 to $16.80/MMBtu in 2029, at nominal prices; Capacity factor: 75%
                           Wind – onshore: Lifetime: 30 years; Capacity factor: 37%; Subsidies: Federal production incentive of $4.10/MWh
                           Geothermal: Lifetime: 30 years; Capacity factor: 94%; Subsidies: Federal production incentive of $4.10/MWh
                           Hydropower: Lifetime: 30 years; Capacity factor: 30%; Subsidies: None; Online: 2018; Notes: For “small‐scale and existing sites”
                           Biomass: Lifetime: 20 years; Fuel: $2.00/MMBtu in 2009 to $2.91/MMBtu in 2029, at nominal prices; Capacity factor: 85%; Subsidies: Federal production
                           incentive of $4.10/MWh; Online: 2018; Note: Data are for stoker boiler.
                           Solar CSP & Solar PV: Lifetime: 20 years; Capacity factor: 27%; Subsidies: Receives federal production incentive of $4.10/MWh, and exempt from state ad
                           valorem tax; Notes: 250 MW gross capacity parabolic trough for Solar CSP; 250 MW gross capacity single axis system for PV
                           Gas – conventional simple cycle: Lifetime: 20 years; Fuel: $6.56/MMBtu in 2009 to $16.80/MMBtu in 2029, at nominal prices; Capacity factor: 75%

3. Du &         Inflation: 3% annual inflation, plus 1% real escalation in O&M and 0.5% real escalation in fuel; Lifetime: 40 years; Capacity factor: 85%; Subsidies: None; Online: 2009;
   Parsons      Notes: Real LCOE in 2007$
   2009                    Pulverized: Interest: 7.8% real WACC; Fuel: $2.60 / MMBtu in 2007$ with escalation as described above; Notes: Based on recently proposed supercritical and
                           ultrasupercritical pulverized coal plants
                           Gas – Conventional CCGT: Interest: 7.8% real WACC; Fuel: $7 / MMBtu in 2007$ with escalation as described above
                           Nuclear: Interest: 10% real WACC; Fuel: $0.67 / MMBtu in 2007$ with escalation as described above

4. EIA 2011a,   Inflation: Average 2.9% annually; Interest: 10.4% real WACC for fossil generators without CCS, 7.4% real WACC for all others; Lifetime: 30 years; Subsidies: None;
   2011b,       Carbon cost: Cost of capital for fossil plants without CCS is 3 percentage points higher than for other generators; Online: 2016; Notes: LCOE is in 2009$
   2011c                   Pulverized: Fuel: Delivered price is about $2.50 / MMBtu in 2009$ through 2035; Local pollutant cost: Plants choose least‐cost combination of scrubbers and
                           emissions allowances to comply with Clean Air Interstate Rule; Capacity factor: 85%
                           Gas – Conventional CCGT: Fuel: Lower 48 wellhead price rises from about $4/kCF in 1990 to about $6.50/kCF in 2035; Capacity factor: 87%
                           Wind – onshore: Capacity factor: 34%
                           Geothermal: Capacity factor: 92%
                           Hydropower: Capacity factor: 52%
                           Nuclear: Fuel: Proprietary model starting from Energy Resources International uranium price forecasts; Capacity factor: 90%;
                           Biomass: Fuel: Not given; Capacity factor: 83%
                           Solar CSP: Capacity factor: 25%;
                           Solar PV: Capacity factor: 25%; Notes: For 150 MW fixed‐tilt flat plat PV
                           Gas – conventional simple cycle: Fuel: Lower 48 wellhead price rises from about $4/kCF in 1990 to about $6.50/kCF in 2035; Capacity factor: 30%
5. EPRI 2009    Inflation: All calculations use real 2008$; no escalation is modeled for any cost component; Interest: Real, after‐tax WACC of 5.5%; Lifetime: 30 years; Subsidies: None;
                Carbon cost: none; Online: 2015; Notes: LCOE in 2008$
                           Pulverized: Fuel: $15 / MWh in 2008$; Capacity factor: 80%; Local pollutant cost: Mercury removal; Notes: For 650 – 750 MW supercritical plant
                           Gas – Conventional CCGT: Fuel: $8 ‐ $10 / MMBtu in 2008$; Capacity factor: 80%
                           Wind – onshore: Capacity factor: 35%; Notes: 100 MW wind farm; location not specified
                           Nuclear: Fuel: $0.80 / MMBtu in 2008$; Capacity factor: 90%; Notes: 1400 MW plant
                           Biomass: Fuel: $1.22 ‐ $2.22 / MMBtu in 2008$ ; Capacity factor: 85%; Notes: 75 MW circulating fluidized bed plant, with 28% efficiency
                           Solar CSP: Capacity factor: 32%; Notes: 125 MW facility in New Mexcio with wet cooling and 10% combustion
                           Solar PV: Capacity factor: 26%; Notes: 20 MW fixed flate plate PV with 10% conversion efficiency

6. Fthenakis    Inflation: 1.9% annual; Interest: 6.7% after‐tax WACC; 5% real discount rate; Lifetime: 30 years; Subsidies: not specified; Online: 2020; Notes: Assumes new HVDC
   et al 2009   transmission construction costs of $0.007/kWh
                           Solar CSP: Capacity factor: 90% (16 hours of thermal storage); Notes: “Gigawatt scale” CSP plant in southwest US with 16 hours of thermal storage capacity
                           Solar PV: Capacity factor: 90% (300 hours of compressed air storage); Notes: “Multi‐hundred MW scale” PV; assumes major technological advances lower cost

7. Lazard       Inflation: 2.5% annual escalation for fuel, O&M, and tax credits (no overall inflation specified); Interest: 7.3% after‐tax WACC; Lifetime: 20 years; Notes: Online years
   2008         imputed based on stated construction times; LCOE in 2008$; Carbon cost: None; Local pollutant cost: None
                           Pulverized coal: Fuel: $2.50 / MMBtu in 2008$, with escalation as described above; Capacity factor: 85%; Online: 2013; Notes: Range of estimates $74 ‐ $135 /
                           MWh (high end includes 90% carbon capture and compression)
                           Gas – Conventional CCGT: Fuel: $8.00 / MMBtu in 2008$; Capacity factor: 40% ‐ 85%; Online: 2011; Notes: Range $73 ‐ $100 / MWh
                           Wind – onshore: Capacity factor: 28% ‐ 36%; Subsidies: Production tax credit of $20 / MWh; Online: 2009; Notes: 100 MW facility; Range $44 ‐ $91 / MWh
                           Geothermal: Capacity factor: 70% ‐ 80%; Subsidies: Production tax credit of $20 / MWh; Online: 2011; Notes: Range $42 ‐ $69 / MWh
                           Nuclear: Fuel: $0.50 / MMBtu in 2008$; Capacity factor: 90%; Online: 2014; Range: $98 ‐ $126
                           Biomass: Fuel: $0 – 2 / MMBtu in 2008$; Capacity factor: 80%; Subsidies: Production tax credit of $10/ MWh; Online: 2012; Notes: Range $50 ‐ $94 / MWh
                           Solar CSP: Capacity factor: 26% – 38%; Subsidies: 30% investment tax credit; Online: 2010; Notes: Range $90 ‐ $145 / MWh (low end tower, high end trough)
                           Solar PV: Capacity factor: 20% – 26%; Subsidies: 30% investment tax credit; Online: 2009; Notes: Range $96 ‐ $154 / MWh; low end is for 10 MW net capacity
                           thin film installation; high end is for 10 MW crystalline fixed axis installation
                           Gas – Conventional simple cycle: Fuel: $8.00 / MMBtu in 2008$ with escalation as described above; Capacity factor: 10%; Online: 2010; Notes: Range $221 ‐
                           $334; Low end is for GE 7FA turbine; High end is for GE LM6000PC turbine

8. Cory and     Inflation: 4% annually; Interest: All equity financing with 10% target internal rate of return; Interest rate 5.8%; Lifetime: 20 years; Capacity factor: 34%; Subsidies:
   Schwabe      Production tax credit of $15 ‐ $21 / MWh; Online: 2008; Notes: 120 MW facility; Used “corporate” financing structure and “base case” scenario.
   2009

9. UCS 2011a,   Inflation: All calculations use real 2010$. Interest: Not specified. Capital costs based on EIA technology‐specific fixed charge rates; Lifetime: 20 years; Subsidies: None;
   2011b        Carbon cost: None; Online: 2015; Notes: LCOE is given in 2010$
                           Pulverized coal: Fuel: $1.60 ‐ $2.70 / MMBtu in 2010$; Capacity factor: 85%; Notes: Range of estimates $103 ‐ $130 / MWh; for 600 MW supercritical plant
                           Gas – conventional combined cyle: Fuel: $4.00 ‐ $6.75 / MMBtu in 2010$; Capacity factor: 50% ‐ 87%; Notes: Range $52 ‐ $98 / MWh; 400 MW plant
                           Wind – onshore: Capacity factor: 25% ‐ 45%; Notes: Range $57 ‐ $125 / MWh
                           Geothermal: Capacity factor: 85%; Notes: Range $65 ‐ $169 / MWh
                           Nuclear: Fuel: $0.8 / MMBtu in 2010$; Capacity factor: 80% ‐ 90%; Notes: Range $141 ‐ $184 /MWh; for 1100 – 1350 MW plant
                           Biomass: Fuel: $1.88 ‐ $4.06 / MMBtu in 2010$; Capacity factor: 80%; Notes: Range $147 ‐ $328 / MWh; 50 MW circulating fluidized bed plant
                           Solar CSP: Capacity factor: 27% ‐ 43%; Notes: Range $147 ‐ $328 / MWh; 50 – 100 MW facility
                           Solar PV: Capacity factor: 20% ‐ 28%; Notes: Range $126 ‐ $260 / MWh
and extraction, and government regulation (see Holland (2003)).

  Variation in technology and usage within a generation fuel source can also greatly affect
levelized cost. Combined-cycle gas turbine plants are highly efficient (in terms of “heat
rate,” the amount of fuel energy needed to generate a unit of electricity), but relatively
costly to build, while single-cycle generation combustion turbine gas plants are less efficient,
but much cheaper to build. As a result, combined-cycle plants tend to run most of the time,
while combustion turbines are used primarily at peak times, running far fewer hours per
year. The levelized costs of these two technologies are quite different, but the comparison
isn’t informative, because they are intended for different uses. Because electricity demand
is quite variable and electricity is not storable in a cost-effective way, there is demand for
some “baseload” generation that run in most hours and some “peaker” generation that is
called on for relatively few hours per year. Neither technology could efficiently substitute
for the other.

  Hydro-electric and geothermal generation are generally viewed as renewable. They can
be inexpensive, but locations that are usable and high-productivity are quite limited.
Large-scale hydro-electricity generation also creates such major alterations to the landscape
that it is generally not considered environmentally friendly. In addition, hydro-electric
generation usually faces a limit on the total energy that can be produced in a year or other
time frame due to precipitation and water storage limits.

  The three broad categories of renewable energy that are considered closest to being scal-
able and cost competitive are wind, solar and biomass. Wind and solar are also location-
limited, though not to the same extent as hydro and geothermal. Studies have identified
sufficient sites that if these locations were developed with wind and solar generation they
could make the technology the dominant electricity sources in the United States – see
NREL (2010) on wind power and Fthenakis et al (2009) on solar. The more significant
barriers are cost of generation, cost of transmitting the power to where demand is, and the
value of the power generated. The lowest-cost wind power is usually generated in fairly
remote locations, so the cost of infrastructure to transmit the power to demand sites can
be significant. Transmission costs for connection to the grid are generally not included
in levelized cost estimates, in part because they are so idiosyncratic by project. Local
resident resistance to transmission lines and incomplete property rights in some cases can
also create significant regulatory uncertainty.

  Solar power encompasses two different fundamental technologies. Solar thermal gener-


                                               6
ation focuses sunlight on a heat transfer fluid that is used to create steam, which is then
used in a turbine to drive a generator. Photovoltaic systems use semiconductors to convert
sunlight directly to electricity.5 Either technology can be used for large-scale generation in
open space, known as utility-scale generation – while photovoltaic panels can be installed
at small scale near demand – such as on residential rooftops.

    Rooftop solar reduces the need for investment in high-voltage transmission lines that
carry power from large-scale generation to local distribution wires. Some argue that it also
reduces the cost of the local distribution networks, but there do not seem to be reliable
studies on the distribution cost impact, as I discuss below. Economies of scale at the local
distribution level are significant, suggesting the marginal savings from reduced flow on
distribution lines is well below the average cost of distribution per kilowatt-hour. Small-
scale rooftop solar, such as on a single-family home, also enjoys fewer economies of scale
in construction or panel procurement, so the up-front cost per unit of capacity tends to be
much greater.6

    Biomass is a broad category that includes both burning the inputs directly and biomass
gasification, in which the inputs are heated to produce a synthetic gas. The primary
biomass fuels are wood scraps and pulping waste, but also agricultural residue, landfill
gas, and municipal solid waste. The levelized cost of biomass tends to depend to a great
extent on the idiosyncratic local cost of collecting and preparing the fuel relative to the
energy it produces. In 2007, it provided about half of the non-hydro renewable electricity
generation in the U.S. and the world. Mostly, this is from mixing biomass with coal and
burning in a conventional coal-fired power plant, which requires fairly small incremental
equipment investments. Such approaches represent the lower end of the levelized cost
estimates in figure 1, but the opportunity for expansion are limited.

C. Limitations of Using Levelized Cost Estimates to Compare Electricity Technologies

    Although levelized cost in some form has been the starting point for cost comparisons
since the beginning of electricity generation – McDonald (1962) discusses levelized cost
comparisons from the early 20th century – it is by no means the final word. This is

5   The International Energy Agency provides brief useful overviews of alternative energy technologies at
    http://www.iea.org/techno/essentials.htm.
6   To some extent the lower panel cost for large photovoltaic farms is a pecuniary economy, not representing
    real resource savings, if it is just a rent transfer from sellers to buyers. But to the extent that the panel
    cost is higher for small installations due to higher shipping or transaction costs of small orders, or
    because of the need to customize panel selection to particular types of installations, those probably
    reflect real cost differences.


                                                        7
primarily because electricity generation technologies have different temporal and spatial
production profiles.

  Because electricity is very costly to store, wholesale prices can vary by a factor of 10 or
more within a day. As a result time variation in production, and the operator’s control
over that variation, greatly affects the value of power produced. Generation resources over
which an operator has greater temporal control are considered “dispatchable,” while those
that vary significantly due to exogenous factors are considered “intermittent.” Joskow
(2011a) and Joskow (2011b) discuss in detail the impact of temporal output variation on
the value of power produced by different generating sources.

  Among conventional gas and coal plants, there are constraints on how quickly a plant’s
output level can be increased or decreased (“ramping rates”), how long the plant must
remain off once it has been shut down, and how frequently it must be shut down for planned
or unplanned maintenance, as well as the cost of starting the plant. Economic tradeoffs also
arise here between short-run benefits of pushing the plant to or beyond the engineering
specifications and the longer-run costs of increased wear on the plant components that
cause greater need for planned outages and greater incidence of unplanned outages.

  Gas-fired peaker plants, for instance, have low fuel efficiency, but are very flexible, with
rapid ramping capability and low start-up costs. Hydro-electric generation is also highly
valued for its ability to adjust output very quickly. If the optimal “dispatch” of a plant
implies that it will run disproportionately at times when electricity is of particularly high
value – as is the case with gas-fired peaker generation and most hydro generation – then
any levelized cost comparison must be augmented with adjustment for this enhanced value
of the power that is produced.

  Generation resources that depend on the local weather – such as wind and solar – are
intermittent and therefore the least dispatchable. Such generation is almost entirely out
of the control of the plant operator (although these technologies can be shut down fairly
easily and quickly, so the plant operator can usually put an upper limit on their output).
Power from intermittent resources must be evaluated in terms of the time at which it is
produced. Solar power is produced only during daylight hours and tends to peak in the
middle of the day. In many areas, this is close to coincident with the highest electricity
demand which usually occurs on summer afternoons. Thus, the average economic value of
generation from solar is greater than if it produced the same quantity of power on average
at all hours of the day. Wind power often has the opposite generation pattern in the United


                                              8
States, in most locations producing more power at night and at times of lower demand
and prices.

    Adjustment for the time variation of production is straightforward: compare the levelized
cost to the average wholesale value of the power it delivers. In Borenstein (2008a) I find that
power from solar photovoltaics in California is likely to be about 20 percent more valuable
than the average power sold in the state, because it is produced disproportionately at high-
priced times. The premium would be as high as 50 percent if the wholesale market were
allowed to clear at very high prices, but that doesn’t occur, because grid operators contract
separately for stand-by generation capacity, known broadly as “generation reserves,” which
they use to meet demand spikes and supply outages without allowing prices to rise too high
at peak times. Fripp and Wiser (2008) find that wind power production in the west is likely
to be between zero and ten percent less valuable per unit than if the power were produced
equally on average at all times, though that study may understate the appropriate discount
in wind value because it uses data from a period of very low power price volatility.

    However, even this temporal adjustment for wholesale power prices doesn’t completely
capture the granularity over which the true value of power fluctuates. Because electricity
is not storable at reasonable cost and the demand side of the market has had limited
opportunity to respond to price fluctuations in very short time intervals, it is more cost
effective to build back-up generation in sufficient quantity to have most adjustment occur
on the supply side of the market.7 The presence of back-up generation in itself is not a
barrier to efficient pricing that reflects the actual shadow value of power at each point in
time, though the shadow value is likely to be low at most times. The presence of back-up
generation in itself is not a barrier to efficient pricing that reflects the actual shadow value
of power at each point in time, though the shadow value is likely to be low at most times.
Grid operation, however, has never been based on such a precise market model.8 In the
more than 20 years in which merchant generators have played a significant role in U.S.
electricity markets, however, grid operators have generally procured reserve generation
and charged it to the system as a whole. Thus, the cost to the system of an intermittent
producer has been socialized across all generators and prices have not fully reflected the

7   The technology for near-instantaneous demand response now exists, but questions remain about the
    cost-effectiveness of incorporating such sophisticated demand activity. If customers found it acceptable
    to have their thermostat respond automatically to retail price changes, i.e., considered the associated
    cost to be fairly low, then the cost of intermittency could be substantially reduced. See Callaway (2009).
8   This makes sense under the old utility model, in which all generation was owned by the same company,
    which solved a complex optimization problem and implemented the solution administratively.


                                                      9
time-varying value of power. There is now an active debate about how much the failure
to assign these costs of intermittency to specific generators skews incentives.

  Adjusting levelized cost estimates for the intermittency clearly depends on the degree
to which intermittency requires additional generation reserves, or increases the risk of a
supply shortage that causes blackouts or brownouts. While a grid can easily handle very
small shares of intermittent resources – in fact, to a grid operator they look almost the
same as the stochastic component of demand that supply must follow – some grid engineers
have argued that the cost will increase more than proportionally if intermittent resources
constitute a significant share of generation, such as 20 percent or more, as is currently
contemplated and has been achieved in some locations in Europe. This too is an area of
active debate; a detailed discussion appears in New York Independent System Operator
(2010). Ideal market pricing would reveal the value of a generator’s production at every
instant, but wholesale electricity markets are not set up to generate such fine-grained price
signals.

  There is also a multi-year temporal issue that complicates comparisons of levelized costs.
Levelized cost does not incorporate any variation in the real value of power across years.
For instance, if the real cost of electricity is expected to rise substantially over time, then
power produced in the near-term is less valuable than in the distant future. Comparing
levelized costs implicitly assumes that the real marginal value of power will be constant.
This assumption is particularly important if the output profiles of two generators differ
substantially, such as comparing a nuclear plant that will take five to ten years to build to
solar panels that will start producing within a year or less.

  Just as the value of electricity varies temporally due to storage constraints, it also varies
locationally due to transmission constraints. Complete locational pricing is difficult logisti-
cally due to the complex physics of power flows, but a number of areas of the United States
do have what is known as “locational marginal pricing” that sends fairly efficient short-
run price signals. The greater challenge in locational pricing is in the long run, because
the full incremental cost of adding new transmission capacity can differ significantly from
the direct infrastructure cost once one accounts for the resulting change in transmission
capacity on all lines in the grid. Highly granular pricing – in both time and location – had
less value in the historical electricity supply paradigm with less reliance on intermittent
generation and a single utility that could coordinate long-term generation and transmission
investment, and internalize the externalities created by each in terms of grid capacity and
intermittency. Even in the markets that remain regulated today, many of these issues still

                                              10
arise as regulated utilities buy much more power from independent generators than they
did 10 or 20 years ago.

  Locating electricity generation at the customer site, known as “distributed generation,”
engenders the most controversy in locational valuation. Retail prices are a very poor guide
to locational value, because they include significant fixed cost recovery (e.g., the fixed
costs of local distribution networks) and they reflect little or none of the locational (or
time) variation in wholesale power purchase or production cost. At one extreme, some
advocates of distributed solar and wind generation argue that customers should not only
be able to reduce their power bills to zero by generating as much power over a billing
period as they consume, they should be paid the retail rate by the utility for any net
power they contribute to the system. At the other extreme, some grid engineers argue
that intermittent distributed generation not only doesn’t reduce local distribution costs
much at all – so should be compensated no more than the wholesale price of power –
the intermittent nature of the power and the reverse flow from customers increases the
stress on distribution transformers and increases the frequency of repairs. At the heart
of this conflict is an internal inconsistency in the utility revenue model: local electricity
distribution service is a regulated, largely fixed-cost, business, but costs are recovered
primarily through charges that vary with the quantity of electricity consumed. In the
United States, wholesale electricity costs average only about 50 to 75 percent of residential
retail electricity bills; most of the rest represents costs that don’t vary with marginal
electricity consumption.

  Residential solar photovoltaic generation has been at the center of this debate. Resi-
dential solar does offer greater value than suggested by its high levelized cost – because it
produces disproportionately at times of high demand, reduces transmission investment, and
avoids the small percentage of power that is dissipated as heat when it is sent through the
transmission and distribution lines from a distant generator (Borenstein, 2008a). Nonethe-
less, retail rates don’t accurately reflect the social value of distributed solar generation.
With distributed generation, a significant share of the savings customers see in their elec-
tricity bills would have gone to pay the utility’s fixed costs. These costs change very little,
even in the long run, when customers generate some of their own power.


D. Subsidies and preferential tax treatment

  Some of the levelized cost estimates shown in figure 1 and described in detail in the
notes reflect costs after direct subsidies and preferential tax treatments, and some don’t

                                              11
state clearly how subsidies and taxes are handled. Excluding subsidies and tax advantages
seems sensible for cost analyses that are intended to guide public policy, but even that
approach can be questioned. For instance, should state regulator consider federal sub-
sidies and tax breaks when evaluating a proposed renewable energy facility? Given the
political and logistical barriers to accomplishing Pareto improving trades in these markets,
the appropriate treatment will depend on whose welfare the decision maker weighs most
heavily.

     Excluding direct subsidies and tax breaks from levelized cost analyses is relatively
straightforward, though it can be challenging in practice. Indirect subsidies that occur
upstream and affect the price of inputs are somewhat more difficult to sort out. Advocates
for renewable electricity argue that fossil fuel extraction receives special tax treatment in
the United States. While that is likely true, and subsidies for fossil fuels are larger than
for renewable energy in aggregate, the subsidy per kilowatt-hour for fossil fuel generation
is quite small. Adeyeye et al (2009) estimate that total subsidies for fossil fuels from
2002-2008 were $72 billion in the U.S., of which about $21 billion plausibly went to domes-
tically produced coal and natural gas that went into electricity production (most went to
oil production).9 Even if these subsidies were passed through 100% to consumers, which
seems highly unlikely in these internationally traded goods, that would amount to $0.0011
per kilowatt-hour of generation over this period.10 Other estimates of subsidies to coal and
natural gas for electricity generation are substantially lower (EIA, 2008) or many times
higher (Koplow, 2010), but over the range of subsidies claimed, the impact on electricity
generation costs will not materially affect their comparison to renewable sources.

9    Based on the descriptions on page 7-16 of Adeyeye et a (2009), this includes all of the categories
     that are primarily subsidizing coal: Credit for Production of Nonconventional Fuels ($14.1b), Black
     Lung Disability Trust Fund ($1.0b), Characterizing Coal Royalty Payments as Capital Gains ($1.0b),
     Exclusion of Benefit Payments to Disabled Miners ($0.4b), Other-Fuel Exploration & Development Ex-
     pensing ($0.3b), Other-Fuel Excess of Percentage over Cost Depletion ($0.3b), Special Rules for Mining
     Reclamation Reserves ($0.2b), Natural Gas Distribution Lines Treated as Fifteen-Year Modified Accel-
     erated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) Property ($0.1b), Expensing Advanced Mine Safety Equipment
     ($0.03b). In addition, for a number of oil and natural gas items, I’ve prorated for the value of natural
     gas used in electricity generation as a share of all oil and gas production in the U.S. (which average
     about 16% over this period). These include Oil and Gas Exploration & Development Expensing ($7.1b),
     Oil and Gas Excess Percentage over Cost Depletion ($5.4b), Exception from Passive Loss Limitations
     for Oil and Gas ($0.2b). I also include in this category Reduced Government Take from Federal Oil and
     Gas Leasing ($7.0b), which is charging below-market rates for leases. These are arguably subsidies, but
     they are actually unlikely to be passed through to prices for natural gas. I do not include the Foreign
     Tax Credits, which could be subsidies, but are extremely unlikely to affect domestic prices for natural
     gas or coal.
10   According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration “Electricity Net Generation” spreadsheet,
     coal and natural gas fired generation produced about 19 trillion kilowatt-hours of electricity over this
     seven-year period.


                                                      12
     In 29 U.S. state and the District of Columbia, renewable energy benefits from a different
sort of indirect subsidy, a minimum share of electricity that is mandated to come from
renewables, often termed a “renewable portfolio standard.” Nearly all such programs,
however, translate this quantity standard to some extent into a subsidy/tax system through
tradable credits for renewable energy, which can be purchased by retail electricity providers
in lieu of meeting the standard through their own generation. As a result, some calculations
of the economics of renewables may include the value of these credits. Whether such
value should be counted in a social cost calculation depends on whether the credit price
reflects the true cost of externalities avoided by the generation, which is difficult to assess,
as I discuss in the next section. Schmalensee (2011) discusses the different policies for
promoting renewable energy generation and their effectiveness.11

     With many factors affecting calculations of the full cost and benefit of generation tech-
nologies, claims that a new technology has attained “grid parity” must be interpreted with
great caution. Advocates of wind generation who argue that it is at grid parity in some
locations generally do not adjust for the timing, location and intermittency factors that
can make wind substantially less valuable. Residential solar photovoltaic power is some-
times claimed to be at grid parity if it saves the customer money (usually, after subsidies),
but such analyses do not consider that the retail electricity rate pays for much more than
just the energy that the solar generation replaces. Of course, grid parity on market factors
alone is not the socially optimal driver of technology choice if some technologies produce
greater negative externalities than others.



III. Incorporating Environmental Externalities
     Until the 1960s, air pollution from conventional electricity generation was largely un-
regulated and in that sense “free” to the polluter. But in the 1960s and 1970s, legislation
restricted the rights of generators to emit local air pollutants, particularly sulfur diox-
ide, nitrous oxides, and mercury. These policies didn’t put prices on pollutants, but were
command and control regulation, such as requiring the installation of smokestack devices
(“scrubbers”) that remove sulfur dioxide and other pollutants. In the last two decades,
carbon dioxide has been found to be a major contributor to climate change, leading to
efforts to restrict its emissions as well. About 33 percent of anthropogenic greenhouse
gas emissions in the United States come from the electric power sector, with 27 percent

11   Also see http://www.dsireusa.org/, a comprehensive database of such programs in the U.S.


                                                   13
coming from transportation, 20 percent from industry, and the remaining 20 percent is
from agriculture, commercial or residential (EPA (2011), table 2-12).

  In a first-best economic world, pollution rights would be just another input to the pro-
duction of electricity from a given technology and would automatically be included in the
levelized cost calculation. In most of the United States and the world, however, markets
for rights to emit greenhouse gases or local pollutants are spotty at best. Most levelized
cost estimates do not include the costs of emissions directly, though they do generally in-
clude the cost of technology that must be installed in order to meet command and control
regulations.

  A large literature exists on the marginal social cost of the air pollutants that power
plants emit. For local pollutants, the cost varies across plants and depends very much on
the population density, climate and geography around the plant, as well as the presence
of other pollutants (Fowlie and Muller (2010)). For greenhouse gases, the damage is not
localized, so valuation is much more uniform across plants. All of these studies rely heavily
on meteorological, climate and public health models, as well as valuations of statistical
lives. Muller and Mendelsohn (2007) explain the details and uncertainties of such studies
and present estimates of the cost of local pollutants. The caveats applied to local pollution
cost estimates are even stronger for estimates of the marginal social costs of greenhouse
gas emissions, because there is even more uncertainty in the underlying climate and public
health models. Greenstone, Kopits and Wolverton (2011) present a detailed discussion of
the uncertainties in estimating the social cost of greenhouse gas emissions.

  Absent government intervention, the external costs will not be borne by producers and
will not affect choices among electricity generation technology. The obvious solution is to
price the externalities – either through a tax or tradable permit program. The relative
merits of these approaches have been debated at length (Keohane (2009), Metcalf (2009),
and cites therein). Still, the reality is that both approaches remain relatively rare compared
to alternative interventions such as technology mandates and subsidies for green power.

  Technology mandates for pollution controls on conventional electricity generation have
been and remain the most common response to these market failures. Technologies to
remove some pollutants from the smokestack emissions of power plants have been used
since the 1960s. It is well known that such mandates can be inefficient, because they apply
uniform standards to emitters with very different production profiles, costs of meeting the
regulations, and costs of alternative technologies or production changes that would allow


                                             14
similar pollution reductions. Also known, but less highlighted, command and control
regulations don’t account for whether the emissions occur at times when they are likely to
be more or less damaging to public health. This is particularly important for nitrous oxides,
which under some, but not all, meteorological conditions combine with volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) and sunlight to make ozone. Even pricing the externality solves this
problem only if prices reflect such variation, which is often not the case, generally for
reasons of simplicity (Fowlie and Muller (2010)).

     Subsidies for green power (or mandated utility offer prices, known as “feed-in tariffs”)
have been portrayed as nearly equivalent to pricing externalities, but more politically
acceptable. This approach, however, is very problematic for three closely related reasons.
First, subsidizing green power for reducing pollution (relative to some counterfactual) is
not equivalent to taxing “brown” power to reflect the marginal social damage. If end-
use electricity demand were completely inelastic and green and brown power were each
completely homogeneous, they would have the same effect; the only impact of the subsidy
would be to shift the production share towards green and away from brown power. But
the underlying market failure is the under-pricing of brown power, not the over-pricing of
green power, so subsidizing green power from government revenues artificially depresses
the price of power and discourages efficient energy consumption.12 As a result, government
subsidies of green power lead to over-consumption of electricity and disincentives for energy
efficiency. In addition, for any given level of reduction, it will be achieved more efficiently
by equalizing the marginal price of the pollutant across sectors as well as within sectors.
This is not achievable through ad hoc subsidies to activities that displace certain sources
of emissions. Fowlie, Knittel and Wolfram (forthcoming) estimate that failure to achieve
uniform marginal prices in the NOx emissions in the U.S. has raised the cost of regulation
by at least 6 percent.

     Second, subsidizing green power generally fails to recognize the heterogeneity within the
green power sector and among the brown power sources that are being displaced. Solar
power that reduces coal-fired generation lowers greenhouse gas emissions by about twice as
much on average as if it reduces natural-gas-fired generation. Assuming that the marginal
generation displaced is equal to the average generation mix in the system can be a poor
approximation. A number of studies have attempted to go further and infer the generation


12   Green power subsidies that are paid for through a general surcharge on electricity are likely to be a step
     in the right direction, but only in very special cases do they result in electricity prices that reflect the
     social cost of pollution.


                                                        15
that is displaced by an incremental unit of power from wind or solar within a system,
accounting for the timing and location of the green power (for example, Callaway and
Fowlie (2009), Cullen (2011) and Gowrisankaran, Reynolds and Samano (2011)). These
studies have made clear how difficult it is to identify the alternative generation emissions
even after the fact. But to give efficient long-run incentives for investment, policy makers
must commit to subsidies well before they could have the data to calculate the alternative
emissions. The problem arises because subsidizing green power is an indirect approach to
the pollution problem, and the relationship between green power and emissions avoided is
not uniform. It would not arise with a direct tax (or pricing through tradable permits) on
pollution.13

     Third, because subsidizing green power addresses the policy goal only indirectly, it in-
troduces an opportunity for what might be called “benefit leakage” in which the impact
on the policy goal takes place out of the immediate area. If producing more green power in
one state lowers the production of brown power in a distant area that exports electricity to
the state, then the benefits of the pollution reduction are less likely to flow to those under-
writing the subsidies. Obviously, with greenhouse gases this would just be an accounting
issue, not a real change in the benefits, but with local pollutants the local environmen-
tal gains from subsidizing green power could be much less than would be suggested by a
calculation that assumes no change in trade.

     All energy sources have environmental implications for which property rights have not
been clearly assigned or would be costly to enforce. Wind turbines harm birds, as well
as create low-frequency thumping that some people find difficult to live with. Large scale
solar projects in the desert can endanger habitat for native animals. Solar photovoltaic
panels contain some heavy metals that require careful handling in disposal. Geothermal
generation may cause ground water pollution and small-scale seismic activity. Tidal and
wave power – both in nascent development stages – will likely run into concern that the
generators interfere with marine life. Coal mining creates significant quantities of solid
waste. Oil and gas production can result in leaks that spoil nearby ecosystems, including
recent concerns about the environmental impact of fluids used in hydraulic fracturing. And
nearly all generation sources are at some point accused of visual pollution.


13
     Both subsidizing green and taxing brown power require committing to the level of a policy instrument
     – such as prices or quantities – with only imperfect knowledge of its optimal level. Subsidizing green
     has the additional problem of setting the level of the policy instrument while knowing only imperfectly
     the relationship between the policy instrument and the variables of real interest.


                                                     16
  Many of these externalities involve substantial costs which mean substantial wealth
transfers and potentially large efficiency implications. Externalities from fossil fuels have
triggered litigation for years. With each new energy source, new property rights conflicts
emerge and must be adjudicated. Even if Coasian efficiency results after property rights are
assigned, the assignment process is costly. In one vivid example in Sunnyvale, California
a conflict arose between one neighbor with solar panels and another with redwood trees
that had grown tall enough to shade the panels. After a lengthy lawsuit, the solar panels
won out and the redwood tress had to be removed (Rogers (2008)).


IV. Non-Environmental Externalities
  While environmental externalities are the leading argument for public policy that en-
courages alternative energy sources, it is certainly not the only argument made. With the
failure to pass significant climate change legislation in the first 2 years of the Obama admin-
istration and the shift in Congressional power after January 2011, the non-environmental
justifications have become more prominent in public policy discussions. These arguments,
however, are generally much less persuasive.

A. Energy Security

  “Energy security” is rarely defined precisely, but the phrase generally is used to suggest
that the United States should produce a higher share of the energy it uses. One justification
is macroeconomic: If the price of a fuel for which the U.S. is highly import-dependent
rises suddenly, the common wealth shock to most consumers could potentially disrupt the
macroeconomy. Empirically, this argument may apply to oil – the U.S. now consumes
nearly twice as much oil as it produces – but it does not apply to coal or natural gas, for
which the U.S. is about self-sufficient. The U.S., however, uses almost no oil in producing
electricity. Energy security arguments could perhaps support a move towards electric cars
(or other alternatives to oil for transportation fuels). In that case, however, producing the
electricity from coal or natural gas enhances energy security as much as producing it from
renewable. In addition, electricity from coal and natural gas is less expensive, so using
those sources would make electric transportation more affordable and would do more to
enhance energy security. The distinct advantage of renewable electricity generation is its
lower environmental impact, not its ability to enhance energy security.

  A second “energy security” argument is that high energy prices enrich some energy-
exporting countries that are hostile to U.S. global interests. By reducing use of these fuels,

                                              17
the argument goes, the U.S. could lower the price of energy, which would both help U.S.
consumers and reduce the wealth flows to hostile regimes and possibly reduce military
expenditures directed towards to ensuring unimpeded energy trade. This argument again
does not have traction in analysis of coal or natural gas in the U.S. Even in oil-importing
countries where oil is a significant source of electricity generation, the quantities of oil
used for generation are so small relative to the world oil market that replacing them with
renewables is unlikely to have any noticeable impact on world oil prices, as indicated in
Table 1. This argument has been raised with more credibility in the context of European
natural gas purchases from Russia.


B. Non-appropriable Intellectual Property

  Even with the strong intellectual property laws that have been adopted in the most
advanced countries, in most cases a successful innovator captures little of the value he
or she creates. That surely creates some dynamic inefficiency, which governments have
addressed in many sectors by subsidizing basic research. Whether this incentive problem
is any greater in energy than other sectors in not clear, but it is clear that U.S. government
expenditures on energy R&D have been much smaller as a share of GDP contribution than
in healthcare, defense or technology (NSF (2010), Chapter 4). Government support for
generating fundamental scientific knowledge in energy has increased with the creation of
the Advanced Research Projects Agency - Energy within the Department of Energy in
2009, but the ARPA-E budget for 2012 is likely to be under $200 million. Studies from
across the political spectrum have suggested it should be 50 percent to many times higher
(Augustine et al (2011) and Loris (2011)).

  For renewable electricity technologies currently available, a common argument for subsi-
dies is that greater installation will lead to learning-by-doing that will drive down the cost
and price of the technology. This justifies government intervention, however, only if the
knowledge from that learning-by-doing is not appropriable by the company that creates
it, that is, if the knowledge spills over to other firms. Though the argument has merit,
proponents frequently overstate the case.

  First, most studies of learning-by-doing are not able to separate learning-by-doing from
other changes. In solar photovoltaic power, studies have shown that costs have come down
dramatically since the 1960s as the total number of installed panels has increased, with
estimates that every doubling of the installed base has on average been associated with
about a 20 percent decline in the cost of solar panels (for instance, Duke and Kammen

                                             18
(1999) and Swanson (2006)). Many factors that have changed costs over this time, as
Nemet (2006) points out. Significant exogenous technological advances in crystalline silicon
solar technologies have resulted from investments made outside the commercial solar power
sector, especially public investments made as part of the U.S. space program and private
investments in the semiconductor industry. In addition, firms in the industry have simply
gotten larger, which has lead to savings from economies of scale – producing more units
of output in each period – rather than learning-by-doing, which is the knowledge gained
from a larger aggregate history of production over time.14

     The distinction between learning-by-doing and economies of scale may seem minor, but
the implications for the economic analysis of public policy are immense. If one firm can
drive down its costs by producing at large scale in its factory or running a large scale
installation operation, those benefits are highly appropriable by that large firm. Other,
smaller firms are not likely to experience a cost decline because a competitor is enjoying
economies of scale. Thus, significant economies of scale in any industry, short of creating
a natural monopoly, are not generally seen as a basis for government intervention.

     Learning-by-doing creates more spillovers, because knowledge is likely to be portable
across firms. Still, the evidence of strong learning-by-doing is thin and credible results on
spillovers are even more rare. Nemet’s (2006) analysis suggests that learning-by-doing has
actually played a relatively small role in the decline of solar photovoltaic costs over the last
30 years. He finds that the scope for learning-by-doing using the current crystalline silicon
technology is quite limited given the current state of the industry. While the evidence
of minimal learning-by-doing effects in solar photovoltaics is not dispositive, it is more
convincing than any existing research claiming significant effects.

C. Green Jobs

     The “job creation” justification for government policies to promote renewable energy
took on greater prominence after the downturn that began in 2007 and the failure of
climate change legislation in Congress since then. In the green jobs debate of 2008-2010,
there was much confusion between the short-run stimulus goal and the longer run policy
of subsidizing green job creation. As a stimulus program, the advisability of subsidizing
renewable energy depends on how rapidly the investment can take place and the elasticity
of investment with respect to those subsidies. In general, the renewable energy sector
tends to require large up-front construction costs, which is likely to be attractive, but the

14   See also Barbose et al (2011) for a thorough presentation of changing photovoltaic costs over time.


                                                     19
capacity to expand such projects rapidly is likely to be fairly limited.

  When the economy recovers and the stimulus justification fades, is there a longer-term
job creation justification for subsidizing renewable energy? There is a static component
and a dynamic component of this question. The static view is simply that renewable energy
and energy efficiency are more labor-intensive technologies for producing (or conserving)
energy than conventional energy production. The empirical support for these claims is
uneven, but even if true it is far from making the case that green job creation is welfare
improving. To the extent that renewable energy costs more, even after accounting for
environmental externalities, renewable energy absorbs more resources to produce the same
value of output – a unit of electricity – and lowers GDP compared to conventional sources.
It is possible that renewable energy creates “better” jobs than conventional sources, per-
haps by targeting workers whose incremental economic welfare is of particular importance
because they are otherwise difficult to employ or because they would otherwise have very
low wage jobs.

  The dynamic view is that investment in renewable energy is justifiable as an attempt
to change the equilibrium path of investment and the economy. One reason suggested
is that renewable energy is a growth industry and, implicitly, that private investors are
too slow to recognize the opportunity, leading to sub-optimal investment. Still, it seems
hard to argue in general that government policy makers are better at identifying emerging
business opportunities than the private sector. A more nuanced and potentially compelling
version of this argument is that up-front investment will create network externalities and
learning that spill over much more strongly intra-nationally than internationally, creating
a sustainable economic advantage for the country that makes the investment. Such effects
could be important, but as countries make competing investments to become the dominant
center of renewable energy it seems likely that at least some of those rents would be
dissipated or transferred to firms that can choose their locations.

  The network effects argument is often heard in political debates, but evidence supporting
it is scarce. Both Germany and Spain have subsidized enormous investments in installation
of renewable energy, particularly solar. In 2008, Spain was the largest market for new solar
generation in the world, but its manufacturing and installation of new capacity virtually
disappeared in 2009 when the country cut back subsidies. Germany has continued to grow
installations of solar photovoltaics, more than quadrupling new capacity from 2008 to 2010,
but panel manufacturing in Germany declined from 77 percent of new installed capacity
in 2008 to 27 percent in 2010 as China and Taiwan have made massive investments in

                                             20
manufacturing.15

     This is an area ripe for further research. I am not aware of any credible studies that
have compared the short-run stimulus effect of green energy investment relative to other
stimulus policies, the quality of the jobs created in the long run by green energy investment,
or the ability of governments to make strategic investments that trigger a sustainable new
sector.

D. Lowering cost of fossil fuel energy

     Increasing adoption of renewable energy lowers the demand for fossil fuels and drives
down their prices. As a public policy argument, to the extent that renewables are more
expensive, this is essentially advocating the exercise of monopsony power in the fossil fuel
market. That has clear inefficiencies – some fossil fuels are replaced by more-expensive
renewable power – but it still might be surplus-enhancing on net for the set of economic
actors that the policy maker represents. In the U.S., the impact of increasing renewable
power is to reduce demand for natural gas and coal. U.S. production of these fossil fuels
is nearly equal to consumption, so the impact is to transfer wealth from producers to
consumers. On the state level within the U.S., the impact is much more uneven since
many states are large importers of fossil fuels and a smaller number are large exporters.

     The size of the impact on prices is also questionable. While some advocates have focused
on short-run price variation, the impact of a long-term shift towards renewables will depend
on the long-run elasticity of supply for natural gas and coal. With the advent of hydraulic
fracturing, it seems likely that the long-run elasticity of natural gas supply has probably
become quite high. The long-run elasticity of coal supply is generally seen as quite high
as well (Miller, Wolak and Zhang (2011)). Thus, a shift to renewables is not likely have a
large impact on fossil fuel prices.


V. An Application to Residential Solar Photovoltaic Power
     In this section, I apply the analytic approach described above to update the calculations
of levelized cost of residential solar power from Borenstein (2008a), taking into account
recent changes in the cost of solar photovoltaic systems.

     According to Barbose et al (2011), residential-scale solar systems (less than 10 kilowatt
capacity) in 2010 varied in average price from $6.3/watt in New Hampshire to $8.4/watt

15   These data are from Earth Policy Institute at http://www.earth-policy.org/data center/C23.


                                                   21
Table 2: Levelized Cost of Residential Solar Photovoltaic Power

Real Interest Rate                    1%             3%              5%             7%             9%
Real Levelized Cost                 $0.249         $0.315          $0.389         $0.468         $0.551
Assumptions: Five kilowatt system costs $36,500 installed (California estimate for 2010 from Barbose et
al (2011, p. 21)). Panels last for 30 years with no shading or soiling and no maintenance costs, producing
on average 0.77 kilowatts over all hours in first year (based on Sharp corporation calculator for SSW
facing panels in Sacramento, California (http://sharpusa.cleanpowerestimator.com/default.aspx). Output
of panels declines by 0.5% per year due to degradation (Barbose et al (2011, p. 47)). Inverter replaced
after 10 (at $2552) and 20 (at $2171) years, based on current cost of $3000 (Barbose et al (2011, p. 16))
declining by 2% annually in real terms (Borenstein (2008a) and cites therein).



in Utah, with California – by far the largest state for residential solar – at $7.30. Taking
California’s number as the benchmark, Table 2 presents the implied levelized cost of power
for a 5 kilowatt system located in Sacramento, California, under alternative real discount
rates. The underlying assumptions, noted in the table, are intended to be median estimates,
if anything tilted somewhat towards a lower cost of solar power.

     The real interest rate of 3 percent implies a levelized cost of $0.315 per kilowatt-hour.
I follow Borenstein (2008a) in adjusting for the timing of production, increasing the value
of residential solar by 20 percent, which is slightly higher than the estimated gains of 15%-
17% in a typical grid operation (with generation reserves) for Southwest facing panels in
Sacramento, but lower than the 40%-50% premium in an “ideal” economic grid with no
generation reserves and prices clearing the market hour by hour. I adjust for the location
of production, increasing value by just 1 percent as found in Borenstein (2008a), because
residential solar panels are not disproportionately located in congested areas. These effects
are incorporated by adjusting the levelized cost down to $0.260 per kilowatt-hour (=
 0.315
1.2·1.01 ).   An additional downward adjustment of $0.02 per kilowatt-hour accounts for
long-run savings in transmission investment, as discussed in Borenstein (2008b, p. 10),
which brings the net cost to $0.240.16 This compares to levelized costs for combined-cycle
gas-fired generation that are now generally below $0.08 per kilowatt-hour given recent price
forecasts for natural gas that account for supply increases from new production techniques.

     Adjusting next for environmental externalities raises the issues discussed earlier about
the cost of those externalities. If one assumes that new residential solar generation substi-
tutes for new combined-cycle gas turbines, then the local pollutant reduction is valued at
about $0.0015 per kilowatt-hour according to Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus (2011).

16   Even the figure $0.02 per kilowatt-hour is above the average transmission cost per kilowatt-hour in most
     U.S. utilities including California.


                                                      22
That leaves a cost gap between residential solar and combined-cycle gas turbine generation
of at least $0.158. The gas plant emits slightly less than 0.0005 tons of carbon dioxide per
kilowatt-hour of electricity, so residential solar would be cost competitive on a social cost
basis only if the cost of carbon dioxide emissions were greater than $316 per ton. Nearly
all social cost and price forecasts for carbon dioxide are well below $100 per ton (Green-
stone, Kopits and Wolverton, 2011), which leaves residential solar still at least $0.108 per
kilowatt-hour more expensive.

  This analysis is for the cost of installation in 2010. Barbose et al (2011) report prelim-
inary data suggesting that costs for systems below 10 kilowatts fell $0.5 per kilowatt in
the first half of 2011, but they don’t report details for California. Nonetheless, this high-
lights the fact that such cost analyses are in constant flux as technology improves and as
supply/demand factors change. It’s also important to note that I have used the retail cost
of installation (before subsidies) to represent the social cost of photovoltaics. Depending
on the degree of capacity utilization, exercise of market power and the supply/demand
balance in the equipment and installation markets, retail price may be above or below
long-run marginal cost of production and distribution of a given technology.

  This analysis does not account for distribution cost savings from distributed generation
or for spillovers from learning-by-doing, for which analyses offer much less guidance. On
the other side, it also doesn’t incorporate reduced output due to shading or soiling of the
panels, or installation at a less-than-ideal angle due to the building orientation, as discussed
in Borenstein (2008b). Nor does it account for the cost of extra generation reserves to
backup intermittent generation. In addition, it does not incorporate the expected returns
to waiting and the option value of waiting: if cost declines are expected to occur for
exogenous reasons, then installing solar in the future could have a higher social net present
value that installing today. In addition, to the extent there is uncertainty about the rate
of cost declines – in solar and in alternatives to solar – then waiting retains the option
to pursue a different technology for a given project if it turns out to be less expensive.
Nonetheless, this analysis does give a good notion of the gap that those omitted factors
would have to fill on net in order for residential solar photovoltaics to cost-effectively
substitute for gas-fired generation.

  Medium-scale and large-scale solar photovoltaics installations and large-scale solar ther-
mal generation are more cost competitive. Contracts for these larger systems are not
public, but reports in the industry press suggest the unsubsidized levelized cost from these
installations is probably between $0.15 and $0.20 per kilowatt-hour in 2011, before any of

                                              23
the market or externality adjustments, and likely using more than a 3% real cost of capital.
These systems enjoy the same production timing benefit as residential solar, but less (or
none) of the reduction in line losses and transmission savings. These systems would require
a much lower cost of carbon dioxide to be competitive with gas-fired generation, though
still probably $100 per ton or greater.


VI. Conclusion
  The most important market failure in energy markets is almost certainly environmental
externalities and the single most efficient policy would be to price those externalities ap-
propriately. Yet, the policy makers often find pricing externalities to be very restricted or
impossible politically. Thus, the second-best discussion is over which, if any, alternative
policy interventions are likely to do the most good, or at least to do more good than harm.

  Instead of pricing externalities, the far more prevalent government response has been
targeted programs to promote specific alternatives to conventional electricity generation
technologies. Justifications for such programs have generally begun with environmental
concerns, but often expanded to energy security, job creation, and driving down fossil fuel
prices, generally without support of sound economic analysis. Such targeted programs also
seem especially vulnerable to political manipulation, promoting technologies that benefit
the most politically influential.

  If governments are to implement reasoned renewable generation policy, it will be crit-
ical to understand the costs and benefits of these technologies in the context of modern
electricity systems. This requires developing sophisticated levelized cost estimates, and
adjusting for both the market value of the power generated and the associated externali-
ties, so they can be usefully compared across projects and technologies. Such adjustments
are complex and frequently controversial. More research at the interface of the economics
and engineering of electricity markets would be very valuable, particularly on the cost of
intermittency, the benefits of end-use distributed generation and the economic spillovers
from learning-by-doing and network externalities. Progress on these questions would en-
hance renewable energy public policy and private decision making, particularly in a world
where first-best, market-based options are greatly restricted.




                                             24
                                     REFERENCES
Adeyeye, Adenike, James Barrett, Jordan Diamond, Lisa Goldman, John Pendergrass, and
    Daniel Schramm. 2009. Estimating U.S. Government Subsidies to Energy Sources:
    2002-2008. Washington, DC: Environmental Law Institute.
Augustine, Norm, Ursula Burns, John Doerr, Bill Gates, Charles O. Holliday, Jeff Immelt
   and Tim Solso. Catalyzing American Ingenuity: The Role of Government in Energy
   Innovation. Washington, DC: American Energy Innovation Council.
Barbose, Galen, Naïm Dargouth, Ryan Wiser and Joachim Seel. 2011. “Tracking the Sun
    IV: An Historical Summary of the Installed Cost of Photovoltaics in the U.S. from
    1998 to 2010.” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Paper LBNL-5047E.
    http://eetd.lbl.gov/ea/emp/reports/lbnl-5047e.pdf
Borenstein, Severin. 2008a. “The market value and cost of solar photovoltaic electricity
    production.” Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper 176.
    http://www.ucei.berkeley.edu/PDF/csemwp176.pdf.
Borenstein, Severin. 2008b. “Response to Critiques of ‘The market value and cost of solar
    photovoltaic electricity production’.”
    http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/borenste/PVwork.html
California Energy Commission. 2007. “2007 Final Natural Gas Market Assessment.”
     CEC-200-2007-009-SF.
     http://www.energy.ca.gov/2007publications/CEC-200-2007-009/ CEC-200-2007-009-
     SF.PDF.
California Energy Commission. 2007. “2007 Integrated Energy Policy Report.” CEC-100-
     2007-008-CMF. http://www.energy.ca.gov/2007publications/CEC-100-2007-008/
     CEC- 100-2007-008-CMF.PDF.
Callaway, Duncan and Meredith Fowlie. 2009. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions
    from Wind Energy: Location, Location, Location?”
    http://nature.berkeley.edu/˜fowlie/ papers.html.
Callaway, Duncan S. 2009. “Tapping the energy storage potential in electric loads to deliver
    load following and regulation, with application to wind energy.” Energy Conversion
    and Management, 50(5):1389-1400.
Cory, Karlynn and Paul Schwabe. 2009. “Wind Levelized Cost of Energy: A Comparison
    of Technical and Financing Input Variables.” National Renewable Energy Laboratory
    Technical Report NREL/TP-6A2-46671.
    http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/46671.pdf.
Cullen, Joseph A. 2011. “Measuring the Environmental Benefits of Wind-Generated Elec-
    tricity.” http://www.u.arizona.edu/˜jcullen/Documents/measuringwind.pdf.
Davis, Lucas, and Catherine Wolfram. 2011. ”Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency:
    Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power.” Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper 217.
Du, Yangbo and John E. Parsons. 2009. “Update on the Cost of Nuclear Power.” MIT
    Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research Paper 09-004.
    http://web.mit.edu/mitei/docs/spotlights/nuclear-fuel-cycle-du.pdf
Duke, Richard, and Daniel M. Kammen. 1999. “The Economics of Energy Market Trans-
   formation Programs.” Energy Journal, 20(4): 15-64.
Electric Power Research Institute. 2009. “Program on Technology Innovation: Integrated
    Generation Technology Options.” http://my.epri.com/portal/server.pt?Abstract

                                            25
    id=000000000001019539
Energy Information Administration. 2008. “Federal Financial Interventions and Subsidies
    in Energy Markets 2007.”,
    http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/servicerpt/subsidy2/pdf/subsidy08.pdf.
Energy Information Administration. 2010. “International Energy Outlook 2010.”
    http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/ieo/
Energy Information Administration. 2011a. “Annual Energy Outlook 2011.”
    http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/
Energy Information Administration. 2011b. “Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook
    2011.” http://205.254.135.24/forecasts/aeo/assumptions/
Energy Information Administration. 2011c. “Levelized Costs in the Annual Energy Out-
    look 2011.” http://205.254.135.24/oiaf/aeo/electricity generation.html
Environmental Protection Agency. 2011. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
    and Sinks: 1990-2009. Washington, DC.
Fowlie, Meredith, Christopher R. Knittel and Catherine Wolfram. forthcoming. “Sa-
    cred Cars? Optimal Regulation of Stationary and Non-stationary Pollution Sources,”
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Fowlie, Meredith, and Nicholas Muller. 2010. “Designing Markets for Pollution When
    Damages Vary Across Sources: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program.”
    http://nature.berkeley.edu/f̃owlie/fowlie muller ASSA.pdf
Fripp, Matthias and Ryan H. Wiser. 2008. “Effects of Temporal Wind Patterns on the
    Value of Wind-Generated Electricity in California and the Northwest.” IEEE Trans-
    actions on Power Systems, 23(2): 477-485.
Fthenakis, Vasilis, James Mason, and Ken Zweibel. 2009. “The Technical, Geographical,
    and Economic Feasibility for Solar Energy to Supply the Energy Needs of the US.”
    Energy Policy 37(2): 387-399.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Stanley S. Reynolds, and Mario Samano. 2011. “Intermittency
   and the Value of Renewable Energy.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper 17086.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Estimating the Social
    Cost of Carbon for Use in Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation.”
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16913, March.

Holland, Stephen. 2003. “Set-up Costs and the Existence of Competitive Equilibria when
    Extraction Capacity Is Limited.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
    ment. 46(3): 539-556.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group III. 2011. Special Report
     on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. http://srren.ipcc-
     wg3.de/
Joskow, Paul L. 2011a. “Comparing the Costs of Intermittent and Dispatchable Electric-
    ity Generating Technologies.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.
    101(3): 238-241.
Joskow, Paul L. 2011b. “Comparing the Costs of Intermittent and Dispatchable Electricity
    Generation Technologies.” Center for Energy and Environmental Research Working
    Paper 2010-013, Revised February 2011.

                                          26
Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2009. “Cap and Trade, Rehabilitated: Using Tradable Permits to
   Control U.S. Greenhouse Gases.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
   3(1):42-62.
Klein, Joel. 2010. “Comparative Costs of California Central Station Electricity Generation
    Technologies.” California Energy Commission CEC-200-2009-017-SD.
    http://www.energy.ca.gov/2009publications/CEC-200-2009-017/
    CEC-200-2009-017-SF.PDF
Koplow, Doug. 2010. “EIA Energy Subsidy Estimates: A Review of Assumptions and
    Omissions,” Earth Track, Inc.,
    http://earthtrack.net/files/uploaded files/EIA%20subsidy%20review
    %20final 17Mar10.pdf .
Lazard Ltd. 2008. “Lazard Cost of Energy Analysis: Version 2.0.”
    http://www.narucmeetings.org/ Presentations/2008%20EMP%20Levelized%20Cost
    %20of%20Energy%20-%20Master%20June%202008%20(2).pdf
Loris, Nicolas D. 2011. “Department of Energy Spending Cuts: A Guide to Trimming
    President Obamas 2012 Budget Request,” The Heritage Foundation Backgrounder
    #2545.
Margolis, Robert M. 2003. “Photovoltaic technology experience curves and markets.”
   Paper presented at the NCPV and Solar Program Review Meeting, Denver, CO.
McDonald, Forrest. 1962. Insull. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2009. “Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas
    Emissions.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1):63-83.
Miller, Michael, Frank Wolak, and Zhe Zhang. 2011. “Quantifying the Economic and
     Environmental Impacts of Chinas Buying Power in the Global Steam Coal Market.”
     Program on Energy and Sustainable Development Working Paper, Stanford Univer-
     sity, December.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn. 2007. “Measuring the Damages of Air Pol-
    lution in the United States.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
    54(1): 1-14.
Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert Mendelsohn and William Nordhaus. 2011. “Environmental
    Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy” American Economic Review
    101(4): 1649-1675.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 2010. “Windpowering America: Estimates of
    Windy Land Area and Wind Energy Potential, by State, for areas ≥ 30% Capacity
    Factor at 80m.”
    http://www.windpoweringamerica.gov/docs/wind potential 80m 30percent.xlsx.

Nemet, Gregory F. 2006. “Beyond the Learning Curve: Factors Influencing Cost Reduc-
   tions in Photovoltaics.” Energy Policy, 34(17):3218-3232.

New York Independent System Operator. 2010. “Growing Wind: Final Report of the
   NYISO 2010 Wind Generation Study.”
   http://www.nyiso.com/public/webdocs/newsroom/press releases/2010/
   GROWING WIND - Final Report of the NYISO 2010 Wind Generation Study.pdf
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan and Co.
Rogers, Paul. 2008. “Local Tree Law Balances Solar vs. Shade, Lawmakers Respond to


                                           27
    Celebrated Sunnyvale Feud.” San Jose Mercury News. July 23.
Schmalensee, Richard. forthcoming. “Evaluating Policies to Increase the Generation of
    Electricity from ‘Renewable Energy.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
Swanson, Richard M. 2006. “A Vision for Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaics.” Progress in
   photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 14(5): 443- 453.
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2011. “A Risky Proposition: The Financial Hazards of
    New Investments in Coal Plants.” http://www.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/
    clean energy/a-risky-proposition report.pdf
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2011. “A Risky Proposition Appendix A: Key Assumptions
    for Levelized Cost of Electricity Ranges.” http://www.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/
    clean energy/Appendix-Key-Assumptions-Levelized-Costs.pdf




                                          28
