NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADJUSTMENT PATTERNS TO COMMODITY TERMS OF TRADE SHOCKS:
THE ROLE OF EXCHANGE RATE AND INTERNATIONAL RESERVES POLICIES
Joshua Aizenman
Sebastian Edwards
Daniel Riera-Crichton
Working Paper 17692
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17692
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the JIMF 4th conference at UCSC, International Policy
Implications and Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis. We thank Michael Melvin and the conference
participants for their insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Joshua Aizenman, Sebastian Edwards, and Daniel Riera-Crichton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adjustment patterns to commodity terms of trade shocks: the role of exchange rate and international
reserves policies
Joshua Aizenman, Sebastian Edwards, and Daniel Riera-Crichton
NBER Working Paper No. 17692
December 2011, Revised January 2012
JEL No. F1,F15,F31,F32,F36,O13,O54
ABSTRACT
We analyze the way in which Latin American countries have adjusted to commodity terms of trade
(CTOT) shocks in the 1970-2007 period. Specifically, we investigate the degree to which the active
management of international reserves and exchange rates impacted the transmission of international
price shocks to real exchange rates. We find that active reserve management not only lowers the short-run
impact of CTOT shocks significantly, but also affects the long-run adjustment of REER, effectively
lowering its volatility. We also show that relatively small increases in the average holdings of reserves
by Latin American economies (to levels still well below other emerging regions current averages)
would provide a policy tool as effective as a fixed exchange rate regime in insulating the economy
from CTOT shocks. Reserve management could be an effective alternative to fiscal or currency policies
for relatively trade closed countries and economies with relatively poor institutions or high government
debt. Finally, we analyze the effects of active use of reserve accumulation aimed at smoothing REERs.
The result support the view that “leaning against the wind” is potent, but more effective when intervening
to support weak currencies rather than intervening to slow down the pace of real appreciation. The
active reserve management reduces substantially REER volatility.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

Daniel Riera-Crichton
Department of Economics, Bates College
Andrews Road 2
Office 237 Pettingill Hall
Lewiston, ME 04240
drieracr@bates.edu

"I have wondered why it’s hard to make money in the foreign exchange market trading commodity
terms of trade. Maybe this is the answer: central banks lean against the exchange rate effects of
commodity price changes so that no opportunity exists."

Michael Melvin, Black Rock and JIMF, September 2011

1. Introduction
The recent (2010-2011) surge in commodity prices has brought to the forefront of policy debates
the issue of terms of trade (TOT) volatility in emerging economies. An important aspect of this discussion
relates to whether these price increases are permanent or transitory, and how they affect a country’s
degree of international competitiveness. In many countries – Brazil being a prime example – terms of
trade improvements have been accompanied by a surge in capital inflows. A number of prominent policy
makers have argued that the combination of significant increases in export prices and higher capital flows
has generated “Dutch Disease” type situations, where acute real exchange rate appreciation has resulted in
the crowding out of non-commodities tradable industries. Within this picture, emerging countries’ policy
makers have discussed a number of palliatives, including the imposition of controls on capital inflows, tax
incentives to ailing tradable industries, and active central bank intervention in foreign exchange markets
with the concomitant accumulation of international reserves. Most of these offsetting policies fall within
the category of “self insurance.” These policy options, however, are shadowed by large opportunity
costs, including forgone uses of international liquidity (e.g. in domestic investment), the loss of the
independence of monetary policy (as posited by the famous "trilemma" proposition), and/or inefficiencies
associated to the use of capital controls.
As a growing body of literature has shown, TOT volatility in emerging countries is 3 times higher
than in industrial countries. This results in real income shocks that are 3.5 times as volatile as those
affecting advanced countries (see IDB, 1995, and Hausmann, Panizza, & Rigobon, 2006). Among
emerging markets, and over the last thirty years, Latin American economies have shown an over-exposure
to shocks in their terms of trade (Edwards 2010).
In this paper, we use a “commodity terms of trade” (CTOT) data set to analyze the way in which
shocks to commodity prices affect the real exchange rate (REER), and the way international reserves and
the exchange rate regime impact the transmission of CTOT to the REER. Our analysis focuses on the
Latin American countries – the region that, as noted, has the highest volatility in CTOT – and covers the
period 1970-2009. This concept of “commodity terms of trade” differs from the traditional measure in
that it only includes the relative prices of a country’s commodity exports and imports, weighted by their
country specific GDP shares. By excluding industrial goods, and concentrating on commodity prices, we
focus on the most volatile component of import and exports prices. Specifically, this commodity terms1

i
j

i
j

of-trade data set was constructed by Ricci et. al (2008), as follows: CTOTi   ( Pj / MUV ) X /  ( Pj / MUV ) M ,
j

j

where Pj is the price index for six commodity categories (food, fuels, agricultural raw materials, metals,
gold, and beverages), and ( X ij , M ij ) are the average shares of commodity j in country i‘s exports and
imports over GDP for the period 1970 through 2006, respectively. Commodity prices are deflated by the
manufacturing unit value index (MUV). As Spatafora and Tytell (2009) have pointed out one of the
desirable properties of CTOT is that, since X ij and M ij are averaged over time, the movements in CTOT
are invariant to changes in export and import volumes in response to price fluctuations, and thus, isolate
the impact of commodity prices on a country’s terms of trade.2
In this study, we analyze the role played by international reserves on the short and intermediaterun REER dynamics generated by a CTOT shock. We also test the degree to which international reserves
and the choice of exchange rate regime mitigates REER volatility associated with given CTOT shocks.
Specifically, we investigate the way in which international reserves and the exchange rate regime affect
the pattern of REER adjustment to transitory CTOT shocks (defined as the log deviations of current
CTOT from its long run value). Our analysis focuses on both “reserve availability” -- measured as stock
of international reserves --, and “active reserve management”, measured as changes in international
reserves. In the last section of the paper we concentrate on the effects of reserve assets managed through
sovereign wealth funds (SWF). We do this by focusing on a case study: Chile and its “Copper Fund”
established in the mid 1980s.
Our results confirm the idea that international reserves play an important role in buffering the
adjustment of the REER to CTOT shock. A higher stock of international liquidity increases the
persistence effect of CTOT shocks on the REER, delaying the reversion of REER towards equilibrium
and accelerating the process once REER starts to revert back. Our findings provide some validation to the
idea that there are advantages, in terms of low volatility of REER, of holding sizable stocks of reserves.
Moreover, we observe reserve policies of “leaning against the wind” that effectively reduce the
transmission of CTOT shocks to the REER. As one may expect, our findings show that while large stock
of reserves are most effective against the risk of real appreciation suffered from positive CTOT shocks,
sales of reserves are not very effective against the risk of real depreciation from negative CTOT shocks.
We also find that reserve accumulation is effective as a buffer against CTOT shocks under flexible
regimes. As the country increases the amount of reserves, deviations of REER from equilibrium have a
2

By construction, a percentage increase (decrease) in the commodity terms of trade measure is
approximately equal to the aggregate net trade gain (loss) relative to GDP from changes in real individual
commodity prices (see Spatafora and Tytell (2009)). See the Appendix for further details regarding the
derivation of CTOT, Data Definitions and sources.
2

lower effect on the dynamics of REER. This indicates that active reserve and nominal exchange
management may be closer to being substitutes rather than complements as policies against excess REER
volatility. Finally, we observe an important role in our buffer story for assets managed through SWF.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we discuss alternative ways in which
TOT shocks affect real exchange rates both in the short and long runs. We also deal with the role of
international reserves in smoothing temporary TOT shocks, under alternative exchange rate regimes. In
Section III, we analyze the evolution of TOT and international reserves in Latin America, from an
international comparative perspective. We focus on volatility and show that, indeed, REER have been
extremely volatile in that part of the world. Section IV contains our econometric results from the analysis
of the buffering effect from the stock of reserves. We start by presenting our empirical model and
reporting the results of a number of co-integration analyses for the long run REER for our countries. We
then analyze the effects of CTOT on the REER, under alternative holdings of reserves, using a pooled
data set. We, then, move to individual countries analysis. In Section V, we expand our investigation by
studying the effect of CTOT shocks on the REER (again under alternative reserves holdings) in countries
with “flexible” and “pegged” exchange rate regimes. Section VI contains a number of extensions and
robustness checks. We analyze the role of openness (both trade and financial), government expenditures,
and quality of institutions. Section VII contains the econometric results from our analysis of active
reserve management policies and their buffering effects. In Section VIII we focus on the case of Chile, as
a way of providing some light on the role played by SWF in smoothing REER fluctuations. Section IX
concludes.

2. On the transmission of TOT shocks to the REER, and the Buffer role of international reserves .
This section overviews, selectively, works on the transmission of TOT shocks to the REER under
alternative exchange rate regimes, and the buffer role of international reserves. The past literature
investigated these two issues separately, while our paper deals with these issues jointly, identifying the
effects of international reserves and exchange rate management on the impact of TOT shocks on REER
dynamics.
2.1 TOT shocks and the REER
A number of studies have shown a potential direct link between terms of trade and output through
volume effects in net exports, and supply-side effects of imported intermediate inputs. However, the most
studied channel of transmission of terms of trade shocks to the real economy is through the real exchange
rate. A common definition of the real rate is the nominal exchange rate adjusted by price levels3.

3

See Chinn (2006) for a short and clear analysis of real exchange rates.
3

qt  st  pt  pt*

(1)

where s is the log exchange rate defined in units of home currency per unit of foreign, and p and p* are
log price levels. As customary, an asterisk (*) denotes "foreign" or international prices. To understand
more clearly the potential determinants in the movement of the real exchange rate, we can decompose (1)
into the price of trade and non-traded goods:

pt   ( ptN )  (1   )( ptT )

(2)

Substituting (2) into (1) yields:

qt  ( st  ptT  ptT * )  [ ( ptN  ptT )   * ( ptN *  ptT * )]

(3)

This decomposition helps us express the real exchange rate as the sum of two components. First, the
relative price of tradable, and second, the cross-country relative price of non-tradable in terms of tradable.
Many studies assume that the purchasing power parity (PPP) condition holds for tradable goods,
rendering the first term of (3) as a constant. Under this assumption real exchange rate movements are
fully determined by changes in the relative price of the non-traded sector across countries.
In order to simplify the exposition, consider the case of perfect capital mobility and labor
immobility. In this case, in a small open economy, where the rental rate of capital is given by the world
interest rate, the wage rate is uniquely determined. Factor price equalization across sectors will, then,
result from perfect inter-sectoral factor mobility. With factor price equalization all the movements in the
relative price of non-tradable across countries comes from sectoral productivity differentials. These
differentials across countries have long been identified as a major determinant of real exchange rate
movements in the long run (Harrod, 1939; Balassa, 1964; and Sarnuelson, 1964).
Breaking with the assumption of PPP for tradable, another set of papers identifies relative price
movements within the tradable sector, specifically, movements in the relative price of exports to imports
(TOT), as another major determinant of real exchange rate movements (Dornbusch, 1983; Marion, 1994;
Ostry, 1988; Edwards, 1989; and Frenkel and Razin, 1992)4. These studies suggest direct links between
TOT shocks and the REER. Our study will test these links for the most volatile segments of traded
goods: commodities, focusing on the most exposed continent to CTOT shocks: Latin America.5
2.2 International reserves as a buffer
To recall, the buffer stock approach to international reserves goes back to the Bretton Woods
system. Under the Bretton Woods system adequate reserves were measured by months of imports: the
prevailing rule of thumb considered four months of imports to be a reasonable coverage. This perspective
4

See Gregorio and Wolf (1994) for a paper considering both approaches at the same time.
Commodity currencies were studied by Chen, Rogoff and Rossi (2010), concluding that "commodity
currency" exchange rates have robust power in predicting global commodity prices, but that commodity
prices are less robust in forecasting exchange rates.
5

4

fitted well in a world with limited financial integration, in which trade openness reflected a country’s
vulnerability to external shocks (Fischer 2001). In the absence of reserves, balance of payment deficits
would have to be corrected through a reduction in aggregate expenditures (or absorption), imposing
macroeconomic adjustment costs, and a change in relative prices or “expenditure switching”. Adjustment
costs manifested in sharp contractions of investment and consumption, thereby inducing recessionary
pressures. As greater trade openness increased the exposure to trade shocks, minimizing adjustment costs
required higher reserve holdings.
The earlier literature focused on using international reserves as a buffer stock, as part of the
management of an adjustable-peg or managed-floating exchange-rate regime. Heller (1966) was the
first to derive the optimal level of reserves using a cost-benefit approach.6 Frenkel and Jovanovic
(1980, 1981) reformulated Heller’s approach in an optimal inventory management, where reserves serve
as a buffer stock. Edwards (1984) showed, empirically, that countries with adjustable peg exchange rate
regimes had a different demand function for reserves than countries committed to a fixed exchange rate
system. Extensions of the buffer stock model predicts that average reserves depend negatively on the
opportunity cost of reserves, and exchange rate flexibility; they depend positively on GDP, adjustment
costs, and reserve volatility. Overall, the literature of the 1980s supported these predictions (see Flood and
Marion 2002).
Aizenman and Riera-Crichton (2006, 2008) report evidence that international reserves cushion
the impact of TOT shocks on the REER, and that this effect is important for developing but not for
industrial countries. This finding is consistent with a broader buffer stock view of international reserves,
where proper reserve policy reduces the volatility of the REER, possibly supporting superior economic
performance.7
In this paper we look at the dynamics of adjustment of the REER to CTOT shocks, identifying
conditions under which the proper reserves and exchange rate policy would buffer the transmission from
CTOT to the REER.

3. Commodity Terms of Trade Shocks, Real Exchange Rates, and International Reserves
Figure 1 shows that Latin American economies display a higher volatility in commodity TOT
(CTOT) than any other set of emerging markets (CTOT shock volatility is measured as the standard

6

The benefit from holding reserves in Heller’s model stems from the ability to avoid a reduction in output
in case of a deficit in the balance of payments. The opportunity cost of holding reserves is the gap
between the return on capital and on reserves.
7
Aghion et al. (2009) found that REER volatility reduces growth for countries with relatively low levels
of financial development; hence, factors mitigating REER volatility may be associated with superior
economic performance.
5

deviation of ΔLog CTOT). During the last 40 years, CTOT shocks have been 50 percent more volatile in
Latin America than in Emerging Asia, and almost twice as volatile as in other emerging markets.
Table 1 provides the summary statistics for CTOT shocks (defined as the percent change in
CTOT) by period for the following Latin American economies in our sample: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuela. The data in this table show that there has been a significant increase in the volatility of CTOT
shocks over the last two decades. Moreover, while CTOT shocks were weakly positively skewed during
the 1990's, during the 2000's, this positive skewness increased significantly. Finally, with the collapse of
the price of commodities traditionally exported by Latin American countries during the "Great
Recession," shocks’ skewness quickly turned very large and negative. It is also worth mentioning that
distribution of CTOT shocks suffered from "fatter" tails (higher probability of large shocks) during the
90's compared to 2000-2006.
An Important question is what happened to REER volatility during periods of increased CTOT
shock volatility? As shown in Figure 2, REER volatility in Latin America has significantly decreased
over the last two decades. This figure also shows opposite directions in the evolution of CTOT and REER
volatilities, leading us to conjecture that active policies were used successfully to insulate international
relative prices (REERs) from the volatility of international commodity prices. Recent studies have shown
that reserve accumulation may indeed be used for such purposes.8 Comparing the evolution of reserve
accumulation and REER volatility (Figure 3), we observe that the decrease in the latter was accompanied
by a steady increase of the former. While governments may accumulate international liquidity for other
reasons,9 this accumulation may be also helpful in buffering the real exchange from CTOT shocks.
Moreover, the different speeds at which these economies accumulated reserves during periods where
CTOT shocks were positively skewed versus periods were shocks were negatively skewed, may indicate
an active use of reserve accumulation as a policy against CTOT volatility.
4. Real Exchange adjustment and commodity terms of trade shocks
`

We are interested in understanding: (a) how real exchange rates adjust to CTOT shocks in several

Latin American economies; and (b) the way in which this adjustment is affected by international reserves
policies. We proceed in steps: first we look at the results obtained using pooled data for the region during
1970-2010. Then, we analyze each country individually using a simultaneous SURE approach.
4.1 The empirical model

8

See Aizenman & Riera-Crichton (2006).
See Aizenman and Marion (2003) for a precautionary savings view and Dooley, Landau and Garber
(2003) for a Mercantilist view of the reserve accumulation in the last two decades.

9

6

In our analysis, we use, as a base-case model, the following linear dynamic error correction
formulation:

 ECTREERit 1 
Ln( REER) it   i  1Ln( REER) it 1   2 ;  3  
   4 RES it 1   it
 TCTOTit 1 
where REER corresponds to the effective (trade weighted) real exchange rate10. ECTREER is the error
correction term for (the logarithm of) the REER. As usual, this term is defined as the log deviations of
REER from its equilibrium value. The term TCTOT represents transitory CTOT shocks, and is defined as
the log deviations of current CTOT from its long run value. The latter, in turn, is obtained applying an HP
Filter to the original series with a smoothing parameter set at 1600. Finally, RES is the international
reserve/GDP ratio.
From this base-case formulation, we introduce the role of reserves through their interaction with
the lagged value of REER. Under this new specification, we implicitly assume the autocorrelation of
REER depends on the level of international reserves so that β1 varies over time as:

1  1  2 RESit 1
Where β1 is the autocorrelation coefficient from our basic dynamic model and RES represents stock of
international reserves. Assuming that reserves only affect the persistence of the REER deviations, but not
the long run equilibrium REER, we obtain the following specification;
(4)

Ln( REER) it   i  (1  2 RESit 1 )Ln( REER) it 1   2

 ECTREERit 1 
; 3  
   4 RESit 1   it
 TCTOTit 1 

As an example of such mechanism, a positive CTOT shock leads to a shift in production towards
exportable commodities, an increase in the price of non-tradable, and a real appreciation. If the central
bank absorbs part of the proceeds of this positive shock in relative export revenue by increasing the stock
of foreign reserves, the subsequent expansion of the domestic currency supply will push towards a
nominal depreciation of the domestic currency, thereby (partially) softening the original effects of the
CTOT shock in the REER.
In order to compute the equilibrium/long-run REER, we use a co-integrating approach. The
methodology calls for a series of co-integrating regressors. Following Edwards (1989), Montiel (1999)
and others, we estimate the following equation:

10

For the rest of the empirical section REER is defined as foreign currency in terms of the domestic
currency, e.g. an increase in REER corresponds to a real appreciation of the domestic currency
7

 Ln(CToT ) t 


Govt


 TradeOpent 


Ln( REER) t      USINFt    ti
 TimeTrend t 


CapitalOpent 
 IntSpread 
t 


(5)

The term CTOT is commodity terms of trade, Gov represents the share of Government
Expenditures over GDP, TradeOpen is a measure of Trade Openness (Exports plus Imports over GDP),
USINF is a measure of inflation in the US based on the US CPI and represents world inflation, Capital
Openness represents a proxies for Financial Openness (Total private gross flows over GDP) and
IntSpread is the domestic market reference interest rate spread from the 3-month US T-Bill. Once we
obtain the coefficients from equation (5), we use the HP filter to find the long run values of the
fundamentals, we then use these values, jointly with the estimated coefficients, to generate what we refer
to as the Long Run REER (LRREER).
Table 2 shows the coefficients from the co-integrating regression for each individual country in
our sample11. The following results are worth mentioning:
- Commodity Terms of Trade: An improvement in the terms of trade would reduce the supply of
non-traded goods (since resources would be drawn towards the traded sector), increasing their price and
pushing for a real appreciation. Since we are dealing with commodity terms of trade, this effect would be
less significant if resources are drawn from other trading sectors such as manufactures. Most of the
economies in Latin America seem to experience a real appreciation, (although there are some exceptions,
such as Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay, with statistically insignificant effects and Nicaragua with
statistically significant coefficient).
-Time Trend: Our time trend may capture differences in sectoral productivity growth. According
to the Ricardo-Samuelson-Balassa effect, as the country develops and productivity spills over to the nontraded sector, there will be a real appreciation. In our sample, only Bolivia displays a negative and
statistically significant coefficient.
-World Inflation: In theory, world inflation following expansionary monetary policies, could
force a nominal devaluation of the foreign currency (excess supply of foreign currency) and, thus, a
nominal/real appreciation of the domestic currency. In effect, only Bolivia and Nicaragua show
significant negative signs in their USINF coefficients.
11

Given the nature of the exercise, we use low frequency, yearly data in our co-integration equations in
order to smooth out as much from transitory shocks as possible.
8

-Government Expenditure: The effects of fiscal policy on the REER are difficult to determine a
priori, since targeted expenditures into traded or non-traded goods could carry opposite effects in the
external relative prices. Given this dichotomy, it is not surprising that we observe mixed signs on the
coefficient of government expenditures across Latin American economies. On one hand, Brazil, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Uruguay suffer real depreciations after increases in
government consumption indicating a potential biased towards government expenditure in traded goods in
those economies. On the other hand, Argentina Bolivia Chile, Colombia, Paraguay and Venezuela
experience real appreciations indicating a bias towards non-Traded goods.
-Trade Openness: Most of the countries in our sample (with the sole exception of Bolivia),
display a robust negative relationship between trade openness and the real exchange rate -- in our sample,
higher trade volumes/GDP has been associated with real depreciations.
-Gross Private Capital Flows: Although capital openness seemed to be an important determinant
of the real exchange rate for several Latin American economies, the signs of the coefficients are mixed,
with openness leading to real depreciations in countries like Mexico and real appreciation in countries
like Costa Rica or Nicaragua.
-Interest Rate Spreads: Similarly to fiscal policy, pinning down in the theory the effects of an
increase in the foreign interest rate spread can be difficult. On the one hand, if a positive spread opens due
to higher productive perspectives, capital inflows will put a pressure on non-traded prices leading to a real
appreciation. If, on the other hand, the positive spread is driven by a higher risk, capital outflows may
force a real depreciation. As in the case of trade policy, the coefficients in our sample are at best mixed.
To complement our first model, we also assume the possibility that reserves affect the speed of
adjustment in our dynamic model.

 2  1   2 RES it 1
In order to account for this effect we introduce a second interaction term between reserves and the
error correction term. This interaction term gives us the effect of high reserves on the speed adjustment of
the real exchange rate back to its equilibrium level.
(6)

Ln( REER )it 
 ECTREER



it 1
 i  (1  2 RESit 1 )Ln( REER)it 1  1   2 RESit 1 3  
   4 RESit 1   it
TCTOT
it 1 


Finally, in our last specification, we also assume that the direct effect of changes in CTOT is affected by
changes in the stock of reserves.

 3   3   4 RESit 1

9

Again, to account for this effect we include a third interaction with the transitory CTOT shock to capture
the role of reserves as a direct buffer from CTOT shocks.
(7)

Ln( REER )it 
 ECTREER



it 1
 i  (1  2 RESit 1 )Ln( REER )it 1  1   2 RESit 1 3   4 RESit 1  
   4 RESit 1   it
TCTOT
it 1 


4.2 Pooled-Data Results
Table 3 displays the results from the fixed effect estimation for all countries in our sample for the
period 1970-2009. These results show that, in Latin America, the accumulation of international reserves
substantially affected REER dynamics. Accumulating reserves not only helps buffer the direct effect of
CTOT transitory shocks on the REER, but also decreases the half-life of the shock, substantially lowering
the volatility of the REER after the shock. Figure 4 represents the impulse response functions (IRF)
calculated from the coefficient means in the regression following our third specification.
The IRF show that an average Latin American economy with reserves of 3 percent of GDP
(approximately one standard deviation below the region average holding of international reserves) will
suffer a short run real appreciation of approximately a 16 percent as a result of a 20 percent CTOT
transitory shock. In turn, the same economy holding 13% percent reserves over GDP (approximately one
standard deviation above the region average) would experience a real appreciation of only 8.6 percent in
the next period, reaching a maximum appreciation of 9.3 percent in the second quarter.
Looking at the adjustment patterns, we also observe that in the low reserve case the half-life of
the CTOT shock hovers around the second and third quarter, while the half-life for the high reserve case
is extended until the fourth and fifth quarter. This “smoothing” of the CTOT shock effectively lowers the
volatility of log REER (measured as the relative standard deviation) in the first 5 quarters from 5.6
percent to 3.4 percent. Moreover, while the shock in the high reserve case effectively dies off after
approximately 7 quarters, in the low reserve case the effects linger well beyond the 12th quarter.
To further illustrate the volatility reduction role of international reserves, Figure 5 illustrates the
marginal effect on REER volatility of an average Latin American economy (Table 9 give us the means of
all variables describing our “average” Latin American country) of a 1 percent increase in international
reserves after an average CTOT shock. Although the REER dynamic adjustment patterns seem to be
significantly affected by reserves in the aggregate sample of Latin American Economies, in the next
sections, we will show that this effect is much larger in a number of circumstances, such as countries
under flexible regimes, or after positive CTOT shocks.
4.3 REER adjustment by Period and asymmetric Adjustment

10

In this Sub Section we compare the effectiveness of the buffer role of reserves by decades. The
results presented in Table 4 split the sample in 3 sub-periods for which we have data for all countries:
1980-1990, 1990-2000 and 2000-2007. The coefficients in Table 4 provide a consistent message across
all the sub-samples: although the adjustment pattern and shock dynamics changed substantially across the
three decades, reserves were very effective protecting REER volatility from CTOT shocks in all periods12.
Figure 6, shows the IRF from Table 4’s coefficient. We observe that the largest shock transmission and
the largest buffering effect of international reserves occurred during the decade of the eighties. In that
period, a 20 percent transitory CTOT shock would increase the REER in low reserve holders (9 percent of
GDP) by 54 percent while high reserve holders (13 percent of GDP) would only experience a real
appreciation of 13 percent. An increase of reserves of just 3 percent of GDP would decrease REER
volatility from 18 percent to 5 percent. During the nineties, an increase of Reserves from 9 percent to 13
percent of GDP would have completely offset the effect of a 20 percent increase in CTOT on REER,
reducing REER volatility from 2.8 percent to negligible 0.3 percent. Interestingly, the same increase in
2000 to 2007 would decrease the real appreciation of the same 20 percent CTOT shock from 12 percent to
8 percent, effectively reducing REER volatility from 4.3 percent to 3.4 percent.
When checking for potential asymmetric effects of positive and negative CTOT shocks to the
REER, we uncover some interesting results. Table 5 shows that, contrary to what many analysts believe,
the REER in Latin American economies are more exposed to positive CTOT shocks than negative ones.
It is also shown that the stocks of international reserves play a larger role insulating REER from CTOT
when the economy faces positive shocks. Even if we ignore the fact that the CTOT coefficient and its
interaction term are statistically insignificant in our full model regression, Figure 7 shows that a positive
20 percent CTOT shock would appreciate the real exchange rate by 38 percent, while an equally sized
negative shock would cause a real depreciation of 18 percent for economies with low stocks of reserves (3
percent of GDP). Increasing reserves to 13 percent of GDP would reduce the real appreciation to a 13
percent and the real depreciation to 3.4 percent. In both cases, REER volatility is greatly diminished from
11 to 5 percent in the case of the positive shock and from 8 to 1 percent in the case of the negative CTOT
shock.13
4.4 Individual Country Results: A Seemingly Unrelated Regressions Approach
We now turn to the individual country analysis. In order to do this, we estimated dynamic ECM
equation for each of them. To account for the fact that REER are related across countries we estimated the
12

Although the coefficients point in the same direction for all the sample periods during 2000-2007 the
interaction term measuring the buffer effect is statistically insignificant.
13
This result is consistent with the ‘fear of appreciation,’ where emerging markets may be more
concerned with transitory appreciations due to the adverse competitiveness effects of commodity driven
terms of trade improvement on non-commodities exports.
11

model simultaneously, using a seemingly unrelated regression (SURE) procedure. Table 6 shows the
results.
From the coefficients in Table 6, we observe that, in most countries (7 out of 11), there is a direct
mitigation effect from holding international reserves. The regression results indicate that reserves have
been particularly effective in reducing the effect of CTOT shocks on REER in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil
and Mexico. What makes this result interesting is that countries in this group have different exports and
production structures. For example, while Mexico exports oil and light manufactures (almost all of them
to the US), Argentina is a quintessential commodity exporter (although it does export some manufactured
goods, mostly to its Mercosur partner, Brazil).
The role of reserves mitigating on the speed of adjustment is even more extended across the
sample (8 out of 11 countries) with large and significant coefficients identified for Argentina, Ecuador,
Mexico, Peru and Venezuela. The interaction between the dynamic components gives us 8 out 11
countries with buffering effects , although these interactive terms are only significant for Argentina and
Peru, and Uruguay ,

5. The Role of the Exchange Rate Regime in REER Adjustment Patterns
A second policy that may affect the pattern of adjustment in real exchange rates is the choice of
the nominal exchange rate regime. More specifically, it is highly likely that countries that peg their
nominal exchange rate to a foreign currency or to a basket of currencies will exhibit different REER
dynamics than countries allowing for full nominal exchange rate flexibility.
In order to investigate the differences in REER adjustment patterns across nominal exchange rate
regimes, we use the third specification (full model) from the last section. This time, however, we split the
sample into observations under fixed or flexible exchange rates regimes. To determine when a country
starts running a fixed exchange rate regime, we use the de facto exchange rate regime classification of
Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008).
For each country, a nominal fixed exchange regime is defined as one where the country either has
no legal tender, a hard peg, a crawling peg, and de facto or pre-announced bands or crawling bands with
margins of no larger than +/- 2%. All other arrangements are classified as nominal flexible regimes (we
exclude episodes of “Free Falling” from the sample of the regression)14.
Table 7 displays the results from running our extended model and interacting the main variables
with dummies for these two groups of countries. In this table, we observe that the effects of CTOT shocks
are much larger in flexible regimes. This is expected, since REER is protected from CTOT shocks under
fixed nominal rates and sticky domestic prices.
14

See Table 10 for a complete list of Country-Period under Fixed and Flex Exchange Rate Regimes.
12

Looking at the impulse response functions (IRF) obtained from the mean coefficients reported in
the third column from Table 7 (and graphically represented in Figure 8), we uncover large differences in
the adjustment patterns and in the effects of reserve holdings among economies with fixed exchange rate
regimes and those allowing their currency to float. Let us assume a representative Latin American
economy with a stock of international reserves equivalent to 3 percent of GDP (low reserve case). For
economies with flexible exchange rates a 20% transitory CTOT shock would appreciate the REER by 26
percent in the short run, peaking at 34 percent in the second quarter. In contrast, the same 20% transitory
CTOT shock would appreciate the REER by only 6 percent in economies with fixed exchange rate
regimes. Interestingly, if the same country held reserves amounting 13 percent of GDP (high reserve
case), then, the short run appreciation would have been much closer across regimes with a 8.6 percent in
the case of flexible regime and 4 percent in the case of fixed regimes. Thus, as in the previous section,
large holdings of international reserves help reduce the volatility of the REER, from 10 to 3 percent, in
the case of flexible regimes, and from 3 to 1.5 percent, in the case of fixed exchange rate regimes.
These results leave us with interesting conjectures: First, countries choosing to peg their
currencies are able to effectively insulate their external relative prices against transitory CTOT shocks.
Second, countries in Latin America have an alternative way of buffering against CTOT shocks through
active international reserve management under exchange rate flexibility. These policies seem to be
similarly effective for a level of reserves over GDP (13 percent), a level that is far below the mean level
of reserves in other emerging regions, such as Asia (20 percent) or East Europe (17 percent). Finally,
most of the effectiveness of active reserve policy comes from absorbing the pressure off the nominal
exchange rate (see Figure 8)15.
6. Robustness checks
6.1 Trade Open vs. Trade Closed Economies:
Access to international markets may help countries moderate the volatility of real exchange rates,
although it may also increase the country exposure to large changes in terms of trade. Column 1 of Table
8 give us the adjustment coefficients for Latin American economies with interaction dummies for
country/periods relatively open to international trade.16 From these coefficients, we observe that REER in
relatively trade closed countries are subject to larger reactions from CTOT shocks. A plausible
explanation being that undeveloped trade sectors may enjoy higher potential productivity, improvement in

15

We know that there must be also a price mechanism since there is, albeit small, a buffering effect from
an increase in reserves in the fixed exchange rate case.
16
Based on the literature we consider a country to be “Open” if our ratio (EX+IM)/GDP is larger than
40% and close if its lower than 40%. See list of “Trade Open” Economies and Periods in Table 11. We
run sensitivity analysis around this figure without any major changes in our main results.
13

the terms of trade in the face of these potential returns would lead to a stronger shift of resources towards
those sectors amplifying the regular transmission mechanism through larger increases in the price of nontraded goods and, thus, larger real appreciations.
The role of international reserves buffering from CTOT shocks among relatively closed
economies is substantial. Given the IRF represented in Figure 9, a 20 percent CTOT shock in
representative relatively trade closed Latin American economy with low holdings of international reserves
(3 percent of GDP), generates a real appreciation of 89 percent after one quarter. The real appreciation
suffered by the same country with large holdings of reserves (13 percent of GDP) would be much smaller,
7.6 percent, peaking at 8.9 percent in the second quarter. As before, holding more reserves also lowers the
volatility of REER from 21 percent to 3.2 percent. In the case of relatively trade open economies, not
only we observe a much weaker relationship between REER and CTOT shocks, but also reserves seem to
play a minor role. The same 20% CTOT shock would generate a 16.5% real appreciation for low reserve
holders while holding large amounts of reserves would help buffer the real appreciation but only down to
a 10%. Volatility is reduced, from 5 to 3.7 percent. A much smaller effect than the one displayed in
relatively trade closed economies.
6.2 The Degree of Financial Integration
Adjustments of the REER in financially integrated economies may differ significantly from
relatively close economies. On the one hand, access to international capital markets is of vital importance
for developing economies in order to hedge against large changes in international prices. On the other
hand, developing countries exposed to volatile “hot money” flows may be subject to large, uncontrolled
financial inflows or outflows after shocks to their terms of trade, inducing higher REER volatility.
Interestingly, our empirical results show very little (not significant) differences in the adjustment patterns
between capital open and capital closed economies. Column 3 in Table 8 shows that while the coefficients
in our regular adjustment components are significant all the interaction terms with the “Capital Openness”
dummy are small and insignificant.17. Figure 10 shows that, in a financially open country with low stock
of reserves (3 percent of GDP), a 20 percent CTOT shocks would cause a 23 percent real appreciation.
The same country, with a relatively large stock of reserves (13 percent of GDP), would only suffer a real
appreciation of 13 percent. High stock of reserves reduces the REER volatility from 9 to 4.8 percent.

17

We define our “Financially Integrated” dummy as 1 for observations with private gross capital flows in
excess of 25 percent of GDP and zero otherwise. 25 percent of GDP represents the top 10 percent of
private gross flows observations in the region and its about 1 standard deviation above the median. See
table 11 for “Capital Open” economies and periods. As with our measure of trade openness we run
robustness checks around this definition without major changes in our results.
14

6.3 Institutional Quality
Institutional quality may have a profound impact on the adjustment patterns of REER.
Corruption, risk of repudiation on government contracts or low investment profile could render many
government policies completely ineffective to deal with external macroeconomic shocks. The lack of
credibility or willingness may cause fiscal policy as well as exchange rate policy or trade policy to fail in
their effort to buffer the economy against CTOT shocks. In these circumstances, Reserve management, a
fairly visible policy which has been respected by Latin American economies, may provide an efficient
alternative to the policies mentioned above. In order to investigate the effects of reserve management
across different levels of institutional quality, we build an Institution Quality Index. This variable acts as a
proxy for conflict-management institutions. The methodology follows from Rodrik (1998) and Knack and
Keefer (1995), and the raw data originates from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). This index
is based on underlying numerical evaluations relating to the rule of law, bureaucratic quality, corruption,
expropriation risk, and governmental repudiation of contracts. It ranges from 0 to 7, with higher values
indicating superior institutions.
In the second column of table 8, we show the coefficients of our full specification regression
including interaction terms with a “Good Institutional Quality” dummy variable that takes the value of 1
if the Institutional Quality Index score is above the median (High quality) and 0 otherwise18. Building the
IRF from these coefficients in figure 11, we show that Latin American economies with relatively poor
institutions suffer a larger (although not statistically significant) initial reaction to CTOT shocks. The
major statistically significant impact made by institutional quality is an increase in the persistence of
CTOT shocks that combined with a decrease in the speed of adjustment decreases the overall volatility of
REER. Applying the typical 20 percent CTOT shock if the average “Bad Institutional Quality” Latin
American economy increases international reserve holdings from 3 percent of GDP to 10 percent, we
would observe a decrease in REER volatility from 9.3 to 5.8 percent, on the other hand, those countries
with relatively good institutions would experience a decrease in REER volatility from 9.5 to 3 percent.
Although we observe that Reserves may play an important role in buffering the CTOT shock in
economies with poor institutions, reducing the initial reducing significantly REER volatility, its in
countries with institutional credibility were, again, we observe the most beneficial effects from reserve
policy.
6.4 Government Debt
As in the case of economies with relatively poor institutions, countries with high government debt
could have difficulties applying effectively fiscal policies to contain the effects of CTOT shocks into the
18

The Median Value of our Institution Quality Index in Latin America comes to be 4.0. See Table 12 for
a list of “Good Institutions” economies and periods.
15

economy. Reserve management could provide an effective alternative. Column 4 in Table 8 gives us the
REER adjustment coefficients interacted with a High Government Debt Dummy19. Looking at the IRF
represented in figure 12, generated from the fourth column in Table 8, we observe that countries with
high government debt suffer larger REER adjustments to CTOT shocks than countries with low
government debt. Reserve Management proves once more to be an effective policy to buffer REER from
CTOT shocks; this is especially true for high government debt economies. A representative Latin
American economy with high debt and low stock of international reserves would suffer, in average, a 40
percent real appreciation after a 20 percent CTOT transitory shock. The same economy with high
holdings of reserves would only suffer a 9 percent real appreciation. High reserve holdings reduce the
REER volatility, from 12 to 4 percent. Countries with low government debt experience a much smaller
improvement, protecting their REER from CTOT with the boost in reserves.
7. Active use of reserve accumulation
So far we have studied the ability of countries with large stocks of international reserves to
maintain REER stability. In this section we analyze the effects an active use of reserve accumulation
aimed at smoothing REERs. The main difference between the analysis in this section and our previous
discussion is that we now focus on the change in reserves, as opposed to the level of reserves.20
A priori, the “reserves buffer” would seem to matter more when intervening to support a weak
currency (as in the past) rather than intervening to slow down the pace of appreciation (as recently). In
order to test this assumption we look at the effectiveness of “active reserve management” from absorbing
the pressure off the nominal exchange rate during positive as well as negative shocks to CToT. We define
our measure of reserve accumulation, ΔRES, as the deviation of current IR/GDP from its long term level
(defined as the difference between the actual series from the HP filtered one)21. In Table 9 we present the
new results from the estimation of a dynamic model similar to that in previous sections
(8)

Ln( REER )it 
 ECTREER



it 1
 i  (1  2 RESit 1 )Ln( REER )it 1  1   2 RESit 1 3   4 RESit 1  
   4 RESit 1   it
 TCTOTit 1 

19

We consider High Government Debt any amount over 45 percent of GDP. See Table 12 for “High Gov
Debt” economies and periods. As ever, we run sensitivity analysis using different values for robustness
without any major change in the main results.
20
We thank Mike Melvin for suggesting us to look into this issue.
21
Defining reserve accumulation this way instead of a normal quarter on quarter difference solve two
potential problems: a) The series are very volatile when compared to REER or CTOT; much of this
volatility, we suspect, comes from reasons other than the stabilization policy we want to uncover. b)
There is a "long term" adjustment to higher levels of reserves during most of our sample period.
16

As before we upgrade the model to make a distinction between positive and negative CTOT shocks.
As seen in columns 1-3 the coefficients of the interaction term between change in reserves and
CTOT, when the underlying CTOT is positive, is negative and significant, telling us that an accumulation
of reserves is required to fend off the appreciation pressure on REER (a positive ΔRES combined with a
negative coefficient would effectively buffer the initial real appreciation pressure generated form an
increase in CTOT). Meanwhile, contrary with our previous model with stock of reserves, we observe that
the buffering effect is important, even larger (for the full specification model), under negative CTOT
shocks. This translates in the need of a sale of reserves to buffer the depreciation pressure in the REER.
For the rest of the model we observe that, while reserves seem to play little to no role in the persistence of
the shocks, they seem to significantly slow down the speed of adjustment majorly after negative CTOT
shocks. These results seem to support our prior where “leaning against the wind” would seem more
effective when intervening to support weak currencies rather than intervening to slow down the pace of
real appreciation.
Figure 13 shows the impulse response function of our full specification model (column 3 in Table
9). As may be seen, a positive 20 percent shock to an average Latin American economy would raise the
REER 17.7 percent if the country decides not to change its international reserves. If, however, the country
decides to accumulate international reserves the initial increase in REER is buffered to 14.5 percent
increase in the case of an accumulation of 0.5 percent of GDP. If reserve accumulation is 1.5 percent of
GDP the REER will rise by 9.3 percent.
As noted, this effect is not symmetric with a negative shock to CTOT. In this case the buffer
effect of active reserve policy is slightly larger. For a 20 percent negative CTOT shock, if the country
sells reserves for a value of 0.5 percent of GDP, it would reduce the REER depreciation from 13.1 to 10
percent. If the country sells reserves up to 1.5 percent of GDP then it would almost entirely eliminate the
transmission of the CTOT shock into the REER with a real depreciation of a mere 3.3 percent.
Apart from buffering the initial shock, the active reserve management reduces significantly
REER volatility. In our example above, accumulating reserves by 1.5 percent of GDP during a positive
CTOT shock will lower REER volatility from 5.7 to 3.1 percent. Again, the effect is larger for a negative
CTOT where selling reserves by 1.5 percent of GDP will drop volatility from 6 to 1 percent.
The final two columns show the full model for two individual Latin American economies with
large exposure to CTOT shocks; Chile and Argentina. While Argentina displays all the “correct” signs
and significant coefficients for our buffer story, Chile’s results are somewhat puzzling. We suspect that
these results depend on the way in which international reserves are measured. Indeed, according to
traditional conventions international reserves don’t include assets held by (semi) independent sovereign
wealth funds. In Chile this is potentially important since in the last decade its “Copper Fund” has grown
17

very significantly22. In order to investigate the role played by Sovereign Wealth Funds, in Section VIII
below to deal in some detail with Chile’s case study.

8. The role of assets managed through Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Chilean Case
We believe that the Chilean economy deserves a detailed treatment in this section due to two
characteristics: (a) Chile is a perfect representative of a small, open emerging market heavily reliant on
commodity trade and thus subject to economic instability derived from CTOT shocks. And (b), in the last
25 years Chile has successfully experimented with fiscal rules and active management of international
reserves through Sovereign Wealth Funds. In particular, in 1985, Chile founded the “Fondo de
Estabilización de los Ingresos del Cobre (Copper Fund)” which was transformed into the “Fondo de
Estabilización Económica y Social” (FEES) in 2006. The specific question that we want to address is:
how has the existence – and management -- of this fund affected REER in Chile.
From the time the Copper Fund was created, the Chilean authorities established a direct
relationship between the price of copper (its main commodity export) and accumulation of foreign assets.
Furthermore in 2001, the government of President Ricardo Lagos introduced a fiscal rule based on a
structural surplus of 1 percent of GDP. As Andrés Velasco and Eric Parrado noted23:
“The evidence suggests that the Chilean economy has become more resilient to external shocks.
An interpretation that helps reconcile these facts is that policy actions can play a role as shock
absorbers. Improved resilience to external shocks may result from policy actions that more
effectively stabilize output, which would be manifested, for example, in a shift in the policy
component from procyclical (positive correlation with the output gap) to countercyclical
(negative correlation)”.
In Figure 14 we present the evolution of CTOT in Chile against the accumulation of the assets held by the
“Fondo de Estabilización Económica y Social” (FEES) from its founding year in 2006 up to the end of
2010. In spite of the fact that the fiscal stabilization policy of 2001 does, a priori, mark a weak
relationship between asset accumulation and CTOT shocks24, we observe that, given the importance

22

We do include the assets managed by the “FEES” fund from 2006.
See Velasco & Parrado.
24
The methodology devised in 2001 by the Budget Directorate to compute the structural balance
consisted in (i) estimating ex-ante the expected structural revenues E(SRt), i.e., the revenues that the
government would have achieved if the economy was operating at potential and the copper price was at
its long-term level; (ii) subtracting from the expected structural revenues the structural balance (SBt, e.g.,
a 1 percent of GDP surplus as originally envisaged in 2001); and (iii) calculating the expenditures (Et) as
a residual, according to the following formulae:
Et = E(SRt) – SBt;
E(SRt) = E(Rt) – E(At) = E(Rt) * (Yp /Y)ε
where E(SRt) will equal the expected government revenues (E(Rt)) minus the expected
adjustments for the long-term copper price and the output gap, E(At). Yp is the potential output (that is
the maximum output compatible, at any given time, with the absence of unexpected inflation), Y is the
23

18

played by the price of copper in determining the underlying structural surplus of the country, fiscal rules
forced a reserve accumulation in the FEES fund after large positive shocks to the country’s CTOT during
the first 3 years of the fund. Later, during the crises, copper prices collapsed causing a large deterioration
of Chile’s CTOT. Again the FEES reacted to this large swing in CTOT liberating reserve assets in order
to protect the fiscal structural surplus. This sale of reserves helped insulate Chile domestic economy from
increased volatility in REER.
Figure 15 give us a clear view of this insulating effect going all the way back to the founding of
the original Copper Fund in 1985. As Velasco & Parrado noted, the Chilean economy became better
insulated to external shocks after the SWF was put into place. Figure 15 shows a break in the correlation
between CTOT volatility and REER volatility starting in 1985 (establishment of the Copper Fund). While
CTOT volatility continued to be relatively high after 1985, REER volatility remained subdued for the rest
of the sample period25.
In Table 10 we present the results of applying or basic dynamic model to the Chilean economy,
using Time dummies to identify a potential break in the relationship between CTOT shocks and REER
after the establishment of the Copper Fund. More specifically, we included an interaction term with a
dummy for the year 1985 and beyond and a dummy for the year 2001 and beyond. As expected the
interaction terms show a clear break in the transmission mechanism between CToT shocks and REER
starting in 1985. This effect is reinforced by the 2001 fiscal rule although the coefficient is not statistically
significant. Applying the coefficients in column three we would observe a tight correlation between
REER and CTOT shocks before 1985 where a 20 percent positive CTOT shock would cause a 48 percent
real appreciation. This correlation dissipates after 1985 where the same 20 percent CTOT shock is only
accompanied by a mere 8 percent appreciation. Furthermore, if we look at periods beyond 2001 the
correlation breaks completely with an expected real depreciation of 3 percent after the positive 20 percent
CTOT shock. These results, combined with the counter-intuitive coefficients for Chile in Table 9, imply
that foreign reserves held as part of Sovereign Wealth Funds could be an important part of policies
intended to smooth external shocks in the domestic economy. If this is the case, we will need a clear
measure of the size of these funds to capture the true effect of these policies.

actual output and ε is the elasticity of revenues with respect to the output gap (See Teresa Dabán 2011
"Strengthening Chile's Rule-Based Fiscal Framework" IMF WP/11/17 and Marcel, M. Tokman, M,
Valdes, R., and Benavides, P., 2001, “Methodology and Estimation for the Chilean Central Government
1987–2001,” Direccion de Presupuestos, Ministerio de Hacienda).
25
Looking at the sample means for the volatilities of the series before and after 1985 we observe the
large change in REER volatility relative to the change in CToT volatility:
REER VOL AVERAGE <1985 = 0.071349; REER VOL AVERAGE > 1985 = 0.025696
CToT VOL AVERAGE <1985 = 0.007085; CToT VOL AVERAGE > 1985 = 0.006667.
19

9. Concluding Remarks
Our paper identified an important role for international reserves and managed exchange rate
flexibility in buffering and stabilizing the real exchange rate in the presence of large commodity terms of
trade shocks. This result is consistent with the trends observed in the last two decades, where Emerging
Markets converge to the middle ground of the Trilemma, opting for greater financial integration and
larger exchange rate flexibility, buffered by sizable accumulation of international reserves. In principle,
the buffering role of reserves may be also provided by sovereign wealth funds, though due to data
limitations, we focused only on international reserves. The end of the illusive “great moderation” and the
higher volatility of commodity prices suggest greater willingness of Emerging Markets to use financial
buffers. Of course, international reserves and sovereign funds may provide buffer services dealing with
other shocks, and we don’t attempt to identify in this paper the precise share of reserves that are held to
deal with any specific buffering role. By the virtue of liquidity, reserves will keep providing time
dependent precautionary and buffer services, reducing the vulnerability of emerging markets at times of
turbulence26.

26

At the core of our buffer story lays the mechanism through which reserve policy reacts to observed or
predicted CTOT shocks. Although a different topic and well beyond the scope of this paper, we remain
interested in understanding this “Black Box” and we plan to take steps in that direction in future research.
20

References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romain Ranciere, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. “Exchange Rate
Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 56, 494–513.
Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy P. Marion, 2003,“The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far
East: What's Going On?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 17, No. 3,
pp. 370–400.
Aizenman Joshua Daniel Riera-Crichton, 2006, "Real exchange rate and international reserves in the era
of growing financial and trade integration," NBER Working paper 12363.
Aizenman Joshua and Daniel Riera-Crichton, 2008, "Real exchange rate and international reserves in the
era of growing financial and trade integration," Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 4, pp.
812-815.
Balassa, Bela, 1964 "The Purchasing-Power-Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal." J. Political Economy 72, 6:
584—96, December 1964.
Chen Yi-Chin, Kenneth Rogoff and Barbara Rossi . 2010. "Can Exchange Rates Forecast Commodity
Prices?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125, No. 3,pp.1145–1194.
Dooley, P. Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2003. “An Essay on the Revived Bretton
Woods System.” NBER Working Paper No. 9971. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1983 "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External Borrowing." J.
Political Economy 91, 1: 141—153, February 1983.
Caballero R. J., 2003, “On the intertemporal financial architecture: insuring emerging markets", NBER
Working paper # 9570
Chin, Menzie D., 2006 "Real Exchange Rates" New Palgrave Dictionary.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1984, “The Demand for International Reserves and Monetary Equilibrium: Some
Evidence from LDCs” Review of Economics and Statistics 66(3), August, 1984.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1989, Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange Rate Policy in
Developing Countries,, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1994, “Real and Monetary Determinants of Real Exchange Rate Behavior: Theory
and Evidence from Developing Countries,” in Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates, ed. By J.
Williamson, IIE.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2004, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals, and
Sudden Stops.” IMF Staff Papers 51 (special issue): 1–49.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2010, Left Behind: Latin America and the false Promise of Populism, University of
Chicago Press, 2010.
Fischer, Stanley, 2001, “Opening Remarks.” IMF/World Bank International Reserves: Policy Issues
Forum. Washington, DC.
Flood, Robert, and Nancy P. Marion. 2002. “Holding International Reserves in an Era of High Capital
Mobility.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2001, edited by S. Collins and D. Rodrik.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin , 1992, Fiscal Policies and the World Economy, 2nd Edition,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and B. Jovanovic "On Transactions and Precautionary Demand for Money," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 94, No. 3, August 1980.

21

Frenkel, Jacob A. and B. Jovanovic "Optimal International Reserves: A Stochastic Framework," The
Economic Journal 90, June 1981.
Gregorio, J. and Wolf, H. 1994, “Terms of Trade, Productivity and the Real Exchange Rate,” NBER
working paper
Harrod, Roy F. 1939. International Economics, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,
Hausmann, R., U. Panizza, and R. Rigobon, 2006, “The Long-Run Volatility Puzzle of the Real Exchange
Rate,” Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (2006), 93–134.
Heller, Robert, 1966, “Optimal International Reserves,” Economic Journal, 76: 302.
IDB (Inter American Development Bank). 1995. Economic and Social Progress in Latin America, Part 2:
Overcoming Volatility.
Rogoff, K, Ilzetzki EO, Reinhart CM. 2004. “Exchange Rate Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will
the Anchor Currency Hold?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1):1-48.
Knack, Stephen and Keefer, Philip, (1997), “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A CrossCountry Investigation”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, issue 4, p. 1251-8
Marion, Nancy P., 1984, "Nontraded Goods, Oil Price Increases, and the Current Account." Journal of
International Economics. 16, 1: 29—44, February 1984.
Montiel (1999), “Determinants of the Long-Run Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate: An Analytical Model”
in Exchange Rate Misalignment: Concepts and Measurement for Developing Countries, ed. By L.
Hinkle and P. Montiel (New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank)
Neary, Peter E, 1988, "Determinants of the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate." American Economic
Review 78, 1: 210—215, March.
Ostry, Jonathan, 1988 "The Balance of Tnde, Terms of Trade, and the Real Exchange Rate." IMP Staff
Papers 35, 4: 541—573, December 1988.
Rodrik, Dani, 1999. " Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and Growth
Collapses," Journal of Economic Growth, Springer, vol. 4(4), pages 385-412, December
Ricci, L. A., G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, and J. Lee (2008) “Real Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: A CrossCountry Perspective” IMF Working Papers, January 2008 Vol., pp. 1-25.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1964, "Theoretical Notes on 'Trade Problems." Review of Economics and.
Statististics 46, 1: 145—154, March 1964.
Spatafora, N. and I. Tytell (2009) “Commodity Terms of Trade: The History of Booms and Busts,” IMF
Working Papers # 09-205.

22

Figure 1: CTOT Shock Volatility across Emerging Regions
CTOT Shock Volatility*
(1970-2009)
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
Latin America

All Countries
except Latin
America

Developed
Countries

Emerging
Markets except
Latin America

Emerging Asia

Emerging
Europe

*CTOT Shock Volatility is measured as the standard deviation of ΔLogCTOT

Figure 2: REER volatility, CTOT Shock Volatility and Reserve Accumulation (% Growth of
Stock of Reserve over GDP) in Latin America by Periods
REER Volatility
CTOT Shock
Volatility

Annual
Change of IR/GDP
(%)
2.5

0.12

2.361

0.102
0.1

2

1.718
0.08
1.5
0.06

0.04

0.056
0.051

REERVol
CTOT Shock Vol

1

1.088

RES

0.017
0.02

0.5

0.007

0.005
0

0
1990-1999

2000-2006

2007-2009

Periods

CTOT Shock and REER Volatility are measured as the standard deviation of ΔLogCTOT and ΔLogREER
respectively. RES corresponds to the average annual change in international reserves over GDP for each sample
period.

23

Figure 3: Evolution of Reserve Stocks vs. REER Volatility in Latin America (1990-2009)
Reserves
Over GDP

REER Volatility

0.18

0.2
Reserves over GDP
0.18

0.16

REER Volatility

0.16

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.1

0.1
0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

Q1 2009

Q1 2008

Q1 2007

Q1 2006

Q1 2005

Q1 2004

Q1 2003

Q1 2002

Q1 2001

Q1 2000

Q1 1999

Q1 1998

Q1 1997

Q1 1996

Q1 1995

Q1 1994

0

Q1 1993

0.02
Q1 1992

0.02
Q1 1991

0.04

Q1 1990

0.04

Quarter

REER volatility is measured as a 5 year rolling standard deviation of REER

Figure 4: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock. Full Sample
Ln REER
1.23

Res = 0 %

Res = 3%

Res = 9%

Res = 13%

1.18

1.13

1.08

1.03

0.98
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Quarters

24

8

9

10

11

12

0

Figure 5: Effect on REER volatility after an average transitory CTOT shock of marginal
increases in the Stock of Reserves in the representative Latin American Economy
Log REER
Volatility (%)
0.25

0.2

0.15
Volatility 3 Quarters
Volatility 5 Quarters
Volatility 10 Quarters

0.1

0.05
3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Stock of Reserves over GDP (%)

REER Volatility is calculated as the relative standard deviation (standard deviation divided by the sample average)
of the Log REER after a transitory CTOT shock of 3 percent. Volatility is expressed in percentage points.

Figure 6: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Split by Decades.
Ln REER

1.58
1980-1990 with Res = 9%
1990-2000 with Res = 9%
2000-2007 with Res = 9%
1980-1990 with Res = 13%
1990-2000 with Res = 13%
2000-2007 with Res= 13%

1.48

1.38

1.28

1.18

1.08

0.98
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 7: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Positive vs. Negative CTOT Shocks
Ln REER
1.4

Positive Shock Res = 3 %
Negative Shock Res = 3%

1.3

Positive Shock Res = 13%
Negative Shock Res = 13%
1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8
0

1

2

3

4

5

6
Quarters

25

7

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 8: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Fixed vs. Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes
Ln REER
1.4
1.35

Fixed Regime Res = 3 %

1.3

Fixed Regime Res = 13%

Flex Regime Res = 3%
Flex Regime Res = 13%
1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 9: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Effects of Trade Openness
Ln REER
1.9

Trade Close Res = 3%

1.8

Trade Open Res = 3%

1.7

Trade Close Res= 10%
Trade Open Res = 10%

1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 10: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Capital Open vs. Capital Close Economies
Ln REER
1.3

Capital Close Res = 3%
Capital Open Res = 3%

1.25

Capital Close Res= 10%
Capital Open Res = 10%

1.2

1.15

1.1

1.05

1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 11: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: Relatively Good Institutions vs. Poor Institutions.
26

Ln REER
1.35

Bad Inst Res = 3%

Good Inst Res = 3%

Bad Inst Res= 10%

Good Inst Res = 10%

1.3

1.25

1.2

1.15

1.1

1.05

1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 12: IRF to a 20% CTOT shock: High Government Debt vs. Low Government Debt
Ln REER
1.4

Low Debt Res = 3%

High Debt Res = 3%

Low Debt Res= 10%

High Debt Res = 10%

1.35
1.3
1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Quarters

Figure 13: IRF of a 20% CTOT shock with active reserve policy. All LATAM Countries
Ln REER

Positive CTOT Shock - DRes = +0.5 %
Negative CTOT Shock-DRes = - 0.5%
Positive CTOT Schock - DRes +1.5%
Negative CTOT Shock- DRes = -1.5%
Positive CTOT Shock No Change in Reserves
Negative CTOT Shock No Change in Reserves

1.2

1.15

1.1

1.05

1

0.95

0.9

0.85
0

1

2

3

4

5

6
Quarters

27

7

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 14: CTOT shocks and the Evolution of the Chilean Sovereign Fund (FEES
2000

Millions
of $US

Deposits in FEES

0.04

Withdrawals from FEES
Transitory CTOT Shocks (right axis)

1500

0.03

1000

0.02

500

0.01

0
12/31/2010

9/30/2010

6/30/2010

3/31/2010

12/31/2009

9/30/2009

6/30/2009

3/31/2009

12/31/2008

9/30/2008

6/30/2008

3/31/2008

12/31/2007

9/30/2007

6/30/2007

3/31/2007

-500

12/31/2006

0

-0.01

-1000

-0.02

-1500

-0.03

-2000

-0.04

Sources: Ministerio de Hacienda de Chile, Executive Monthly Reports on Sovereign Funds.
Transitory CTOT Shocks = log CTOT – HP filtered series, shown in the right axis.

Figure 15: Chile’s REER vs. CTOT volatility before and after the establishment of the Copper
Fund
0.025

0.3
REER Volatility (Left Axis)
CTOT Volatility (Right Axis)
0.25

Start Copper Fund

0.02

0.2
0.015
0.15
0.01
0.1
0.005

0.05

Volatility is measured as the rolling 3 year standard deviation of the each monthly series

28

M8 2009

M4 2008

M12 2006

M8 2005

M4 2004

M12 2002

M8 2001

M4 2000

M12 1998

M8 1997

M4 1996

M8 1993

M12 1994

M4 1992

M12 1990

M8 1989

M4 1988

M8 1985

M12 1986

M4 1984

M8 1981

M12 1982

M4 1980

M12 1978

M8 1977

M4 1976

M8 1973

M12 1974

M4 1972

0
M12 1970

0

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Commodity Terms of Trade Shocks in Latin America
Period
Observations
Mean
Std. Dev.
Variance
Skewness
Kurtosis

All Periods
2016
0.0001
0.0075
0.0001
-0.8619
49.143

1990-1999
520
-0.0003
0.0054
0.000029
0.0085
16.4854

2000-2006
416
0.0011
0.0067
0.000045
0.3706
10.76

2007-2009
117
0.0001
0.0167
0.00028
-3.2158
21.4577

Table 2: Individual Co-Integrating Relations
Dep:
LnREER
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela

Ln CTOT
-0.443
0.292
-2.888
1.214
0.865***
0.7
1.783***
0.694*
-14.539**
0.073
1.382**
-3.791***
1.016***

Time Trend
0.016***
-0.03***
0.018
0.046***
0.004
-0.004
-0.018**
-0.015
-0.03
0.001
0.021***
-0.004
0.008**

INFL
G
0.058***
0.039
-0.035*** 0.239***
0.033
-0.068
0.047***
0.094**
0.017***
0.011
0.029**
-0.077**
-0.004
-0.13*
-0.022
-0.433***
-0.236**
-0.044
-0.023
0.145**
0.016
-0.009
-0.004
-0.214**
0.018
0.084**

29

Openness
-0.022***
0.009**
-0.022***
-0.019***
-0.035***
-0.006**
-0.022***
-0.002
-0.03*
-0.001
-0.02***
-0.013***
-0.027***

PGFGDP
0.194
0.311
0.081
0.224
0.427
0.346**
0.058
-1.075*
0.08*
-1.036
-0.205
-0.175
-0.069

Spread
-0.003***
-0.011***
0
-0.127
0.376
0.02
0.06
0.26
0
-0.772
-0.001
0.493
-0.033

Constant
-25.256*
60.494***
-17.685
-91.795***
-7.043
11.139
34.594**
33.699*
136.423
2.875
-43.264***
32.427
-14.027**

Obs
33
30
35
33
40
30
30
31
22
22
33
30
40

R^2
0.87
0.93
0.51
0.65
0.85
0.6
0.93
0.74
0.82
0.35
0.91
0.78
0.86

Table 3: Panel Fixed Effects Regression Coefficient to REER Dynamic Adjustment Equations

Dependent
Variable:
∆ log(REER) (t-1)

Benchmark
Model
∆
log(REER)
0.092
[0.053]

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Chile

Argentina

∆
log(REER)
-0.054
[0.055]

∆
log(REER)
-0.047
[0.053]

∆
log(REER)
-0.053
[0.054]

∆
log(REER)
0.593***
[0.198]

∆
log(REER)
-0.121
[0.108]

-0.248***
[0.057]

2.988***
[0.750]
-0.248***
[0.057]

2.863***
[0.742]
-0.258***
[0.060]

2.965***
[0.771]
-0.259***
[0.061]

-2.437*
[1.235]
-0.054
[0.122]

7.665***
[2.520]
-0.616***
[0.212]

0.139**
[0.059]

0.140**
[0.056]

-0.268
[0.780]

5.032**
[2.258]

0.458**
[0.171]

0.917***
[0.256]

1.411
[1.008]

8.318***
[3.124]

-3.750***
[1.096]

-5.89
[5.380]

-48.388*
[25.403]

0.063
[0.039]
1627
14
0.147

-0.189
[0.592]
128

-2.861**
[1.317]
128

0.178

0.341

∆ log(REER)
* Reserves (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)
ECTREER
* Reserves (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT (t-1)

0.507**
[0.185]

0.475**
[0.164]

Transitory CTOT
* Reserves (t-1)
Reserves
Over GDP (t-1)
Observations
Countries
R-squared

0.116**
[0.045]
1627
14
0.13

0.082*
[0.039]
1627
14
0.143

0.06
[0.040]
1627
14
0.145

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2009
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECMREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series, Reserves corresponds to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP ( While assets from the Chilean FEES are included the assets allocated to the old
Copper Fund in Chile are not included in IR)

30

Table 4: LSDV Coefficients to REER Dynamic Adjustment Equations: Splits by Period

Dependent Variable:
∆ log(REER) (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves (t-1)
Transitory CTOT (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT * Reserves (t-1)
Reserves over GDP (t-1)
Observations
Number of country
R-squared

1
1980-1990
∆ log(REER)

2
1990-2000
∆ log(REER)

3
2000-2007
∆ log(REER)

-0.061
[0.063]
3.394**
[1.171]
-0.451***
[0.130]
0.697
[0.550]
7.290**
[2.922]

0.128
[0.082]
0.458
[1.112]
-0.210***
[0.053]
0.248
[0.218]
1.376*
[0.758]

0.306**
[0.131]
0.128
[1.410]
-0.222***
[0.041]
0.488**
[0.198]
0.884***
[0.283]

-51.034**
[22.911]
0.519
[0.375]
415
13
0.225

-10.945**
[4.830]
0.072
[0.099]
546
14
0.123

-3.465
[2.280]
-0.142
[0.144]
448
14
0.202

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECMREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series, Reserves corresponds to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP

31

Table 5: LSDV Coefficients to REER Dynamic Adjustment Equations: Positive vs. Negative
Shocks
Dependent Variable:
∆ log(REER) (t-1)

1
∆ log(REER)
0.079
[0.048]

∆ log(REER) + (t-1)
∆ log(REER) - (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves + (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves - (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)

-0.254***
[0.062]

2
∆ log(REER)

3
∆ log(REER)

-0.142**
[0.060]
0.272***
[0.085]
3.671***
[1.187]
0.884
[0.952]
-0.257***
[0.061]

-0.133**
[0.059]
0.280***
[0.085]
3.576***
[1.175]
0.657
[0.906]

ECTREER + (t-1)

1.979**
[0.697]
1.635*
[0.806]

2.031***
[0.638]
1.005
[0.632]

-0.283***
[0.067]
-0.256***
[0.056]
0.295**
[0.109]
0.111
[0.093]
2.305***
[0.746]
1.124
[0.898]

-8.462**
[3.506]

-9.412**
[3.499]

-12.638***
[4.144]

-12.372**
[4.903]
0.113
[0.083]
0.118
[0.077]
1501
14
0.137

-6.926*
[3.904]
0.094
[0.079]
0.103
[0.069]
1501
14
0.161

-7.754
[5.947]
0.104
[0.079]
0.091
[0.069]
1501
14
0.167

ECTREER - (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves + (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves - (t-1)
Transitory CTOT + (t-1)
Transitory CTOT - (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT * Reserves + (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT * Reserves - (t-1)
Reserves over GDP + (t-1)
Reserves over GDP - (t-1)
Observations
Number of country
R-squared

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECMREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series. Reserves correspond to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP.
+ signals a dummy that takes the underlying value of the root variable when the country is undergoing a
positive CTOT transitory shock and 0 otherwise. – follows the same definition for negative CTOT
Transitory shocks and 0 otherwise

32

Table 6: Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUREG): Latin America 1970-2007
Argentina
Δ
Ln(REER)
-0.245*
(0.133)

Bolivia
Δ
Ln(REER)
-0.019
(0.474)

Brazil
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.301*
(0.171)

Chile
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.607**
(0.247)

Colombia
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.296
(0.305)

Ecuador
Δ
Ln(REER)
-0.173
(0.256)

Mexico
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.239
(0.145)

Peru
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.5***
(0.186)

Uruguay
Δ
Ln(REER)
0.466***
(0.118)

Venezuela
Δ
Ln(REER)
-0.167
(0.378)

Δ Ln(REER)
* Reserves (t-1)

12.1***

3.660

-1.107

-2.203

-2.519

8.025

-0.471

-6.8*

-3.842*

3.727

ECTREER (t-1)

(3.368)
-0.608***
(0.122)

(12.561)
-0.6***
(0.173)

(3.362)
-0.092
(0.102)

(1.531)
-0.066
(0.143)

(3.114)
-0.034
(0.161)

(5.229)
-0.582***
(0.134)

(3.633)
-0.413***
(0.105)

(3.836)
-1.02***
(0.144)

(2.335)
-0.3***
(0.090)

(3.304)
-0.61**
(0.248)

ECTREER
* Reserves (t-1)

5.350**

-0.257

-1.518

-0.368

-0.204

7.689***

4.960**

7.904***

1.731

3.6*

CTOT (t-1)

(2.125)
13.7***
(4.561)

(3.823)
10.8**
(4.457)

(1.960)
16.4***
(6.093)

(1.062)
-0.431
(1.318)

(1.665)
3.616
(5.107)

(2.775)
-0.129
(1.269)

(2.079)
11.338*
(5.994)

(2.242)
-3.330
(3.701)

(1.162)
0.116
(2.476)

(2.002)
1.543
(1.167)

CTOT*
Reserves (t-1)

-141.2**

-108.3**

-329.2***

4.382

-22.299

19.670

-134.012

50.878

-16.793

-8.883

(71.508)

(49.415)

(115.480)

(8.202)

(51.258)

(19.597)

(91.999)

(32.382)

(31.839)

(8.833)

-3.038**

0.527

1.675

-0.281

0.292

0.709*

-1.998*

5.356***

-1.724

-2.047*

(1.382)
0.346***
(0.077)
107
0.342

(1.348)
0.198***
(0.064)
107
0.279

(1.742)
0.063
(0.091)
107
0.208

(0.812)
-0.048
(0.107)
107
0.144

(0.974)
-0.063
(0.095)
107
0.178

(0.368)
-0.060***
(0.019)
107
0.400

(1.196)
0.185***
(0.060)
107
0.229

(1.585)
-0.690***
(0.101)
107
0.337

(1.094)
0.319***
(0.087)
107
0.164

(1.191)
0.351**
(0.152)
107
0.141

VARIABLES
Δ Ln(REER) (t-1)

Reserves
over GDP (t-1)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. To maximize the number of observations we have
excluded Panama, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Paraguay from the regression. ECT refers to the Error Correction Term and represents the log distance
between the actual value and its long run estimate. CTOT refers to transitory shocks to CTOT calculated as the log distance between actual CTOT and its
long run value. Reserves correspond to the stock of International Reserves over GDP.

33

Table 7: LSDV Coefficients to REER Dynamic Adjustment Equations: Fixed vs. Flex Exchange
Rate Regimes
Dependent Variable:
∆ log(REER) (t-1)

1
∆ log(REER)
0.269***
[0.048]

∆ log(REER) * Fixed (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Flex (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves * Fixed (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves * Flex (t-1)
Error Correction
Term REER (t-1)

-0.097***
[0.022]

2
∆ log(REER)

3
∆ log(REER)

0.531***
[0.124]
0.453**
[0.187]
-3.007**
[1.103]
-2.001
[1.549]

0.526***
[0.132]
0.450**
[0.184]
-2.967**
[1.179]
-1.996
[1.523]

-0.095***
[0.022]

ECTREER *Fixed (t-1)

0.502***
[0.161]
1.733***
[0.534]

0.389*
[0.187]
1.585***
[0.485]

-0.090***
[0.023]
-0.090***
[0.025]
-0.077
[0.068]
-0.029
[0.103]
0.359
[0.209]
1.584***
[0.473]

-2.602**
[1.038]

-1.53
[1.300]

-1.193
[1.425]

-9.856**
[3.610]
0.172***
[0.037]
0.047
[0.041]
1089
14
0.124

-8.816**
[3.467]
0.174***
[0.038]
0.052
[0.043]
1089
14
0.133

-8.862**
[3.478]
0.199***
[0.051]
0.063
[0.050]
1089
14
0.133

ECTREER *Flex (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves * Fixed (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves * Flex (t-1)
Transitory CTOT * Fixed (t-1)
Transitory CTOT * Flex (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT * Reserves * Fixed (t-1)
Transitory
CTOT * Reserves * Flex (t-1)
Reserves over GDP * Fixed (t-1)
Reserves over GDP * Flex (t-1)
Observations
Number of country
R-squared

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECTREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series. Reserves correspond to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP. Fixed is a dummy with value 1 if the country follows a fixed exchange rate regime
and 0 otherwise. Flex is a dummy with value 1 if the country follows a flex exchange rate regime and 0
otherwise. Given data availability Exchange rate regime classification we run our regression up to 2007

34

Table 8: LSDV Coefficients to REER Dynamic Adjustment Equations: The effects of Trade
Openness, Capital Openness, High Government Debt and Institutional Quality
Dummy X
Dependent Variable:
∆ log(REER) (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * X (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves (t-1)
∆ log(REER) * Reserves * X (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)
ECTREER * X (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves (t-1)
ECTREER * Reserves * X (t-1)
Transitory CTOT (t-1)
Transitory CTOT * X (t-1)
Transitory CTOT * Reserves (t-1)
Transitory CTOT * Reserves * X (t-1)
Reserves over GDP (t-1)
Reserves over GDP * X (t-1)
Observations
Number of country
R-squared

X=Trade Open
∆ log(REER)
-0.207
[0.139]
0.359*
[0.187]
6.361*
[3.047]
-5.35
[3.341]
-0.293***
[0.074]
0.045**
[0.018]
0.352**
[0.157]
-0.283*
[0.151]
6.217**
[2.788]
-5.251*
[2.958]
-58.341*
[28.210]
53.686*
[29.091]
0.225*
[0.114]
-0.161
[0.119]
1501
14
0.167

X=Good Inst
∆ log(REER)
-0.276**
[0.096]
0.650**
[0.255]
6.072***
[1.679]
-8.036***
[2.558]
-0.285***
[0.062]
0.021
[0.020]
0.324*
[0.155]
-0.289*
[0.144]
1.921***
[0.531]
-0.2
[1.797]
-11.598**
[3.869]
-1.408
[12.929]
0.1
[0.077]
0.009
[0.054]
1182
14
0.189

X=Cap Open
∆ log(REER)
-0.064
[0.070]
0.238
[0.248]
3.105**
[1.225]
-1.759
[2.211]
-0.287***
[0.066]
0.053
[0.050]
0.330**
[0.113]
-0.453
[0.303]
1.794**
[0.620]
-0.145
[1.282]
-11.400**
[4.817]
1.169
[9.676]
0.186**
[0.063]
-0.234***
[0.051]
1501
14
0.162

X=High Debt
∆ log(REER)
0.304***
[0.049]
-0.522***
[0.060]
0.11
[0.509]
5.643**
[1.874]
-0.287***
[0.073]
-0.021
[0.022]
0.203
[0.143]
0.097
[0.223]
1.104**
[0.435]
1.6
[0.991]
-5.492
[3.166]
-16.695*
[8.474]
0.159*
[0.081]
-0.139**
[0.063]
1426
13
0.175

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECTREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series. Reserves correspond to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP. X represents a different Dummy variable for each regression, its definition can be
found at the top of each column. The dummy for Trade Openness takes value of 1 if the trade openness
index is above 30 % of GDP and zero otherwise. The dummy for Good Institutions takes value of 1 if
Quality of Institutions index is above 4 and zero otherwise. The dummy for Capital Openness takes value
of 1 if the total private capital flows measure is above 25 % of GDP and zero otherwise. The dummy for
High Government Debt takes value of 1 if total Government Debt is above 45 % of GDP and zero
otherwise.

35

Table 9: Panel and OLS regression Using Changes in Reserves
∆Ln(REER) (t-1)

Model 1
∆Ln(REER)
0.078*
[0.042]

∆Ln(REER) + (t-1)
∆Ln(REER) - (t-1)
∆Ln(REER)*∆RES+ (t-1)
∆Ln(REER)*∆RES- (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)

-0.254***
[0.072]

Model 2
∆Ln(REER)

Model 3
∆Ln(REER)

Chile
∆Ln(REER)

Argentina
∆Ln(REER)

0.007
[0.025]
0.392***
[0.084]
-0.098
[2.443]
5.555
[3.782]
-0.259***
[0.072]

0.01
[0.025]
0.365***
[0.080]
0.301
[2.516]
4.442
[3.523]

0.228
[0.152]
0.244**
[0.114]
7.439
[6.839]
-15.580**
[7.387]

-0.011
[0.126]
0.238
[0.210]
17.502*
[10.224]
-13.159*
[7.441]

-0.269***
[0.074]
-0.254***
[0.068]
0.315
[0.344]
0.833**
[0.346]
0.888**
[0.345]
0.653
[0.386]
-28.103**
[9.417]
32.679**
[12.153]
0.697**
[0.233]
0.478**
[0.192]
1447
13
0.159

-0.089*
[0.047]
-0.118**
[0.049]
-1.02
[3.090]
4.54
[3.503]
2.081***
[0.714]
1.433
[1.242]
140.160**
[67.888]
29.974
[56.337]
-1.325
[2.244]
3.226
[2.649]
119

-0.313***
[0.101]
-0.301***
[0.071]
5.017*
[2.721]
12.759***
[4.301]
5.871
[5.552]
6.242**
[2.933]
185.481
[311.519]
-787.164**
[394.590]
-2.941
[2.220]
-8.504***
[3.229]
119

0.271

0.392

ECTREER + (t-1)
ECTREER - (t-1)
ECTREER*∆RES+ (t-1)
ECTREER*∆RES- (t-1)
CTOT + (t-1)
CTOT - (t-1)
CTOT * ∆RES + (t-1)
CTOT * ∆RES - (t-1)
∆RES + (t-1)
∆RES - (t-1)
Observations
Number of country
R-squared

0.840**
[0.279]
0.586
[0.607]
-24.680***
[7.578]
26.104*
[14.362]
0.660**
[0.230]
0.742**
[0.316]
1447
13
0.129

0.914***
[0.271]
0.517
[0.442]
-25.174***
[7.773]
24.466**
[11.189]
0.711**
[0.244]
0.589*
[0.278]
1447
13
0.151

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECTREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series. Reserves correspond to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP.
∆RES + takes the value of the percent deviation of current International Reserves (RES) over GDP from its long run
value when the country is undergoing a positive CTOT transitory shock and 0 otherwise. ∆RES – follows the same
definition for negative CTOT Transitory shocks and 0 otherwise
International Reserves is defined as the sum of total official reserves assets minus gold reported by the IMF’s BOPS.
In the case of Chile we add the assets managed by the central bank through the “Fondo de Estabilización Económica
y Social (FEES)”

36

Table 10: Dynamic REER Equation for Chile
∆LogREER (t-1)
ECTREER (t-1)
Transitory CToT (t)

∆LogREER
0.28293***
[0.08127]
-0.09498**
[0.04640]
0.55418*
[0.31303]

∆LogREER
0.19709**
[0.08675]
-0.07481*
[0.04272]
2.34488**
[0.95192]
-2.13306**
[1.01139]

128
0.13935

128
0.17855

Transitory CToT *1985 (t-1)

∆LogREER
0.18356**
[0.08677]
-0.06843
[0.04357]
2.40957**
[0.95923]
-1.96037*
[1.05119]
-0.63075
[0.68142]
128
0.18294

Transitory CToT * 2001 (t-1)
Observations
R-Squared

Fixed Effects Model Robust standard errors in brackets. Sample includes observations from 1970 to 2007
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
ECTREER is the error correction term for REER, CTOT corresponds to Transitory CTOT shocks
measured as log deviation from long run series. Reserves correspond to the stock of International
Reserves over GDP.

Table 11: Summary Statistics
Variable
Log Change in REER
Log REER
REER Error Correction Term
Transitory CTOT shock
Reserves over GDP
Fixed Regime Dummy
Flexible Regime Dummy
High Debt Dummy
Trade Openness Dummy
Capital Openness Dummy
Quality of Institutions Index

Observations
1795
1808
1597
2080
2017
1388
1388
1880
2080
1796
1300

Mean
0
4.62
0.183
0
0.091
0.596
0.403
0.434
0.367
0.157
3.636

37

Std. Dev.
0.083
0.283
0.624
0.011
0.061
0.491
0.491
0.496
0.482
0.364
0.834

Min
-0.909
2.967
-1.07
-0.07
0.002
0
0
0
0
0
0.75

Max
1.529
5.562
1.275
0.104
0.442
1
1
1
1
1
6

APPENDIX:

DATA DEFINITIONS AND SOURCES

Real Effective Exchange Rates (REER): The real effective exchange rate index represents a nominal
effective exchange rate index adjusted for relative movements in national price or cost indicators of the
home country,

REER   ti [(e / ei )( P / Pi )] wi
Where e: Exchange rate of the subject currency against the US dollar (US dollars per rupee in index
form); ei: Exchange rates of currency i against the US dollar (US dollars per currency i in
index form);
wi: Weights attached to the country/ currency i in the index; P: Consumer Price Index (CPI) of Subject
country and Pi is the Consumer price index of country i.
An Increase in REER corresponds to a Real Domestic Appreciation.
Data belongs to the IMF International Financial Statistics and JP Morgan (see the following link as an
example of metadata for Argentina:
http://product.datastream.com/Navigator/EconomicsMetadata.aspx?mnemonic=AGJPMRBTF&category
=12&userlanguage=en )
International Reserves
Definition: Stock of foreign reserve assets minus gold end of period, $US.
Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics
Commodity Terms of Trade measure
Definition: is the ratio of a weighted average price of the main commodity exports to a weighted average
price of the main commodity imports. It follows the IMF methodology (see Nikola Spatafora and Irina
Tytell. IMF WP/09/205).
The index is constructed from the prices of six commodity categories (food, fuels, agricultural raw
materials, metals, gold, and beverages), measured against the manufacturing unit value index (MUV)
from the World Bank. These relative commodity prices of six categories are averaged over the sample
period using export and import shares of each commodity category in total GDP as weights. The
commodity terms of trade (CToT) index is the ratio of aggregate indexes of commodity exports and
imports, as follows: CTOTt   ( Pit / MUVt )
i

X ij t

/  ( Pit / MUVt )

M ij t

i

where i represents the six commodity categories; X is the share of exports of commodity i in country j’s
total GDP, and M is the share of imports of commodity i in country j’s GDP.
Giving their nature, weights X and M do not add up to 1. This makes interpretation of the index more
difficult but allows us to capture the relative exposure of each economy to relative commodity price
changes. Note that [ln CTOTt ] / [ln( Pit / MUVt )]  X ij t , hence the appreciation of the price of
exported commodity i relative to the manufacturing unit value would ‘improve’ the CTOT at a rate
proportionate to the GDP share of commodity i. It may be viewed as a reduced form measure of the
improvement in the external competitiveness of a country in terms of its ability to import manufacturing
goods using it’s exports of commodity i.
Commodity Prices are originally reported in monthly frequency. We use an average of the three months
to calculate the quarterly value of each index. All indexes are rebased to 2005=100.
Both, trade data and the Manufacturing Unit Value (MUV) are originally collected in yearly frequency.
We use a simple interpolation technique where yearly changes in these variables are evenly spread across
all quarters further smoothing these variables across our sample.
Note that using other sensible deflators does not alter the series substantially, see two examples below for
Argentina and Brazil were we use MUV=100 and the US CPI index as deflators for commodity prices.
38

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

ARGENTINA

0

50

100

150

year
Transitory CTOT
Transitory CTOT deflated by US CPI

Transitory CTOT MUV=1

-.05

0

.05

.1

BRAZIL

0

50

100

150

year
Transitory CTOT shock
Transitory CTOT with MUV=1
Transitory CTOT deflated by US CPI

39

Sources:
The prices (Pi) of the six commodity categories are obtained from the database of the RES Commodities
Unit.
Exports and imports by commodity category are obtained from the United Nations Common Format for
Transient Data Exchange (COMTRADE) data at SITC IInd digit level
Manufacturing Unit Value Index (MUV) is obtained from the World Bank, contact information for this
dataset: Elliot (Mick) Riordan, DECPG, eriordan@worldbank.org.
Nominal GDP is measured in $US and its obtained from UN Data
Fixed vs. Flex Exchange Regime Dummies: We use the de facto classification of Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and
Rogoff (2009)27 to determine the exchange rate regime of each country in each quarter. We divided the
sample into country-episodes of predetermined exchange rates. For each country we took any 8
continuous quarters when the country had a fixed exchange rate as a "fixed" episode and any 8 continuous
quarters or more when the country had flexible exchange rates as "flex". As Fixed regimes we included
countries with no legal tender, hard pegs, crawling pegs, and de facto or pre-announced bands or crawling
bands with margins of no larger than +/- 2%. All other episodes were classified as flexible. Based on this
definition, Eurozone countries are included as having fixed exchange rates. Table 10 below shows the
different periods defined as “Flex” or “Fixed” in Latin American economies.

27

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff (2009), “Exchange rate arrangements
entering the 21st century: Which anchor will hold?”(mimeo, University of Maryland and
Harvard University).
40

Table 10:Summary of Exchange Rate Regimes
Fixed Exchange Regime
Country
Start
End
Argentina
Q1 1970 Q1 1971
Argentina
Q1 1979 Q4 1980
Argentina
Q3 1985 Q1 1986
Argentina
Q2 1991 Q3 2001
Argentina
Q2 2003 Q4 2007
Bolivia
Q1 1970 Q4 1970
Bolivia
Q1 1988 Q4 2007
Brazil
Q2 1986 Q2 1986
Brazil
Q1 1989 Q1 1989
Brazil
Q3 1994 Q4 1998
Chile
Q2 1978 Q1 1982
Colombia
Q2 1974 Q3 1983
Costa Rica
Q1 1970 Q2 1971
Costa Rica
Q2 1974 Q3 1980
Costa Rica
Q1 1991 Q4 2007
Ecuador
Q1 1970 Q3 1971
Ecuador
Q2 1973 Q4 1981
Ecuador
Q2 1997 Q3 1997
Ecuador
Q2 2000 Q4 2007
Mexico
Q1 1970 Q3 1976
Mexico
Q2 1977 Q4 1981
Mexico
Q1 1989 Q1 1994
Nicaragua
Q1 1970 Q1 1979
Nicaragua
Q3 1991 Q4 2007
Panama
Q1 1970 Q4 2007
Paraguay
Q1 1970 Q2 1973
Paraguay
Q2 1991 Q2 1999
Peru
Q1 1994 Q4 2007
Uruguay
Q1 1970 Q4 1970
Uruguay
Q1 1979 Q3 1982
Uruguay
Q1 1991 Q3 1991
Uruguay
Q4 1995 Q4 2001
Uruguay
Q3 2005 Q4 2007
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q1 1970 Q1 1983
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q3 1996 Q4 2002

Flexible Exchange Regime
Country
Bolivia
Bolivia
Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil
Chile
Chile
Colombia
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Ecuador
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Paraguay
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.

Start
Q1 1971
Q1 1975
Q1 1987
Q1 1970
Q4 1999
Q1 1970
Q1 1983
Q1 1970
Q4 1983
Q3 1971
Q4 1980
Q1 1984
Q3 1984
Q4 1993
Q4 1976
Q2 1994
Q2 1996
Q2 1979
Q3 1973
Q3 1986
Q3 1999
Q1 1970
Q1 2002
Q2 1983
Q2 1990

End
Q3 1972
Q3 1979
Q3 1987
Q1 1975
Q4 2007
Q2 1971
Q4 2007
Q1 1974
Q4 2007
Q1 1974
Q4 1980
Q4 1990
Q1 1987
Q1 1997
Q1 1977
Q4 1994
Q4 2007
Q2 1982
Q1 1985
Q4 1988
Q4 2007
Q2 1971
Q2 2005
Q3 1986
Q3 1992

Trade Openness Dummy: Trade openness is the sum of merchandise exports and imports divided by
twice the value of nominal GDP, all in current U.S. dollars. Data for Imports and Exports were extracted
from the World Bank WDI database. In order to build or dummy we smoothed the series taking 5 year
rolling averages and the extrapolating to obtain quarterly observations, if the value on a given quarter was
above 30 percent we consider the country as an open economy and assigned a 1, if the value was below
30 we consider the country a closed economy and assigned a 0 to the dummy variable. Table 11 below
shows the periods considered as Trade Open for Latin American economies. We ran robustness checks
using a benchmark of 25 and 35 percent of GDP without any substantial changes in our main results.

41

Capital Openness Dummy: Total gross flows were calculated adding up the absolute value of all
liability increases and decreases plus total asset increases and decreases from the capital and financial
balance of each country. All data was extracted from the World Bank Development Indicators and from
the Balance of Payments Statistics of the IMF. In order to build or capital openness dummy we smooth
the series taking 5 year rolling averages and then extrapolating the data to obtain quarterly observations.
If the value on a given quarter was above 25 percent of GDP we consider the country as an financially
integrated economy and assigned a 1, if the value was below 25 percent of GDP we consider the country a
capital closed economy and assigned a 0 to the dummy variable. Table 11 below shows the periods of
Capital Openness for Latin American economies in our sample. We ran robustness checks using a
benchmark of 20 and 30 percent of GDP without any substantial changes in our main results.

Table 11: Summary of Trade and Capital Open Economies
Trade Open
Capital Open
Country
Start
End
Country
Argentina
Q1 2005
Q4 2009
Argentina
Bolivia
Q1 1970
Q4 1983
Chile
Bolivia
Q1 1990
Q4 2009
Chile
Chile
Q1 1977
Q4 2009
Chile
Colombia
Q1 2008
Q4 2009
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Q1 1970
Q4 2009
Ecuador
Ecuador
Q1 1971
Q4 2009
Nicaragua
Mexico
Q1 1989
Q4 2009
Panama
Nicaragua
Q1 1970
Q4 2009
Uruguay
Panama
Q1 1970
Q4 1987
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Panama
Q1 1992
Q4 2009
Paraguay
Q1 1990
Q4 2009
Peru
Q1 2005
Q4 2009
Uruguay
Q1 1985
Q4 1993
Uruguay
Q1 2004
Q4 2009
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q1 1970
Q4 2009

Start
Q1 2003
Q1 1984
Q1 2001
Q1 2007
Q1 1982
Q1 1995
Q1 1979
Q1 1977
Q1 2002
Q1 1990

End
Q4 2006
Q4 1987
Q4 2003
Q4 2009
Q4 1987
Q4 1999
Q4 2009
Q4 2009
Q4 2009
Q4 1994

High Institution Quality Dummy: This dummy it’s built from our Institution Quality Index. This index
is based on underlying numerical evaluations relating to the rule of law, bureaucratic quality, corruption,
expropriation risk, and governmental repudiation of contracts. It ranges from 0 to 7, with higher values
indicating superior institutions. The main source for the numerical evaluations of the rule of law,
bureaucratic quality, corruption, expropriation risk, and governmental repudiation of contracts is the
ICRG dataset. To construct the Dummy variable we assign a value of one to any observation above the
median, 4, and zero to the rest. Table 12 below summarizes all the periods of High Institutional Quality
among Latin American Economies in our sample.
High Government Debt Dummy: Total (domestic plus external) central government debt is obtained
from Reinhart, Camen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis,” NBER
Working Paper 15795, March 2010. Forthcoming in American Economic Review. To build our High
Debt Dummy we assigned a one to all observation where government debt exceeds 45 percent of GDP.
All other observations were filled with zeros.
Table 12 below summarizes all the periods of High Government Debt among Latin American Economies
in our sample. We ran robustness checks using a benchmark of 40 and 50 percent of GDP without any
substantial changes in our main results.
42

Table 12: Summary of Economies with relatively Good Institutions and High Gov Debt
Good Institutions
High Government Debt
Country
Start
End
Country
Start
Argentina
Q2 1994
Q3 1994
Argentina
Q1 1985
Argentina
Q3 1997
Q4 2000
Argentina
Q1 2002
Argentina
Q2 2001
Q4 2001
Bolivia
Q1 1973
Bolivia
Q3 1997
Q2 2002
Bolivia
Q1 1977
Bolivia
Q4 2002
Q4 2003
Bolivia
Q1 1984
Brazil
Q2 1985
Q3 1985
Bolivia
Q1 2009
Brazil
Q1 1986
Q3 1986
Brazil
Q1 1980
Brazil
Q2 1987
Q2 1989
Brazil
Q1 1990
Brazil
Q1 1990
Q4 1990
Brazil
Q1 1996
Brazil
Q3 1991
Q2 1993
Brazil
Q1 2009
Brazil
Q2 2001
Q2 2001
Chile
Q1 1986
Chile
Q4 1989
Q2 1990
Colombia
Q1 2001
Chile
Q2 1991
Q4 1993
Costa Rica
Q1 1980
Chile
Q2 1994
Q4 2009
Ecuador
Q1 1982
Costa Rica
Q2 1990
Q3 2005
Mexico
Q1 1983
Ecuador
Q4 1997
Q1 1998
Panama
Q1 1976
Mexico
Q3 1997
Q2 1998
Panama
Q1 1978
Mexico
Q4 1998
Q4 1998
Panama
Q1 1980
Mexico
Q3 2000
Q4 2009
Paraguay
Q1 1987
Nicaragua
Q4 1997
Q4 1998
Paraguay
Q1 2003
Nicaragua
Q2 2001
Q2 2001
Peru
Q1 1983
Nicaragua
Q3 2005
Q3 2008
Peru
Q1 1988
Panama
Q4 1997
Q4 2009
Peru
Q1 1990
Paraguay
Q1 1992
Q1 1993
Peru
Q1 1999
Paraguay
Q3 1997
Q1 1998
Uruguay
Q1 1984
Peru
Q3 1997
Q3 1999
Uruguay
Q1 2002
Peru
Q2 2001
Q3 2001
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q1 1987
Uruguay
Q3 1997
Q3 2003
Uruguay
Q2 2004
Q4 2009
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q1 1989
Q1 1989
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Q4 1990
Q1 1992

End
Q4 1993
Q4 2009
Q4 1973
Q4 1979
Q4 2006
Q4 2009
Q4 1988
Q4 1993
Q4 2007
Q4 2009
Q4 1992
Q4 2006
Q4 2007
Q4 2005
Q4 1992
Q4 1976
Q4 1978
Q4 2008
Q4 1991
Q4 2005
Q4 1986
Q4 1988
Q4 1995
Q4 2003
Q4 1994
Q4 2009
Q4 1998

Interest Rate Spread: Domestic market reference interest rate spread from the 3-month US T-Bill. The
market reference could be Treasury Bill Rates, Money Market Rates, Deposit Rates or Discount Rates
depending on data availability.
Source: World Bank Development Indicators and the International Financial Statistics of the IMF
Government Expenditure: Government Consumption Share of PPP Converted GDP Per Capita at
current prices (%)
Source: Penn World Tables.

43

