NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATES AND PRICES

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper Nc. 1769

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and Industrial
Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER tbrking Paper #1769
Docenber 1985

Exthange Rates and Prices

The appreciation of the U.S. dollar over the past five years opens
important areas of research. The fact of a large and persistent real
appreciation poses a challenge for equilibriunj theorists to uncover the

change in fundamentals and seems to supprt the role of long—term wage
contracts in macroeconomic adjustment. This paper adopts the perspective of
given wages and investigates in a partial equilibrium setting the
determinants of relative price changes of different groups of goods.
Specifically it advances hypotheses about those sectors where an exchange
rate change should lead to large relative price changes and others where the
relative price effects should be negligible.
The general idea is to draw an models of industrial organization to
explain price adjustments in terms of the degree of market concentration.
the extent of product homogeneity and substitutability, and the relative
market shares of domestic and foreign firms. The exchange rate movement and
the less than fully flexible money wage interact to produce a cost shock for
some firms in an industry ——

foreign

firms in the home market and home firms

abroad—— and thus bring about the need for an industry-wide adjustment in
prices.

Riger rnbusth
M.I.T.
E52—357

Cartridge, a 02139

Revised
October 1985

EXCHAGE RATES AND PRICES
Rudiger Dornbuscli

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

The appreciation of the U.S. dollar aver the past five years opens
important areas of research. The fact of a large and persistent real
appreciation poses a challenge far equilibrium theorists to uncover the
change In fundamentals. For those who explain medium—term macroeconomics in
terms of Fischer—Taylor long—term wage contracts the episode provides a
striking example of the differential speeds of adjustment of wages, goods
and assets prices. This paper adopts the latter perspective and explains the
determinants of relative price changes of different groups of goods.
Specifically it advances hypotheses about those sectors where an exchange
rate change should lead to large relative price changes and others where the
relative price effects should be negligible.

The generai idea is to draw on models of industrial organization to
explain price adjustments in terms of the degree of market concentration.
the extent of product homogeneity and substitutability, and the relative
market shares of domestic and foreign firms. Models of industrial
organization have, of course, been very fruitfully applied in trade theory:
their application to macro—pricing issues, however, has been surprisingly
*1 am indebted to Olivier Blanchard. Stan Fischer, Paul Krugman. Julio
Rotemberg, Larry Summers and Jean Tirole for helpful suggestions. An earlier
version of this paper was presented at the NBER summer workshop and the NBER
Meeting on Business Fluctuations and I wish to acknowledge helpful comments
received on those occasions. David Wilcox provided valuable research
assistance.

2

slow.l There is a long—standing questioning of PPP, especially in the work
of Kravls and Lipsey (1978, 1983). But so far there seems to exist no formal
analysis of price setting behavior in this context.2
This paper adopts a partial equilibrium approach in that it assumes
throughout a given, exogeneous movement in the nominal exchange rate. The
exchange rate movement and the less than fully flexible money wage interact
to produce a cost shock for some firms in an industry ——

foreign

firms in

the home market and home firms abroad—— and thus bring about the need for an
industry—wide adjustment in prices. Although the assumption of exogeneous
exchange rate movements and sticky wages is apen to criticism, it is a
useful working hypothesis for the purpose of investigating relative price
issues.

The first section reviews some facts. Section 2 offers a stylized
view of the link between exchange rates and prices. The third and fourth
sections study respectively the behavior of materials prices and
manufactures

1. Some Facts

The large dollar appreciation is reflected both in absolute and
relative prices. Table 1 shows two measures of the change in U.S. relative

costs and prices; relative unit labor costs and the relative value added

1See Dixit(1983) and Helpman and Krugman (1985) for extensive work on
and references to trade applications. In the macro context see
lanchard 1985), Hart (1982) and Mankiw (1985).
Aizenman (1984,1985) and Giovannini (1985) investigate price setting
behavior in the context of exchange rate ,ovements. Their focus,
however, is on short—term issues of transactions costs and
uncertainty rather than on the large, persistent movements in the real
exchange rate.

3

deflator in manufacturing. In each case the U.S. series is deflated by the
corresponding time series (Dr the trade—weighted average in dollars of our
trading partners. The magnitude of the change in relative costs and prices
arises from the fact that unit labor costs and prices abroad in national
currencies were rising at a lower rate than in the U.S. and that the dollar.

rather than offsetting the divergent trend by a depreciation, further
reinforced that divergence by a strong appreciation.

Table 1

Relative Costs and Prices in Manufacturing
(Cumulative Percentage Change)
1976—80

Relative Unit Labor Costs

Relative Value Added Deflator

1980—84

—8.0

44.0

-14.7

35.6

Source: International Financial Statistics

Figure 1 shows absolute prices measured by the (IS. GrJP deflator and

the deflators for imports and exports, Prior to 1980. import prices
increase more rapidly than the deflator and, to a lesser extent, so do

export prices. During this period the dollar was deperciating. Afte ISdO.
however, the dollar appreciation gets underway, and import price increases
slow down and ultimately import prices fall in absolute terms. Export prices
track the GD? delator more closely though the pattern of divergences is

similar to that for imports. At this broad level it is clear then that
import prices fell relative to the deflator and relative to export prices.

Figure 1

THE U.S. DEFLATORS 0R GNP, IMPORTS
AND EXPORTS
Index 1979:1 —100)

144
140

CNP
135
/

Exports

120

114

100

1980

1981 1982 1983

1984

1985

4

In the absence of comprehensive price series Table 2 shows unit
values for different export and import groups. The table shows that the
absolute decline in import prices must be attributed to the first three
groups, and not to finished manufactures. Oil price increases In 1979 easily
explain the divergent pattern of export and import unit values for crude
materials. The interesting comparison therefore is between the relatively
homogenous commodity groups——food and semi—manufactures—— and finished
manufactures where price setting and product differentiation are likely to
be important. For the former group export and import unit values move
roughly in line, while for finished manufactures exports follow the domestic
price trend and imports show a much smaller of an increase.

Table 2 Unit Values of Imports and Exports
(Index 1980:11O0)

2979:2
1980:1
1985:1

E

Foods
M

87

82

100 100
94

87

Materials
E
M
92
200
91

60
100
97

Semi—Manufactures
E
M
71
100
86

77
100
82

Finished Manufactures
E

H

95
100
139

100
106

91

Note: E=Exports, M=Imports

We aim now to models of price determination for commodities and for
manufactures to explain these patterns.

2. standard Models

There are two extreme models that have been studied extensively in

the literature. One aspumes that the 'law of one price holds. Prices of

S

goods are geographically arbitraged and, adjusted for tariffs and transport
costs, they are equalized in different locations. Homogeneity, information
and perfect competition assure this result.

Let p., p. and e denote the

price of good I in the home country and currency, the foreign price, and the
home currency price of foreign exchange. Arbitrage then implies:

(1)

p1 =

ep.

In this form, or in the first—difference version of Gustav Cassel,
the law of one price is asserted in the PPP literature. The law of one price
has seen important application in the monetary approach to exchange rates
which combines the quantity theory of money, price flexibility, and PPP to
obtain a theory of the exchange rate. An important implication of coniplete

spatial arbitrage, not only for commodities but for all goods, is the idea
that relative national price levels in a common currency are independent of
the exchange rate since exchange rate movements merely reflect, passivejy,
divergent national price trends. That is. of course, an application of the
homogeneity postulate which holds when money is fully neutral.
The alternative model might be called "Keynesian'. Here it is
assumed that each country is fully specialized in the production of "its
own' good. Domestic and foreign goods are less than fully homogeneous or
substitutable. Wages are fixed in national currencies or at least sticky.

Letting P and * be the national GDF deflators, the relative price
of domestic and foreign goods or the real exchange rate then is:

3For a review of PPP see Dornbusch (1985).

6

(2)

If the

• P/eP

mark—up of prices over unit labor

costs

is

constant

then for given

unit labor costs prices will be given. Hence in this model, exchange

rate

movements change relative prices one—for—one. Exchange rate—induced changes
in the relative price affect the world distribution of demand and

employment. This approach tends to be used in open economy versions of the
IS—LM model in the Meade—Mundell tradition.
In what follows we show that equation (1) would be a useful model of
international price relations for materials——say sisal, copper, tea——

whereas (2) more nearly describes what happens with manufactures. But the
assumption of a constant mark—up is no longer justified when domestic and
foreign firms have strategic interactions in their pricing.

3. Materials Prices

In this section we consider the prices of cDmmodities. To be
specific we discuss the IMF indices of metals and agricultural raw materials
as concrete examples. We make the point that movements in the real exchange
rate between the dollar and other currencies will affect the real prices of
commodities in terms of the U.S. GNP deflator. Put alternatively, given the
U.S. GNP deflator a real appreciation of the dollar will reduce world
commodity prices In dollars.

Consider a simple model of the world market for a commodity. There
are two regions, the U.S. and the rest of the world. The rest of the world

7

is viewed as the foreign country and denoted by an asterix. World demand for
commodities depends on the real price of commodities in terms of GtiP

deflators in the two regions and on real activity. The supply of commodities
is assumed exogeneous.

(3)

S

D(p/P.Y)

D*(p*/P*.Y*)

where

are domestic and foreign activity

pp* are commodity prices in home and foreign currency
the national deflators

Now it is assumed that materials or commodity prices are arbitraged so that

p—ep.
Using that relation in (3), and the definition of the real exchange rate X E

P/eP*, we can solve for the real commodity price of the U.S. in terms of
activity, commodity supply and the real exchange rate:

(4)

p/P=J(Yy*•_;S)

The model is illustrated in Figure 2. The schedule MM shows the
commodity market equilibrium for given levels of activity and a given

supply. It has a negative slope since an increase in the real price to users
in one region reduces demand; in order to restore market equilibrium there
must be an offsetting cut in the real price for the other region. Note that
the real price is always measured in terms of the respective regions' GNP

8

deflators. The ray OR has a slope equal to P1eP. Equilibrium obtains
initially at point A.

The model confirms the well—established cyclical behavior of real

commodity prices an increase in activity raises real commodity prices. But

there is also a role for the real exchange rate: equation (4) shows that a
real appreciation of the U.S. will lower real commodity prices in terms of
the U.S. deflator while raising them in terms of foreign deflators.4 In

terms of Pigure 2 the ray OR rotates to OR as a result of the real
appreciation and the equilibrium shifts to point B. This effect is simply
the implication of a flexible price model for commodities combined with an
assumed change in the real exchange rate. The latter assumption implies that

real commodity prices, in terms of the respecti"e users deflators, must
change because the law of one price does hold for commodities but not for
def lators.

The elasticity of the real commodity price with respect to the real
exchange rate is determined by the elasticities of demand of the two regions
weighted by their shares in canmodity absorption. The model does have the
implication that the elasticity should be less than one. With equal demand
elasticities the fraction reduces to the U.S. share in world commodity
absorption.

The model was tested with quarterly data for agricultural raw

materials and for metals over the period 1970—85:1. The real price of each
commodity group in terms of the U.S. deflator was regressed on a distributed
lag of the U.S. real exchange rate and on world industrial produrtion.5 The
regession is run in the log difference of the variables.
4

.

The effect of exchange rates on real commodity prices is discussed in
Dornbusch (1983,1984) and Sachs (1984, 1985).
°The real exchange rate is measured by the IMFs relative value added
deflator and world econonhic activity is the IKE index of industrial
production for the main industrial countries.

/

p fep*

It

/
3

p/P
0

Figure 2
The Real Price of Commodities

9

Table 3 The Effect of Real Exchange Rates on Commodity Prices:1970:1-1985:1
Constant
Metals

Activity

Real Exchange Rate

—1.99

0.94

—1.44

(—1.72)

(2.17)

(—2.42)

2.67
(3.51)

—1.22

Agricultural
Materials
—1.73
(—1.69)

Rho

D—W

0.18 0.30 1.97

0.25 0.51 2.00

(—2.77)

Note: t—statistics in parenthesis

Both activity and the real exchange rate appear as significant
determinants of changes in the real commodity price. The real exchange rate

has the anticipated sign, but the quantative effect is far larger than the
model predicts. Recall that the coefficient should be a negative fraction,
perhaps —0.5, but certainly not larger than unity in absolute value.
There are a number of possible explanations for seeming the
overreaction to real exchange rates apparent in Table 3. Perhaps the most
likely reason for the result is the neglect of structural change and supply
side effects including inventories. But commodity markets (unlike the

markets for manufactures) operate in the manner asset markets and hence an
emphasis on interest rates and a distinction between anticipated and
unanticipated movements in the determinants of demand is also appropriate.

4. Manufactures

Table 1 gave evidence of large, persistent fluctuations in exchange
rate—adjusted relative prices in manufacturing. In this section we explore
theoretical models that would explain these price movements as the result of
changes in relative unit labor costs.

10

The basic assumption we make is that firms in any industry have a
linear technology, with labor as the only input. Unit labor costs, w and w

are given in home and foreign currency respectively. This assumption about
costs is combined with a model of pricing to yield predictions about the

behavior of relative prices. The experiment is simply this: the exchange
rate change, say a dollar appreciation, lowers foreign unit labor costs in
dollars. As a result the market equilibrium is disturbed in each industry
and price and output adjustments must occur. What these adjustments look
like depends on three factors:6
Market integration or separation. Is a particular commodity is
traded in an integrated world market, or are there significant barriers to
restrict spatial arbitrage?
Substitution between domestic and foreign variants of a product.

The extent of substitution influences price setting and the output effects
of cost and price changes.

Market arganisation. Is the market perfectly competitive in which
case forms are price takers, or is the market imperfectly competitive or
oligopolistic in which case firms are price setters and may interact in
strategic ways?

Two models lend themselves in a straight forward fashion to formulating the

price response to cost shocks of part of the industry. The Cournot model
assumes perfect substitution between alternative suppliers and places more
emphasis on the extent of oligopoly. It allows in principle more variation

fourth item of relevance is the functional form of the demand
curve.

11

in the mark—up in response to cost shocks and thus has the potential for a
richer pattern of response to cost shocks.The Dixit—Stiglitz (1977) model by
contrast emphasizes imperfect substitution between alternative suppliers and
in its predictions jocks very much like the

Keynesian model discussed

above. An alternative to the Dixit—Stiglitz model, again emphasizing product
differentiation, is the Salop model of competition of competition on a
circle.

The Cournot Model:

In the Cournot formulation the analytical focus is on a homogeneous

commodity sold in an oligopolistic market. Each seller assumes that other
sellers defend their sales volume. We assume that there is an effective
spatial separation between the home market and foreign markets and discuss
the pricing in the U.S. market.

Market demand is linear in the price of the commodity:

(5)

D=a-bp

where all non—price determinants are captured in the constant. There are n
domestic suppliers and n foreign firms with respective sales of q and
per firm respectively. Aggregate sales of these firms have to sum to market
demand:

(6)

D=nqtn*q*

12

Each firm maximizes profits taking the sales of other firms as
given. Profits of the representative domestic and foreign firm in the home
market are:

(7)

111

It.

(p—w)[a—bp —(n—1)q —ntq]

(p/e—w)[a-bp —nq

Maximization gives rise to the reaction functions shown in Figure 3.
The home country s reaction function is JJ while JtJ' represents the foreign
country. They yield the oCournot—e Nash equilibrium shown at point A which
gives the equilibrium quantity allocation between representative domestic
and foreign firms. The common equilibrium price in the industry is given by:

(8)

p — (nw. n*ew*)/N + a/bN

N =

n.n+1

A dollar appreciation shifts the J*J* schedule out and to the right,
thus leading to increased foreign sales and reduced domestic sales. At the
initial level of sales for every supplier, the individual foreign firm faces

a given marginal revenue schedule in dollars but experiences a reduction in
its dollar marginal cost and hence wishes to increase output. In the flew

equilibrium at point Aforeign firms increase their output while home firms
contract. The industry price declines, as seen from (8).
We are now interested in the exte:,t to which exchange rate movements

(or movements in relative unit labor costs) affect the equilibrium price.

13

The elasticity of the equilibrium price with respect to the exchange rate,g
is:

(9)

g

(n*/N)(ew*/p)

The elasticity formula has two determinants: the relative number of

foreign firms (or the relative number of firms with wages not fixed in
dollars), and the ratio of marginal cost to price of foreign suppliers.

Since both terms are fractions it is immediately clear from (9) that a

dollar appreciation will lower price less than proportionally. The decline
in the dollar price is larger the more competitive the industry ——

i.e.

the

smaller the mark—up of price over marginal cost—— and the larger the share

of imports in total sales. This latter term is represented by n*/N on the
assumption of symmetry and initially equal wages between countries.

Equation (9) is interesting because it stretches all the way from
the "small country" case to the case where exchange rates have virtually no

impact on home pricing. The small country case, in the trade literature, is
the case where a country is a price taker in world markets. In that case a
currency depreciation will raise prices in the same proportion. This is, of
-course, the limiting case here under perfect competition and a number of
foreign firms that is large relative to hone firms.

The other extreme of no influence of the exchange rate on home
prices results when there are few firms in the industry, most of which are

domestic. In that case foreign firms absorb the dollar appreciation
primarily in the form of extra profits rather than increased sales.

14

The Cournot model thus potentially explains both unchanging prices

and steep price declines. The market structure -—
concentration ——

are

import

share and

the key parameters that explain the outcome.

Consider next U.S. export firms competing in a foreign mrket. A
dollar appreciation will lower their marginal revenue in dollars. With
unchanged marginal dollar cost these firms will contract. In terms of
Figure 3 applied to the foreign market our schedule JJ shifts down and to

the left. The common foreign currency price rises, but in dollars it
declines, though less than proportionately to the appreciation. Using the
same model for the foreign market we find that the elasticity of foreign

price with respect to the exchange rate is

(10)

—

(n/N*)(w/ep*)

where n' is the number of domestic firms in the foreign market and N* the

total number of firms. With 9* a negative fraction the dollar price of
exports, pee, has an elasticity 1+9* and hence must decline in response to a
dollar appreciation.
Consider next the price of U.S. exports relative to the price of

imports. Remembering that the markets are separated we look at p/ep*. In
case of a dollar appreciation, dollar export prices rise relative to import
prices if the following condition holds:

(11)

2 > 1+f1

3
ci

3

A

A'

.1

3*

0

Figure 3
The Impact of Appreciation

15

In principle the condition can go either way. In the small country
case export and import prices in dollars fail in the sape proportion as the

currency appreciates (g=1. 9—1) so that the relative price p/ep remains
constant. In general the outcome depends on the relative oligopolistic
structure of the two markets. Export prices will rise relative to import
prices, in the appreciation case, if at home import competition is pervasive
and foreign markets are strongly affected by U.S. suppliers as well as
highly competitive.7

The Dixit—Stilitz Model: The representative consumer in this model
maximizes a utility function V with consumption of two commodities z and x
as arguments.

(12)

V =

tJ(zx)

x =

0< a< 1

We focus on commodity x which is an index of consumption of different brands
of the sane good. We assume that there are n domestic firms supplying sane

variant each, and n foreign firms doing the same.
Maximization yields the demand for each individual brand, as well as

the utility—based price index for commodity x:

7me results are sensitive to the functional form of the demand curve.
With a constant elasticity demand function 0= Ap the easticity of
=
equilibrium price with respect to the exchange rate becomes
(n*/N)(ew*/W) where N=n+nt and I'? =(n/N)w • (ri/N)ew. The exchange
rate impact thus depends no longer on cost—price mark—up and, when
functicn of the
costs are initially equal between countries, is only
relative number of firms. In that case the wage—price ratio w/p = 1—
1/SN.

16

(13)

(14)

x(P/p1

X1

P —

((Eph

c

)C

+ Ep

1/(1—a)

/(ntn*)

11/h

h=—aI(I—a)

In (14) p. denotes the price of a brand produced in the home country and
the price of an imported brand.

We are now interested in the response of prices to cast shacks. The
individual imperfectly competitive firm faces a demand curve as in (13) with

the relative price of its product p/p as the determinant. The firm assumes
it is sufficently small so that its own price changes leave the industry

price, F, unchanged. The representative firms profits are

(15)

ii (1 —

w)x1

Maximization yields the familiar constant mark—up pricing equation:

(16)

p1 = aw

a

11(1—1/c)

where a depends inversely on the elasticity of substitution among variants.

Since the industry structure is symmetric each domestic form will follow the
salie

pricing

rule with an equal mark-up.

We now assume again markets are separated and we can thus
meaningfully discuss the price set by a foreign firm for our market. Foreign
firms in the home market face the same form of demand curve as home firms

17

and hence they also follow the same pricing rule, with the same mark-up, but

with foreign wages in dollars, mc, as the base of their pricing.

(17)

aew

p.

From (16) and (17) we have two strong predictions: First the
relative price of domestic and foreign variants in the home market depends
just on relative unit labor costs in a common currency:

(14) P/P =

w/ew

The industry price can be calculated and it is readily shown that
the relative price of a domestic variant in terms of the industry price
index

is just a function of the relative wage, w/ew*. The elasticity

of the relative price will be

(15)

If

n*z/(n+n$z)

Z

= (wIew*)1'l

wages are initially equal between countries the effect of an exchange

rate change on the industry price and on the relative price depends merely

on the fraction of firms that has wages fixed in foreign currency and hence
experiences a reduction of their costs in dollars when the dollar
appreciates,

Given the wages in hone and foreign currency the Dixit—Stiglitz
model provides strong predictions about the impact of dollar appreciation:

18

.The prices of imported variants fall in proportion to the decline of
dollar unit labor costs of foreign firms and the prices of domestic variants
would remain unchanged.

Exporting firms at home, although they have to compete in foreign
markets, still follow their mark—up pricing on dollar wages. Accordingly a
change iii

the

dollar does not affect their dollar export price. Of course,

it does affect their sales and profits. A dollar appreciation will raise
their foreign currency price in the same proportion and hence raise their
relative price in the foreign market.

The strong prediction of the model is to look for a sharp fall in
import prices relative to domestic prices and to see export prices stay
constant relative to domestic prices of the same variant. This is. of
course, the exact specification of the fixed—price 'Keynesian' model which
is derived here as an implication of given labir costs and an invariant
mark-up.

An Extended Dixit Stiglitz Model:
The Dixit—Stiglitz model represents Chanberlinian imperfect
competition and hence each supplier assumes that he does not affect industry
price. Strategic interaction with other firms is therefore excluded. But the
same structure of differentiated products can easily be adapted to introduce
strategic interaction by way of a conjectural variation. Assume, contrary to
the preceding section, that the individual firm is sufficently large to
affect industry price. Assume, too, that fir,;is respond to changes in the

industry price and let the conjectural variation be the parameter a. a

19

fraction between zero and one. Thus a one percentage point rise in the
industry price is assumed to cause each firm to raise their price by ,

percent.

Assuming a given conjectural variation rather than deriving it from

a dynamic game—theoretic framework is obviously a shortcut.

With this adaptation the demand curve facing the individual firms
price policy no longer is a constant mark—up over unit labor costs but
rather becomes

(18)

=

a'

=

1/[l—

1/c(1—t)]

where the tern c emerges to capture the strategic interaction between firms.
The term is a function of relative prices and the conjectural variation:8

(19)

0 c C(a.P/p.) E

C I

From (18) and (19) it is clear that pricing decisions are now

interdependent, so we can represent each firms pricing policy in terms of a
price reaction functions.

(20)

p =

= F*(P.c.c)ew*
8The tedious derivation of (19) relies on the definition of the
industry priceR, the conjectural variation and the assumption of
symmetry for domestic firms and for foreign firms so that we can deal
with representative firms.

20

Figure 4 shows the impact of a dollar appreciation in this setting.

The schedules F? and PF are the reaction functions and A is the initial
equilibrium.

An appreciation wili shift the foreign reaction function up and to
the left. the magnitude of the shift at constant relative prices (e.g. along
the ray OR) is proportional to the appreciation, Thus AB/BO represents the
percentage appreciation. The new equilibrium is therefore at A'. Note that
this equilibrium at A' differs from the Dixit—Stiglitz one and resembles

more nearly the Cournot model. Foreign firms reduce their price
proportionally less than the reduction in dollar unit labor costs and home
firms cut their price. But at A' the relative price of domestic products has
increased relative to A as can be seen by the slope of a ray through A'
compared to OR.

Competition on the Circle:

We conclude the discussion of masnufactures prices with a sketch of
a third model of pricing for differentiated products. In the Dixit—Stiglitz
model consumers buy some of each brand of a product. Applied to toothpaste
that is an implausible model; we should look for an alternative model where
consumers buy only one brand. A particuiarly manageable version is the Salop
(1978) model where consumers' tastes (defined by preferences for the

attributes or characteristics of goods) are uniformly spread over the unit
circle. Since domestic and foreign firms have potentially different costs, a
symmetric equilibrium does not necessarily exist. We simplify matters by

p1

11*

/

/

H

/

0

pi

/

A

A
II

//

14*

V
0
p1

Figure 4

The Extended Dixit-Stiglita Model

21

assuming that there is an even number of firms and that domestic and foreign
firms alternate along the circle and that each consumers buys a unit from
one or the other of the firms adjacent to his preferred location.
Producers have constant unit labor costs and other than entry costs
there are no fixed costs. With these assumptions we can derive equilibrium
prices and study the impact of dollar cost changes for foreign suppliers.
Each consuner is located at a point on the circle. The significance of the
location on the circle is that firms may not supply precisely the most

preferred product and that accordingly the consumer is forced to chose
between the alternatives offered by the most adjacently located brands.
Following Salop consumer surplus derived from buying a good that is a
distance x Iron the best location (on the circle) depends on the price and
on the distance and the relationship is assumed linear:

121)

h = v—cx—p

where v is a constant. c denotes the utility cost per unit distance from the
best location and p is the price of a particular firm. Consumers will be
indifferent between the brands offered by two conpeting firms on either side

of their preferred location if the consumer surplus is the same, h. =

h.

Taking the case of n firms that are equally spaced on the circle the
condition for indifference between a domestic and a foreign supplier is:

(22)

v —

cx

-

v—cO/n

—

x)

—p

22

Hence the distance served by a foreign fir, is an increasing function of the
price charged by domestic firms and a declining function of its own price.

(22a)

(p+c/n—p')/2c

x =

Profits for the foreign firm are equal to 2Lx times the excess of price over
marginal cost:

=

(23)

(p*_ew*)2L(p.c/n_p*)/2c

where L denotes the total number of consumers and hence L also represents
the density per unit distance served by the fir,. Since the firm serves both
sides of its location 2Lx is the total number of units sold. Maximization
taking domestic price as given yields the foreign reaction function:

(24)

pt= (p. c/n +

ew*)/2

The typical domestic firm's reaction function is derived in the same manner:

(25)

p

(pt +

c/fl

+

w)/2

From (24) and (25) we obtain the solution for the prices charged by home and
foreign firms:

(26)

p =

c/n

'-(ew •2w)/3

pt

c/n + (2ew*

-w)/3

23

From (26) we can calculate the elasticity of prices with respect to
the exchange rate.

(27)

=

(l/3)(ew/p)

id =

(2/3)(ew*/p*)

Note that these elasticities, once again are fractions. If wages and hence

prices are initially equal. wep, the elasticities simplify to the
following expressions:

(27a)

= Y/3

w'= 2y/3

fl 11(1+ c/nw)

The elasticities show that the relative price of imported goods declines and
that the change in the relative price 1/3 is smaller the smaller the number
of firms in the industry and the lower the substitutability as measured by
the term c. Along with the change in relative prices there will be a shift
in demand from hone firms to foreign firms as consumers tradeoff the

reduction in price for a larger distance iron their most preferred brand
location

9At this point it is worth commenting on the properties of the
equilibrium when there is not an alternating pattern between domestic
and foreign firms. Specifically suppose that there are five firms, two
domestic and three adjacent foreign firms. It is apparent that the
middle foreign firm competes only with foreign firms and hence will
cut its price more than the outlying foreign firms that compete with
home firms which have not experienced a cost reduction. Hence there
will be three prices.

24

The same model can be applied to the foreign market. In terms of
foreign exchange the prices will rise and the relative price of our export

brands abroad will rise. But because it rises proportionally less than the
currency appreciates, the export price in dollars changes in the proportion:

(28)

laY =

I

—

2YI3

1'

= 1/(Ic/n*w)

where n is the total number of firms serving the foreign marketwe can
therefore find the change In the relative price of domestic exports in terms
of imports and in terms of home brands:

(29)

&ou=

1—

2(T+Y)/3

1 —

2y/3

-1/3

The first point to note is that export prices may rise or fall in
terms of import prices as a result of appreciation. But the fewer the number
of firms in each country, the more likely that an appreciation leads to a
fall in the relative price of exports. By contrast as the number of firms

increases (and hence y and Y tend to unity) the relative price of exports
must rise, reflecting the increase in the relative unit labor cost at home
which sets competitive relative prices.

The second point is that export prices may decline relative to
domestic prices as a result of an appreciation. This must be the case if the

number of firms in the two markets is the same (y*) As the number of
firms Increases the relative price tends to remain unchanged. This result

25

arises because price gets competed down to marginal cost which is the same w
for home and export production. It is apparent fro. (29) that the change in
the relative price in terms of laportables will always be larger than that
in terms of domestic goods.

Summary: We have now seen common features of a number of models: they all
predict that appreciation should lead to a decline in the price of imports.
In the case of homogeneous goods domestic firms, of course, fuliy match the
decline in price. If products are differentiated it will always be the case
that the relative price of the imported brands declines in response to an
appreciation. The extent of the decline depends on a measure of competition
and on the relative number of home and foreign firms.
The empirically testable hypotheses concern price—marginal cost
mark—ups and the behavior of relative prices. For differentiated products it
is always the case that export and domestic prices will stay closer in line
than import and domestic prices. In the Dixit—Stiglitz model imports fall in
terms of domestic goods and the relative price of exports goods stays
unchanged in terms of hone goods. In other models the export price can in
principle even decline in terms of imports.

Some Evidence: Econometric testing of the hypotheses is unfortunately
precluded by the absence of a comprehensive matched data set of export.

import and domestic prices. The BLS does now publish transactions prices
for exports and imports that are disaggregated to the 4—digit levei and

classified on the SIC basis. But few of the series go back beyond the early

26

iRROs. Where they do the revisions of the SIC—based U.S. producer prices
in most cases are either not at all available yet or only go back very few

years. A complete overlap between export, import, and domestic prices for
more than two years apparently only exists for fewer than a handful of cases
and overlap between any two series is limited to less than a dozen.
At a more informal level there are intersting patterns to observe.
First consider a comparison of U.S. export prices in dollars with those of

Germany and Japan. Table 3 shows the percentage loss in U.S.
competitiveness over the period 1980:IV to 1984:1'.' using as a sample all

available data at a highly disaggregated level.

In the U.S—Germany

the U.S—Japan

comparison there are 36 different matched time series, in

comparison there are 20. Typical items in the list of commodities are
gears and gear units or 'household electrical space heating".

Table 3 changes in Relative Prices: U.S. Versus Germany and Japan
(Percentage Change in Relative Export Prices:1980:IV—1984:IV)

U.S-Germany
Mean
Standard Deviation

ILS.-iapan

39.3

24.9

6.1

8.3

Source;BLS, unpublished data

The data do not allow us to tell whether these are prices of the
same products sold in the sajie third market (say France) or whether they

represent exports to different markets (say U.S. sales to France and German
sales in the U.S.). Accordingly we cannot tell from these data whether they

reflect market segmentation or imperfect substitution. They are consistent

27

with markets being segmented but goods being perfect substitutes and having

a common price in the same market independent of supply source. But they
are also consistent with markets being integrated —— a common world market
——

but goods being imperfect substitutes so that the relative price of

different suppliers can change.

Consider next a comparison of the transactions prices of U.S.

exports and U.S. imports in the same commodity group. There is simply
overwhelming evidence that virtually without exception the dollar

appreciation of the past 5 years has been accompanied by an increase in the

price of exports relative to imports. Evidence in this direction comes from
export—import price comparisons at the more narrow 2— and 4—digit level. An
example is provided in Table 4 which shows data for two 2—digit industries.

Table 4

Cumulative Inflation: 1980:IV—1925:t
Export Prices

Import Prices

Non—electrical Machinery

18.0

—10.1

Scientific Instruments

18.0

—13.4

Source: BLS. unpublished data

Pigure 5 shows the ratio of export prices to import prices for
telecommunications equipment and for non—electrical machninery. The figure
also show the index of the nominal dollar exchange rate index. The dollar
appreciation since 1980 gives rise to an increase in the relative price of
exports in terms of imparts. Table 5 sho's indices of the relative exportimport price for all series where comparable SIC data exist. The same

pattern would be obtained by comparing CS. to German and Japanese export

Table

The Ratio Export to Import Prices
(Index 1990t1 .1001
2011

301

79,4

lOS

103

81i4

308

105

85:1

126

104

353

356

£00

95

96

112

itO

119

121

106

115

108

131

135

152

143

ItO

152

136

35

3569

3643

357

38
92

91

Notti The heidings are SIC codes

Figure 6 The Ratio of Export to Domestic Prices
(Index 1980:4 =100)
3555

3674

3533

3523

3519

3494

2011

3537

79:4

101

101

109

99

99

103

99

110

97

81:4

100

104

91

100

100

103

103

93

79

05:1

95

107

93

too

102

105

108

108

100

Note: The he&dings Ire SIC codes

Table 7 The Ratio of Import to Domestic Prices
(index 1980:4 • 100)
3651

3143

3531

2435

na

96

98

120

105

92

100

95

90

114

90

92

08

76

102

2311

2033

7914

100

108

81:4

101

85:1

110

Notet The headings are SIC codes

2011

3312

3313

lOt

88

92

98

88

85

84

74

28

prices in these individual commodity groups. The first finding then is that
across industries, virtually without exception, export prices have increased
relative to import prices. This is true at the level of individial
commodities but also. as we saw at the outset of the paper in Table 2. for
aggregate export and import unit values.
This result would obtain strictly only in the Dixit—Stiglitz model.
In the other formulations it is a possibility though it need not occur.
Tables 6 and 7 iook at the relative price of exports and imports in terms of
domestic goods. Export prices change little relative to domestic prices.
even though there is no clear pattern of decline in all industries. By
contrast most import prices decline in terms of domestic goods.But the order
of magnitude of the decline remains relatively small compared to the change
in relative unit labor costs, With a change in relative unit labor costs of
more than 40 percent the decline in the relative price is in most cases less
than 20 percent. That is not at all out of line with the theory once some
degree of "pricing to the American market" is taking into account, just as
the price setting models above suggest. It is worth noting that at the
retail level this effect would obtain even more strongly. The reason is that
here distribution costs come intop play so that even with the full pass—
through of cost reductions on imported goods the proportional decline in the
price of imported goods would be much less than the exchange rate
appreciation.

5. Concluding Remarks

29

The models reviewed in this paper focus on a relatively short time
perspective. The wage rate is assumed not to react to changes in output and
profitability and the number and location of firms in an industry is
unaffected. These assumptions are plausible in the short term, but it is
clear that a sustained real appreciation will ultimately showe its effects
in wage cuts in those industries where the loss in competitiveness causes
unemployment and wage increases in the expanding sectors. Firms will close
in high wage areas and entry into an industry will take place in areas where
labor costs are low. These longer term adjustments are also part of the

macroeconomics of adjustment to exchange rate movements. It is clear from
the analysis offered here that also for these issues a microeconomic

pe:spective will be helpful. In particular it will be interesting to see how
pricing decisions are affected by entry and relocation possibilities at an
international level and by the anticipated persistence of disequilibrium
exchange rates.

30

REFERENCES

Aizenman, J. (1984) "Test$ng Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity
(PPPL' NBER Working Paper No. 1475.

_________ (1985)

Monopolistic Competition and Deviations from PPP"

Unpublished manuscript. University of Chicago.

Blanchard. 0. (1985) "Monopolistic Competition. Small Menu Costs, and Real

Effects of Nominal Money." Unpublished manuscript, MIT

Dixit, A. (1984) "International Trade Policy for Oligopolistic Industries,'
Economic Journal, Supplement.

________ and Stiglitz, J. (1977) "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
Product Diversity, "American Economic Review, June.

Dornbusch. R. (1983) Flexible Exchange Rates and Interdependence" IMF Staff
Papers. March.

________ (1984)"Macroeconomic Linkages between LDC's and the OECD
Countries", unpublished manuscript presented at a World Bank Conference.

_________ (1985) "Purchasing Power Parity" NBER Working Paper No. 1591

31

Giovannini, A. (1985) "Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices' Unpublished
manuscript. Columbia University

Hart, 0. (1982) "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features.
Quarteriy Journal of Economics. February

Helpman, E. and P. Krugman (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT
Press

I. and R. Lipsey (1977) "Price

Kravis,

Behavior in the Light of Balance of

Payments Theories Journal of International Economics. May
____________ (1984) "Prices and Terms of Trade for Developed Country Exports

of

Manufactured

Goods,"

in Csikos—Nagy. B. et al

(eds.) The Economics of

Relative Prices, Saint Martin's Press, New York, 1984

Mankiw, G. (1985) "Small Menu Costs and

Large Business Cycles: A

Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly." Quarterly Journal of

Sachs,

J. (1985) "The Dollar and the Policy Mix 1985'

_______ and

External

Economics. May.

Brookirigs Papers, I.

W. McKibbin (1984) "Macroeconomic Policies in the OECD and LDC's

Adjustment.

Unpublished manuscript presented at a World Bank

Conference

32

32

Salop,S41979) 'Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods.'The Bell
Journal of Economics, Vol. 10. Spring.

