NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ORGANIZATION OF DISASTER AID DELIVERY:
SPENDING YOUR DONATIONS
J. Vernon Henderson
Yong Suk Lee
Working Paper 17707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17707

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation (SES 0416840) and the
National Institute of Health (R01 HD057188). We thank Ari Kuncoro, Ifa Isfandiarni, Zakir Machmud,
and Hamdan Bintra of the University of Indonesia for their efforts in supervision of the survey. Shiva
Koohi contributed excellent research assistance, as did Tiago Freire and Manabu Nose in earlier stages
of the project. The work in early stages benefited from helpful comments by seminar participants at
LSE, Berkeley, and Minnesota. We thank Andrew Foster and Ross Levine for helpful comments on
a draft version of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by J. Vernon Henderson and Yong Suk Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Organization of Disaster Aid Delivery: Spending Your Donations
J. Vernon Henderson and Yong Suk Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 17707
December 2011
JEL No. F35,H4,H5,H84,L2,L3
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes how different organizational structures between funding and implementing agencies
affect the quality of aid delivered and social agendas pursued across neighboring villages in a set disaster
context. We model the implied objective functions and trade-offs concerning aid quality, aid quantity,
and social agendas of different types of agencies. We analyze three waves of survey data on fishermen
and fishing villages in Aceh, Indonesia from 2005-2009, following the tsunami. Different organizational
structures result in significantly different qualities of hard aid, differential willingness to share aid
delivery with other NGOs in a village, and differential promotion of public good objectives and maintenance
of village religious and occupational traditions. This is the first time these aspects have been modeled
and quantified in the literature. Some well known international NGOs delivered housing with relatively
low rates of reported faults such as leaky roofs and cracked walls; others had relatively high rates.
For boats, some had very high rates of boat “failure”, boats that sank upon launch, were not seaworthy,
or fell apart within a month or two. We also document how a social agenda of particular agencies to
promote greater equality can be thwarted and distorted by village leaders, potentially increasing inequality.

J. Vernon Henderson
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
j_henderson@brown.edu
Yong Suk Lee
Dept. of Economics
Brown University
Providence RI 0291
yong_suk_lee@brown.edu

I. Introduction
Extreme disasters catch the public eye, often resulting in massive infusions of aid that affect not just
individual well being but the fabric of societies. We examine aid delivery in Aceh Indonesia, following
the tsunami at the end of 2004. The tsunami devastated coastal villages in Aceh Indonesia, wiping out
almost all physical capital and large proportions of the population. The international response was huge.
For the affected areas, aid gave 134,000 houses for 120,000 houses destroyed (Xinhua News Service,
February 1, 2009); and all forms of aid totaled 7.7 billion USD (Brookings, 2008), with aid officially
completed in just over 4 years.1
How do we evaluate the efficacy of aid delivery -- what aid agencies do a better job in delivering
higher quality housing or boats, or in attainment of certain social objectives? In examining aid delivery,
the traditional aid literature focuses on the perspective of a generic donor country dealing with recipients,
asking how conditionality and local buy-in affect efficacy of delivery and how delivery affects village
functioning. This paper takes a new perspective. Disaster relief projects involve multiple parties in
different organizational configurations delivering in-kind aid, where each party has distinct objectives.
Name brand NGOs raise money from the public for general purposes and specific causes such as
alleviating the devastation from a particular natural disaster. These NGOs then act as donor agencies
funding aid delivery, or implementation on the ground in devastated areas, along with foreign and
domestic government ministries and agencies who also donate. We examine how the organizational
structure of the way in which donors deliver aid through implementers has a profound impact on the
quality of aid delivered and attainment of a variety of social objectives. This aspect has not been
recognized in the literature.
To understand outcomes we model and analyze how implementers behave. We distinguish four
organizational structures by implementation method and give the labels we use for them in the paper: (1)
donor-implementers who are NGO donors who do their own implementation in villages, (2) international
implementers who represent different donors who choose not to do their own implementation, (3)
domestic implementers hired by donors which have chosen neither to do their own implementation nor to
hire an international implementer, and (4) a country level governmental organization, in this case BRR
[Executing Agency for the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Aceh and Nias] used primarily by
domestic and foreign governments. While we focus on these organization structures for implementation,
the choice of implementation method will tell about what donor agencies value in aid delivery.
Donor-implementers are major NGOs with international reputations and sometimes associated
social agendas, where there is no principal-agent problem in aid delivery between donors and
1

When the official aid process ended in April 16, 2009, there was $250m “left over” (Jakarta Globe March 2, 2009),
although some committed funds for transport infrastructure were still in process.

2

implementers. While international implementers operate in an agency relationship with donors, they may
themselves have strong quality preferences, as well as international reputations to maintain with an eye to
fund raising and being hired by other donors in the future. The largest international implementer in our
sample is Habitat for Humanity (Indonesia), which in Aceh represented a consortium of donors including
Mercy Corps, Plan International, and Fidelity Investment. Habitat for Humanity’s well-known mission is
to work with communities in building quality housing. Domestic implementers are a heterogeneous group
of some established agencies and those that arose only following the tsunami. They have no international
reputation to maintain and many were short-lived, presenting obvious principal-agent and reputational
problems in aid delivery. However, they tend to be more knowledgeable about local culture and better
able to access local political and social networks. As such they may be more responsive to village social
needs as defined by villagers. Finally, BRR was effectively a short-lived domestic implementer spending
Indonesian government monies and monies from the multi-donor fund, typically governments of other
countries. BRR was disbanded in 2009 as planned.
Briefly, what do we find? We focus on construction quality for the main form of hard aid,
housing. BRR is the benchmark. It is the worst quality housing provider operating on a limited scale in
many villages, with an aversion to operating in villages away from the capital. Its houses often financed
through foreign country donations have leaky roofs, cracked walls and poor foundations. In contrast,
donor-implementers offer high quality aid. They tend to completely dominate housing provision in
villages where they operate. When not successful in complete domination, they appear to reduce aid
quality according to the extent of deterioration of domination. Donor-implementers operate not just to
provide housing but to pursue their own social agendas, which require a dominating presence in a village.
International implementers despite their potential agency problem offer almost as high quality aid as
donor-implementers; and they do not shade quality in the many villages where they supply limited
amounts. It seems their goal is just to provide good quality housing to all comers. Domestic implementers
with both agency problems and lack of reputational incentives offer low quality aid like BRR. However
like donor-implementers they tend to dominate provision in villages where they operate. Their villages
have better non-housing outcomes than other implementer types, in terms of public good aid and
preservation of village traditions, which may explain why some donors hire them despite their low quality
housing. Finally using the example of boat aid, we illustrate how substantial portions of aid can be
completely wasted and how specific outside social agendas of NGOs can be thwarted or even perverted if
the agenda is one village elites don’t like. Overturning socio-economic order and conventions by agencies
present for a short period of time seems simply unrealistic.
In analyzing the link between aid quality delivered to villages and organizational set-up, the
allocation of implementation types obviously was not experimentally randomized across villages.
3

Although the aid literature has moved in the direction of utilizing randomized experiments involving
monetary or in-kind allocations to individuals where implementation is strictly controlled, it is hard to
imagine conducting randomized experiments in major disaster situations, especially on organizational
structure of NGOs. Nonetheless, we believe that the variation of implementer types across villages was
essentially randomized and that our results on aid quality and village life are due to the agencies that
landed on the village and not because of unobserved village characteristics. Aid in Aceh was massive,
immediate, and largely uncoordinated, in a region where foreign NGOs had no prior operations, regional
maps of villages post-tsunami were highly inaccurate (Appendix 1), and centralized information on
village characteristics almost non-existent. Which agencies ended up in which villages was a
decentralized process with little effective oversight by BRR.
As an example, immediately after the tsunami, a young university lecturer from a traditional
family in a village near Banda Aceh simply happened to meet French government officials in the course
of his work who offered to “adopt” his village; he said yes. More generally, agencies would simply show
up in a villages guided by locals helping in the immediate post-tsunami clean-up process, offering to
adopt those villages, accepted on a first come first serve basis. Sometimes a village would accept an
adopting agency and then the agency would never follow through. For more remote villages, BRR later
offered information saying which villages they thought were yet to be served based on their limited
knowledge. We note BRR did not start effective operation until more than six months after the tsunami,
well after many agencies had already started the aid process; and it was 2-3 years before some agencies
reported on their operations to BRR (e.g. the Canadian Red Cross). As evidence backing up what we
learned from fieldwork, a multinomial logit regression reported on below supports the notion that the
allocation of implementer types across villages was essentially random with respect to internal village
characteristics. Villages with higher versus or lower rates of survival or higher or lower levels of
measures of pre-tsunami social capital were not matched to implementers delivering better quality aid.
However, even if there was some degree of matching, that per se does not affect our basic
conclusions presented later. The more critical question for causality of implementer effects is whether
certain types of villages were able to induce better quality aid out of the same implementer, compared to
other villages. If so, part of our implementer-type effects would really be village influences. Later, we
will find that all village characteristic variables have no effect on aid quality, conditional on
organizational type. In fact, implementer-type effects are uninfluenced by whatever set of village
characteristics and sub-district fixed effects we include in the analyses. Individual agency policies drive
the quality of aid delivered.
As far as we know, this is the first paper to analyze the micro behavior and implied objectives of
different types of aid agencies operating in a major aid relief context, with a focus on how organization
4

set-ups themselves have profound impacts. There is a large literature on the efficacy of aid and best ways
to deliver aid including conditionality and agency questions (Collier et al. 1997, Azam and Laffont 2003,
Svennson 2003, and Murrell 2002), strategic considerations (the Samaritan’s dilemma in Pederson 2001
and Torsvik 2005), co-ordination across agencies, village “ownership” of the process and the like (e.g.,
Kanbur and Sandler 1999, Easterly 2003, and Paul 2006). While agency issues are central to our analysis,
much of this literature bears only indirectly on this paper. Unlike ODAs (Official Development
Assistance) or planned NGO aid projects, disaster aid is mostly unconditional and largely uncoordinated
as was the case in Aceh after the tsunami. In Aceh, lack of conditionality was driven in part by the huge
number of NGOs “competing” to deliver aid, in a context with little co-ordination. The government
agency overseeing the process, BRR, defined its role not as coordinating aid but as a clearing house
recording aid and filling in ex post gaps in the process.
Empirically, the literature on large scale aid mostly utilizes country level aid data (Alesina and
Dollar 2000, Burnside and Dollar 2000) or aspects of cross-country project data (Svensson 2003, Wane
2004), rather than micro-data. Wane’s working paper does look at aid quality but focuses on the
relationship between aid quality and a country’s degree of accountability, rather than aid agency
accountability. This paper also relates to the economics literature on NGOs or not-for-profit firms, which
focuses mostly on hospitals and schools and how those institutions perform and interact in the market
(Newhouse 1970, Epple and Romano 1998, Malani et al., 2003). We add to this literature by examining
the behavior of humanitarian aid agencies and the quality of delivered objectives.2
The next section describes how agencies are categorized and present descriptive patterns by
implementer type. Section 3 presents a model of aid agency behavior within villages. Section 4 analyzes
house aid delivery and Section 5 examines social agendas.

II. The context and descriptive patterns by implementer type
II.1 The context
The work is based on extensive fieldwork carried out in early 2005 after the tsunami and then again in
2007 and 2009. We surveyed village heads and local heads of the fishermen’s association (Panglima
Laot) in those years and now cover 199 fishing villages, which are intended to be the universe of fishing
villages in 31 sub-districts as one moves north (-east) and south from Banda Aceh, the capital (see
Appendix 1). We also surveyed fishing families in those years, now following a panel of about 635
fishing families in 90 of those villages. In addition we have official government and international records.
Relevant aspects of the surveys, a map and the main variables used are presented in the Data Appendix.
2

Also, there are studies that examine how the salience of disasters affects donation (Stromberg 2007) and how
disasters affect household health, education, and risk management (Skoufias 2003, Townsend 1994).

5

Being fishing villages, our villages were the most devastated by the tsunami, with almost all
buildings, public works, boats and roads destroyed. Our villages account for about 30% of all house aid
delivered in Aceh, with much of the balance delivered in Banda Aceh. Table 1 presents an overview of
destruction in our villages, using official numbers on pre and post-tsunami populations and household
counts to increase coverage. 3 Table 1 gives summary statistics for the 190 villages where we have
complete information for both 2007 and 2009. Our survey counts of houses and public buildings pre and
post-tsunami are fairly accurate since what was destroyed is well recorded by the physical presence of
remaining foundations, as well as village mapping exercises conducted soon after the tsunami. Boats are
another matter since there is no written record of pre-tsunami boats nor physical evidence of what was
destroyed. In 2007 villages tend to heavily exaggerate boats lost. We only report on villages surveyed in
2005, where we record boat, captain, and owner survival status.
Destruction is massive. In 104 villages around Banda Aceh surveyed in 2005, under 50% of the
population survived; in the expanded set more survived as added villages experienced a weaker wave
force. The destruction of physical capital in the overall sample is almost universal, given both the
earthquake that created the tsunami and the wave following 20-30 minutes later. Mean survival rate of
houses for the overall sample is 9% and that of public building is lower at 6%, noting that many public
buildings such as mosques and fisherman halls are built on the waterfront. The survival rate of boats,
based on ’05 survey numbers, is under 6%.
The immediacy and extent of aid are impressive. As Table 1 illustrates, 117% of “needed” houses
were replaced by late 2007; need is the number of surviving households less the number of houses that
survived. Similarly, for boats the ratio of boats in the water in 2007 to surviving captains recorded in
2005 is 105%. Finally, 80% of destroyed public buildings have been replaced by 2007 even with the
significant drop in village populations. Overall the picture is that by late 2007, the massive aid process
had accomplished what it intended—to replace the entire per household physical capital stock. Yet, given
the massive aid there was money left to spend. More public buildings trickled in between 2007 and 2009,
although almost no boats. For public buildings by late 2009 the replacement rate was 96%. House aid
continued with an eventual replacement rate of 145% which was accompanied by new household
formation or splintering of extended families, with each part of the family getting their own house. In
modeling, this will motivate the notion of excess provision.

3

We believe our survey numbers for 111 villages in 2005 are more accurate in portraying pre and post tsunami
village populations than official numbers for reasons detailed in Freire, Henderson, and Kuncoro (2011). Official
numbers seem to modestly undercount surviving populations. Survey numbers for the 88 added villages in 2007 on
pre and post tsunami populations suffer from the fact that by then most village heads had been replaced. As such,
recollections on pre-tsunami numbers were noisy. Also, later reporting on post tsunami households was subject to
manipulation to increase aid allotments.

6

We note that aid agencies tend to specialize. Those providing public buildings, doing official
mapping and planning, and providing boats tend to differ from house agencies. As we will see, in most
villages one NGO provides the majority of housing. Public buildings were disproportionately provided by
BRR — about 38% of 642 public buildings are from BRR (compared to 18% of houses). An Australian
organization, APRID, built 51 of 121 new village halls and PLAN built 11 of 111 new health facilities.
Neither provides housing. Nonetheless, housing NGOs exhibit the largest and by far most sustained
presence in villages, often need to coordinate with other providers, and may influence work by other
NGOs, as discussed later.
II.2 Types of housing agencies and the allocation of implementer types to villages
Each village names the main aid agencies delivering housing and other forms of hard aid. For housing
usually only 1 or 2 agencies are involved in a village, with occasionally there being a 3rd. We map each
named agency into one of the four types of implementers (and hence types of implementation), where
typing is done based on information on donors and implementers in the “RAN” [Recovery Aceh-Nias]
database,4 a database set up by the Indonesian government working with the UN which recorded aid
delivery aspects in Aceh. Details about this mapping are in the Appendix.
As discussed in the introduction, the allocation of implementer types across villages seems
essentially random with respect to internal village characteristics. Table 2 looks at the match between the
housing implementer type and village characteristics. Since some villages have more than one housing aid
project the number of observations is greater than the number of villages. We report the marginal effects
from a multinomial logit regression, looking at the probability of a village getting a particular
implementer type for a project, for each of the four types. There are 6 key covariates we use in all
estimations, 5 of which depict internal village characteristics, with the 6th being distance to Banda Aceh.
Later we detail our choice of key covariates and the use of different types of fixed effects. To the
covariates in Table 2 if we add 4 district (kabupaten) fixed effects, all 40 marginal effects (including
those for fixed effects) are insignificant but one. However, district fixed effects mask a distance effect
evident from Table 2: domestic agencies and BRR appear to have an aversion to operating in more remote
locations, and tended to leave that to the international agencies. We don’t see that as a match affecting our
later aid quality results conditional on agency type; in fact any bias in finding better quality for
international agencies would be that distance makes quality more expensive. But the aversion (which was
also clear from fieldwork) is of interest itself.
With respect to internal village characteristics, the issue is whether villages with measured
characteristics such as more devastation or higher levels of pre-tsunami social capital get better agencies.
If so, that might suggest there are also potentially unobservables affecting match as well. For this first
4

http://rand.brr.go.id/RAND/

7

issue, villages with a pre-tsunami arisan group are 18% more likely to get a donor-implementer, relative
to other implementer types. As explained later arisan groups are rotating saving and credit associations
(RoSCA). It could be that villages with arisan groups have environments of greater social capital
appealing to donor-implementers, or it could be that the finding of 1 significant effect out of 20 (nondistance) covariates is spurious. The more major question is that, even if there is some degree of matching,
are then certain villages able to influence better (or worse) agencies to get even better quality aid. Later
we see that as far as we can tell the answer is no.
II.3 Housing aid and quality
These four types of implementers operate differently across villages and deliver different qualities of aid.
We show some patterns in the raw data. Table 3 compares the scale of housing aid operation by
implementer type across the 199 villages, with individual numbers for the 8 largest housing providers in
our sample. Each village has 1 to 3 housing projects led by different agencies. Table 3 reports some
numbers at the project level and some at the village level. House aid tends to be given mostly by one
agency in any village. 5 Apart from numbers in the table, only 14% of all village-implementer projects
involve a third project in a village; and, in about in 46% of all villages, over 90% of housing comes from
one agency.
BRR is the largest single provider, using multi-donor and government monies. It is involved in
many villages with a small number of houses per village, with a relatively high fraction of occurrences
where its provision is minimal (under 15% of total house aid), and a small fraction where it is the almost
sole provider (over 90%). Donor-implementers provide a sharp contrast. Their provision is much more
focused: they are sole providers in a high fraction of villages and are minimal providers in only a few
villages they are present in. Overall, donor-implementers are dominant [almost sole] providers in 80%
[43%] of villages where they are present, compared to 45% [16%] for domestic implementers, 34%
[14%] for international implementers and 34% [17%] for BRR. The Canadian and British Red Cross’s
stand out as dominant providers; for the Canadian Red Cross, in 8 of its 11 villages it is literally the only
provider. Domestic implementers compared to international (non-donor) ones have a greater relative
presence in villages, with somewhat more houses per village and modestly greater likelihood of being the
dominant agency. This occurs despite their greater within group heterogeneity; we identified 28 different
domestic implementers delivering housing in our villages compared to 12 international ones.
How does house aid quality differ by implementer type? We report on two rankings here. First for
each housing aid project in a village, the village head was asked to rate the quality of construction in
terms of the likelihood of “leaky roofs, cracked walls, faulty plumbing, and mould” with 3 categories: (i)
5

While BRR is a specific agency, other numbers are for group types. For group-types, different agencies of the
same type may appear in the same village. For example, if two different donor-implementers appear in a village,
although that is just one village where any donor-implementer appears, it counts as two donor-implementer projects.

8

high (all houses well built) (ii) medium (some well built and some not) and (iii) low (most not). A high
rating is a 3, medium 2, and low 1. In the survey, we distinguished early and later batches for each
agency. Ratings are generally the same for both batches, but if not we average the ratings, so in fact for
each project our scale can be 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, or 3. For each type of implementer we calculate the average
ranking over all projects. Most projects get a 3, so this is a coarse measure. Second, individual fisherman
list house faults: leaky roof, cracked walls, poor foundation, or faulty plumbing, so each fisherman can
list 0-4 faults in his house. We average across fishing families served by each type of implementer to
obtain another ranking by average number of faults.
Figure 1 shows these two rankings. While the averages are not significantly different, they point
to patterns that in econometric work will be significant. BRR is the worst ranked by both village heads
and individual fishermen. Donor-implementers offer the highest quality housing as rated by village heads,
and correspondingly have the fewest counts of faults as reported by fishermen, reflecting what we believe
to be their greater ability to deal with moral hazard issues. For international implementers the evidence is
more mixed. Village level data suggests they have a relatively good record for house quality construction,
but the averaged fisherman data suggest their number of faults is the same as domestic implementers. In
the econometric results international implementers will score better than domestic ones as rated by
fishermen but only weakly so.
Table 4 gives detailed data on individual agencies providing housing in our villages. Here we list
all agencies that operate in two or more villages. Those who operate in only one village are listed in
Appendix 2. We list implementers by name; readers may want to check out their favorite recipients for
donations. We list implementer type as they operate in Aceh, number of houses provided, number of
villages involved, and average ratings by the village head. For international and domestic implementers,
we list in brackets the donor agencies often associated with the implementing agency. Some village heads
report the funding agency but not the domestic-implementer working on the ground. In this case, we list
the funding agency associated with the anonymous domestic implementer. For the limited number of
villages where fishermen report in the sample, we also list the average count of faults associated with the
relevant implementer type. Given village heads’ rather positive overall assessment, we think an average
rating near or below 2.5 isn’t good and ratings at 2 or below are bad. Clearly, most domestic
implementers as well as BRR have relatively low village head ratings and higher counts of faults, but
some international agencies do as well. For counts of faults, there is a sharp divide with international
agencies scoring below 1 and domestic ones over 1 in general.
II.4 Socio-economic agendas
A second aspect of aid delivery concerns socio-economic agendas. Today, aid agencies tend to have a
loftier objective of “sustainable development”, beyond just hard aid delivery. This is reflected in mission
9

statements on NGO websites that talk about (italics added) “sustainable development”, “long term
rehabilitation”, “continue to stay long after the emergency is over, working with communities to rebuild
their lives…”, or “help restore and strengthen their pre-disaster capacities”. 6 However in some cases
lurking behind these code-words are socio-political-religious agendas that are intended to influence
village way of life and social institutions. These are reflected in statements (italics added) about having
“decent communities in which people…can grow into all that God intended”7 and “addressing structural
causes of poverty and related injustice”8.
Some international agencies that arrived in Aceh in 2005 intended to implement social agendas,
through “adoption” of specific villages whereby they would provide all aid in the village, as noted in the
Introduction. As an example, in early June 2005 we interviewed British Red Cross officials in Banda
Aceh, who were operating an intensive training program for their field workers. They were planning for
their then four adopted and remote fishing villages. Apart from planning delivery of hard aid, they
articulated goals of both modernization and social reform. Modernization involved community planning,
registering all lands for formal title, requiring villagers to carry retinal scan ID’s (despite a lack of use for
such ID’s) and learning how to operate ATM’s despite the local absence of bank accounts or ATM’s. On
social reform, one intention was to provide just enough money to villagers so that they could only acquire
a motorized boat through joint ownership, as opposed to the traditional form of sole ownership with crew.
They wanted villagers to formally contract with potential partners and for all boats to be jointly owned.
More generally, adoption in 2005 was also very much in the vocabulary of village heads. Two years later
the idea of strict adoption was muted. Given the massive aid relief, by 2007 villages faced many
alternative donors. Delivery of aid had become specialized as noted above, with different NGOs
delivering different kinds of hard aid. However, housing aid agencies were necessarily involved in village
planning (lay-out, road access, water delivery, etc.) and had a sustained presence in the village during
construction. With such a presence in villages, housing aid agencies could still pursue certain social
agendas for specific villages.
A specifically defined socio-economic agenda in our data concerns boat aid, with the imposition
of shared ownership and its relation to the quality of boat aid. We first note a feature of aid boats: their
poor quality. Many boats were too light-weight or improperly designed for use on the open ocean, sank

6

The respective websites for these quotes are
http://www.wvi.org/wvi/wviweb.nsf/maindocs/7A0A54FD44BC11C38825737500737C8A?opendocument
http://www.gitec-consult.com/TheCompany.htm,
http://www.redcross.ca/article.asp?id=11724&tid=001,
http://www.redcross.org.uk/What-we-do/Emergency-response/International-emergency-response, and
http://crs.org/emergency.
7
http://www.crwrc.org/pages/crwrc_international relief.cfm.
8
http://www.oxfam.org/en/about/what/mission.

,

10

upon first launching due to bad design, or were poorly constructed so as to leak (green wood) or fall apart
within a few months. For boats, we look just at this stark dimension of quality: failure rates where boats
are unusable for fishing within a short space. We believe about 35% of aid boats failed within two years,
an incredible waste of aid. By 2007 just after most boats had been given, the overall abandonment rate
was already about 22% in our villages. Many of these were clearly unusable for fishing at time of delivery
and were not assigned to fishermen.
From that village level data in 2007, Table 5 provides a list of individual agencies operating in 2
or more villages with Appendix 2 listing those operating in just one village. The table gives the number of
boats in aid, villages, and the initial failure rate. We cannot identify implementer type for boats, because
many boat agencies are not reported in the RAN database. Hence, we do not report implementer type in
the table but will later utilize the few NGOs that can be typed as boat donor-implementers in the empirical
work. Clearly NGOs like Oxfam, International Medical Corps, and certain foreign governments like
France, Kuwait, and the Japan International Cooperation Agency have appalling records of boat failure.
After 2007, some initially usable boats fell apart within a year, where minimal boat life even with heavy
ocean pounding is expected to be 5 years.
For the boats which were assigned to fishermen, Figure 2 illustrates the agenda of shared
ownership and boat aid quality, using individual fishermen data. Some of these boats failed almost
immediately (e.g., sank or were judged useless for fishing); others fell apart within months of delivery.
For shared boats, failure rates are much higher than for non-shared boats (53% vs. 16%); and, regardless
of failure, joint ownership fails to persist with only 20% still sharing in 2009. Of course the high failure
rate plays into that. Among surviving boats that were initially shared, only 35% still had shared
ownership in 2009. While high failure of shared boats could occur because NGOs emphasizing shared
ownership gave bad quality boats, econometrically we will find a key strategic reaction by villages. In the
presence of within agency heterogeneity in boat quality, poor quality boats were steered by village and
lagoon fishing leaders towards those upon whom shared ownership was imposed, often lower status
fishermen. Presumably, this was not what donors intended. Social agendas can be manipulated in villages,
both to thwart an agenda and, as we will see later, to impose its costs on families of lower social status.
III. Modeling agency behavior
In this section we present a stylized model of aid agency preferences and behavior, as well as that of
village heads. We will not estimate a structural model, but the modeling informs how we think about and
specify key aspects of the problem. In each village in line with basic patterns in the data, we assume there
is a lead agency which provides the vast majority of house aid in the village and that we are in a region of
parameter space where this agency provides at least as much as is “needed”. There is also a residual

11

agency that gives excess houses in villages if requested by the village head. The model does not allow for
a third type of agency in a village but that is unusual in the data. The notion of excess is motivated by the
fact that by 2009, overall, villages had been supplied 145% of “needed” housing. Contextually in Aceh,
we think of the residual agency as being BRR, the temporary government clearing house that, as
illustrated in Table 4, operates at a low level in many villages, with low quality housing. In reality, the
“residual” agency is not always BRR; and the quality of residual housing can be high. In fact some
international implementers were often a residual, late-in-the game provider but in some villages were a
lead provider. The model can deal with this dual role.
We relate the four implementer types presented in the introduction to aspects of lead
(implementer) agency objective functions and behavior, relative to how we type-cast BRR in the model.
While principal-agent and reputational issues arise, for simplicity, we do not set the model up as either a
full-blown principal-agent or reputational problem per se, but rather as a reduced form that accounts for
these influences.
III.1 Preferences and costs of aid agencies
The lead agency derives utility from two components: the benefit of house aid provided to the village and
socio-political activities such as sustainable development or proselytizing. Socio-political activities
generate benefits

Ae1 (

n  
) .
n    n0

The value and nature of A may differ by agency type and may be zero. Effort devoted to social activities
is e1 , subject to diminishing returns, or 0    1 .
For the number of houses, we assume there is a count of eligible, or needed housing, n , in each
village. Needed housing is the number of surviving families with houses destroyed which is
documentable by the inspection of slab foundations. We focus on regions of parameter space where all of

n is supplied by the main agency. After that, there are two potential sources of excess:  units provided
by the lead agency and n0 by the residual provider. Those numbers are determined jointly through
decisions made by the village head and lead agency and may result in either an interior solution where
both the lead agency and residual provider operate in the village, or a corner solution where the lead
agency acts strategically to exclude the residual provider. Any value of social agendas is non-decreasing
in the degree to which the lead agency dominates all housing provision in the village, or the higher

(n   ) / (n    n0 ) is. For example, village health conditions may be related to the fraction of houses

12

supplied with piped water; or proselytizing success may depend on the fraction of households where there
is direct contact. The relative value of control is increasing in  , 0   .
The lead agency’s benefit in providing housing aid is defined by both per house quality q and the
number of houses provided. Quality of aid q is determined by the effort put into providing each house, e2,
and is subject to diminishing returns, so q  Be2 , 0    1 . The lead agency’s total benefit from
housing can be expressed as Be2 ( n   z ), 0  z  1 , so that agencies may perceive less benefit from
excess houses. For simplicity, we assume all houses in a village from the same agency are of the same
quality; but, as a matter of agency policy, earlier or later batches of houses from the same agency do not
differ significantly in quality in the data. Differences in the value of B could be interpreted as the
outcome of principal-agent or reputational considerations. A higher B could mean either fewer principal
agent problems as with a donor-implementer or stronger reputational considerations facing an
international implementer. In short, lower B means less value to the agent in providing higher quality.
On the cost side, there is a fixed cost, C, to entering and operating in the village. Aid agency
workers involved in the village, e1 , are paid a wage w1 , while housing construction effort e2 is paid at a
rate w2 . Later we give more of a monitoring flavor by allowing employment of agency workers, e1 , to
reduce the cost of quality.
In sum, the lead agency seeks to maximize its total benefit, U, of operating in the village

U  Ae1 (

n  
)  Be2 ( n   z )  [C  w1e1  w2 e2 (n   )]
n    n0

(1) .

How do we determine the extent of the agency’s housing provision? That determination has two parts.
One concerns the residual provider and the other the village head’s optimization. We

assume

residual

housing involves no fixed cost nor socio-religious-political agenda, We assume such agencies don’t care
about oversupply and their z  1, A  0 and that, in this context, e1  0 . For the moment, we assume they
provide a minimum quality level q as set by outside observers, although later it will be made
endogenous.9
III.2 Village head’s problem
The village head sees benefits of getting more houses and the benefit depends on quality. However, as the
number of houses rises above n , he perceives a social cost to splitting the traditional extended family
across houses — in particular moving unmarried adult children out, moving elderly parents out,
separating wives (if multiple wives), moving daughters and married husbands out, and the like. And if
9

We can and later will manipulate parameter values so q  Be2 where e2 is given by the FOC  Be2 1  w2 .

13

there are in-migrants (tsunami refugees), these extra houses may be valued less. He may also see a cost to
socio-political agendas of agencies, but we ignore that. Assuming the leading agency provides at least n ,
the village head seeks to maximize

Be2 ( n   )  qn0  (  n0 ) ,   1 ,

(2)

where the village head can limit the amount of housing provided by any agency.
Assuming simultaneous choices of e1, e2, and Δ by the lead agency and n0 by the village head, the
village head limits n0 so that the marginal utility from n0 is non-negative, i.e., q   (   n0 ) 1  0 .
Knowing this, the lead agency sees

n0  ( q /  )1/( 1)   ,
If it chooses, the lead agency can set   (q /  )

1/( 1)

(3)

, so the village head sets n0  0 and the agency

becomes the exclusive provider in the village. [Note that the village head only chooses to limit n0 , not  .
At n0  0 , the village head would like greater than  of extra housing from the lead agency where we


restrict parameters so that in equilibrium Be2  q . 10]
In summary for the agency’s maximization problem, (3) is substituted into (1) to get

U  Ae1 (

n 
)  Be2 (n   z )  [C  w1e1  w2 e2 ( n   )]
1/(  1)
n  (q /  )

(4)

III.3 Aid agency choices
If a lead agency has no social agenda and hence e1  0 , it can be shown that a lead agency only provides
excess housing if z /   1 .11 The full problem is more complicated with FOC’s U / e1 , U / e2  0 .
For choices of e1 , e2 that satisfy these equations at the relevant  , we consider 3 types of solutions:

10

Also, we restrict the parameter space so that the lead agency’s marginal net benefit of supplying more housing is
negative for   (q /  )1/( 1) . An alternative would be to have the lead agency want to provide more housing than
( q /  )1/ ( 1) with a limit potentially being set by the village head.

The lead agency maximizes Be2 (n   z )  [C  w2 e2 (n  )] choosing e2 so B e2 1 (n   z )  w2 (n  )  0 .
The agency only supplies beyond n if, for   1, Be2 1 z  w2  0, where e2 is then given by B e2 1  w2  0 . Thus
the agency stops at n if z /   1 . For z /   1 , there can be an interior solution where the agencies choices of

11

e2 ,  are given by its FOC’s, with or without further supply from a residual supplier. Note, we ignore the corner
where the village head wants no more housing from the lead agency despite its high quality (i.e. the village head
imposes a  max  ( Be2 /  )1/ ( 1) based on his optimization).

14

(1) Corner at n (  0) : U / 

1

 0, U / n

 0

0.

(2) Interior: U /   0, 0    ( q /  )1/( 1)
(3) Corner at   ( q /  )1/( 1) : U / 

(5)

 ( q /  )1/(  1)

 0, U / 

 ( q /  )1/(  1)

0

At the first corner, the lead agency allows the residual provider to give all housing beyond n . At the
other corner the lead agency strategically crowds out the residual provider but stops just at the 
sufficient to do that.12 Case 2 is the interior solution between the two corners, where the lead agency
shares excess housing provision with the residual provider.
The model does not lend itself to closed form solutions. While in principle one can differentiate
to do comparative statics, the model has problems of corners and non-existence. To illustrate comparative
static forces based on what are feasible (equilibrium) outcomes as opposed to infeasible ones, we do
simulations. Before identifying stereo-type agencies, we give some intuition, with more to follow.
Agencies with higher B value housing quality more and thus we expect them to provide higher quality
housing. Agencies with higher values of z have less aversion to oversupply, meaning the lead agency has
less loss of benefits with over-provision done to retain village “control”. They also have a smaller rate of
decline in benefits to quality provision in the expression Be2 (n   z ) as scale of operation rises.
Similarly, agencies with higher values of  place greater weight on not admitting a residual provider,
given shared provision reduces the benefits from social agendas.
To

illustrate

comparative

statics,

we

fix

parameters:

n  100, w1  2, w2  1,

A  17, q  40,   2,   .5 and   .6 . Outcomes are very sensitive to z , so we start by fixing
z  .8 . We focus first on what happens as we vary B, the value of house quality, and  , the value of
dominating supply for social purposes. Table 6 presents a caricature classification of our four types of
agencies, recognizing that we could vary other parameters to achieve a similar schema. BRR, the residual
provider, has no social agenda ( A    0 ), does not care about oversupply of housing (z = 1), and offers
a basic low quality house, which we fix quality level at 40. The table gives the value B = 8.94 consistent
with this quality level coming from optimizing behavior by BRR, as opposed to an exogenous minimum
standard. For this BRR quality, village heads want at most 20 additional houses beyond their basic needs

(n  100) .

12

An alternative to case (3) being a corner would be to allow the region of parameter where the lead agency is
willing to provide beyond ( q /  )1/( 1) . If so, there could be an interior solution before  max  ( Be2 /  )1/ ( 1) , or the
village head could set that upper limit.

15

In comparison to BRR, donor-implementers have high housing value (B = 12), a social agenda,
and a strong desire to have full control in the village (  .9) . They offer high housing quality and have
almost complete control of the village: 119.5 out of 120 “houses” (ignoring issues of fractions).
International implementers also highly value housing quality (B = 12), but don’t care so much about
dominating provision (   .2 ). Thus they offer fewer houses: 114.4 of 120. Note their quality level is
slightly higher than donor-implementers; this occurs because they are supplying fewer excess houses and
so perceive higher marginal quality benefits (under the restriction that all houses they build in the village
are of the same quality). Also their social effort is less. We note that modest reductions in z in these
examples result in big supply reductions as additional houses have low value; for example  falls rapidly
to 0 as we lower z from .8 to .7. Finally, we caricature domestic implementers as having low house
quality value like BRR ( B  10) , but having a social agenda where they want some degree of control
(   .6) . Thus their house quality is near BRR but like donor-implementers they supply almost the whole
village, 119.2 out of 120, and they have high social effort.
There are two loose ends. First concerns the two corner solutions. In Table 6 all examples involve
interior solutions where 0    20 . An example satisfying a corner where   20 and condition 3 is
met in equation (5) occurs for B  12, z  .8, and   .95 . That is, for a donor-implementer a slight rise
in  leads to domination in Table 6. At this point we also note what happens as we decrease the village
head’s aversion to extra housing by lowering  . If we are at this corner with domination, lowering  can
move the solution back into sharing, with increased overall housing provision. This heterogeneity in
village preferences will play a role in the empirical work and in the next paragraph. For the other corner,
condition 2 in equation (5) is satisfied for B  10,   .6 and z  .4 , achieved by increasing the degree
of diminishing returns to providing extra housing (lower z).
For the other loose end, in the model as a lead agency increases house supply beyond what is
needed, it lowers overall quality. However in the data the quality of housing provided by donorimplementers quality rises as their domination rises. We can make two adjustments to the model, to
account for this fact. First as just noted, we have heterogeneity in village preferences for extra houses by
varying  in ( q /  )1/( 1) . Second we allow use of social agenda labor, e1 , to improve housing quality,
implicitly allowing monitoring of contractors by this labor. More agency workers in a village, e1 , make
the realization of a given quality level cheaper, or reduce the cost of employing construction workers. A
simple version of this defines the true cost of a construction worker as w2  re1 ( 0) .

U  Ae1 (

n  
)  Be2 ( n   z )  [C  w1e1  ( w2  re1 )e2 (n   )].
n    n0

(6)
16

We then re-solve the model for B=12, z=.8, and θ=.5. For this we make r=.0002. In this region of
parameter space as γ declines and excess housing rises from 20, the lead agency’s share of total housing
declines not surprisingly; and its per house quality also declines. As share declines there is less incentive
to invest in social agendas and thus to monitor for better quality, but less excess also means fewer direct
diminishing returns to construction labor. We note that there are regions of parameter space where quality
rises with the permitted excess and others where the relationship is non-monotonic. Appendix 3 depicts
cases of this relationship based on different values of r.
III.4 Donor choice of implementers
The model covers, by definition, the preferences and actions of donor-implementers. However, donors
can choose international implementers, domestic implementers, or BRR. Modeling the donor’s choice is
beyond the scope of the paper, but we make some comments. For donors who hire international
implementers, we presume their focus is on housing quality and not much on effects of aid on village way
of life. To get better quality housing than residual provision, they hire good reputation international
implementers. It is possible that they do have socio-religious-political agendas, but to set up their own
operations in Aceh to pursue such agendas could be too expensive for them. Local or international donors
may hire domestic implementers because these donors perceive domestic implementers to be more
knowledgeable and respectful of local traditions, and better aware of village needs beyond housing. Such
donors could also have socio-political beliefs about employing local agencies (institution building), even
if they realize that could result in lower quality provision. Finally, donors who chose BRR were typically
foreign governments and international consortiums, whose long term reputational concerns about aid
quality may be low. “Cynically” they may only want to announce to their public that they gave so much
money or built so many houses, with less regard for quality.13

IV. Empirical Evidence on the Quality of Housing Aid
In this section we examine econometrically how aid quality differs across implementer types. We
examine how the degree of agency dominance within the village affects quality. We look at outcomes
from both village level data and individual fishing family data.
IV.1 Base specification and covariates
We have two base specifications. First is

y pv  c    t Dtpv   X v   k   pv ,

(7)

t

13

There is also the issue of agency competition, where, for example, two different donor-implementers both
perceive high benefits from operating exclusively in the same village. Heuristically, we assume a degree of
coordination, where different donor-implementers can agree to enter and not enter different villages. In Table 1
housing supply from donor-implementers who wanted to adopt villages could only cover a fraction of villages.

17

where ypv is the quality measure for housing aid project p in village v as reported by the village head
overall for the village, or by fishermen for their specific house provided under project p. For the quality
measure, we look at village heads’ subjective assessments based on construction quality, fishermen’s
subjective assessments of problems related to construction, as well as their report of additional rooms in
their houses. Dtpv are indicators for whether the village project was implemented by type t implementer,
that is, donor-implementer, international implementer, or domestic implementer. BRR serves as the base
type.  k is a set of district or sub-district fixed effects we discuss in detail momentarily. We are
primarily interested in  t and expect donor-implementers and international implementers to have larger
coefficient estimates than domestic providers.
The second specification further distinguishes whether a project is the dominant project in a
village or the 2nd or 3rd order project by the number of houses given in aid. This order in general
corresponds to the order of aid delivery as well: biggest projects are for the earliest donor. The
specification with project order is

y pv  c   tr Dtpv  rpv   X v   k   pv ,
t

(8)

r

where rpv is an indicator for project order which can go from 1 to 3. Here we are interested in whether
some implementer types shade quality for 2nd and 3rd order projects.
In both specifications, Xv are a vector of village level covariates. Throughout the paper, we use a
common set of covariates for base village characteristics, representing village demographics (number of
post tsunami households, population survival rate), distance from Banda Aceh, amount of physical capital
destroyed, and pre-tsunami social capital. These are characteristics which from other work affect
outcomes to do with volunteerism and labor market choices in our villages (Friere, Henderson, and
Kuncoro, 2011 and Nose, 2011). We eliminate 8 villages with missing or very bad population numbers, 5
with missing numbers on houses destroyed, and 7 with other missing data (e.g., GPS readings to calculate
distance to Banda Aceh or aspects of social capital). 14 When we analyze individual fishermen’s
assessments, we will add family controls as well. Standard errors are always clustered at the village level.
The village covariates include two direct social capital measures. The first is the pre-tsunami
existence of arisan groups. Such groups of women meet regularly, with each member contributing a fixed
sum to a pot and then taking the pot on a rotating schedule.15 The other is whether the mullah, the spiritual
14

For the 8 with poor government data on post-tsunami population and household counts, including those has a
strong effect on the coefficient on post tsunami household, which becomes much smaller presumably because of
measurement error, although still positive and significant. But aid results are not affected.
15
In Indonesia, arisan groups are part of the norm of gotong royong (mutual assistance). A village having an arisan
group indicates the existence of a volunteer association outside the mosque and governance structure. While, the
original theoretical work on such associations (Besley, Coate, and Loury, 1994) suggests RoSCA’s exist to alleviate
credit market imperfections, empirical work suggests a strong social component, with participation rising with

18

leader of the village, survived the tsunami or not, providing continuity in village spiritual leadership. In a
companion paper, Freire, Henderson and Kuncoro (2011) find that village traditions of volunteer labor are
better maintained in the 68% of our villages which had arisan groups pre-tsunami. They also find that
mullah survival is important in maintaining village traditions of volunteer labor; but that survival of
village heads is not, given few heads remain in office even two years after the tsunami. 16 We view
villages with pre-existing arisan groups as having higher social capital and spirit of mutual assistance and
villages with surviving mullahs as being more resistant to external interventions (spiritual pollution) in
village affairs. Hence, we include both variables in analyzing the impacts of aid agencies. We also note
that village size and survival rates may affect social cohesion.
For fixed effects, we do not include village fixed effects, because these eliminate effective
variation in implementer types, given so many villages have just one provider and many agencies operate
almost exclusively at one level or another. A basic control for cultural-institutional differences across sets
of villages is fixed effects for the 4 districts in our sample and we use this throughout. In principle a better
control would be fixed effects for the 31 sub-districts (kecematen) for the 179 villages in the main
estimating sample. This is a tight control, since sub-districts on the coast are small geographic areas of
several neighboring villages usually with common geographic and social characteristics. In particular,
they closely mimic lagoon divisions, where fishing activities are governed informally at the lagoon level.
For our main result with its large village-project level sample, we report results with and without subdistrict and district fixed effects. We discuss the effect on all reported result of adding replacing district
with sub-district fixed effects. The problem especially in smaller samples of villages is that individual aid
agencies tends to cluster their operations spatially to reduce costs of operation and some of that clustering
spreads to the implementer type at the sub-district level. In smaller samples of villages, in the few cases
where adding sub-district fixed effects actually makes a difference, the effects are spurious because of
lack of variation within sub-districts of certain implementer types. But we detail this below.
IV.2 Project-level analysis: Subjective quality ratings by village heads
IV.2.1 Basic results
We start with the subjective quality ratings as reported by village heads for the four implementer types.
Table 7 looks at subjective quality ratings by the village head of each project on a scale of 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 or
3, with 3 being highest as noted for Figure 1. The first four columns all have base village characteristics
with column 1 including only village covariates and district fixed effects. The fifth column redoes column
wealth and complementing (in terms of correlations) rather than substituting for credit institutions, at least in
Indonesia (Varadharajan, 2004).
16
Given the insurgency movement in Aceh which was settled in early 2006, most village heads at the time of the
tsunami were not formally elected and were often figureheads representing village elites. Following political reforms
in early 2006, with widespread elections, by late 2007 only 35% of original village heads were still in office; by late
2009 the number was 12%.

19

4 (our main result), replacing district with sub-district fixed effects. The last column redoes column 4
dropping all covariates and fixed effects. Even in column 1, all of the village level variables are
completely insignificant.
For implementer-type effects, in column 2 we control for the provider for each specific project,
regardless of order as in equation (7). Donor-implementers and international implementers bring similar
positive effects, compared to local ones or BRR. In column 3 which represents equation (8), the base case
is 1st level BRR projects, with effects for 2nd and 3rd level projects for that implementer type. We then
distinguish the 3 other implementer types by project level. We note that sample sizes at 3rd level projects
are tiny, with each cell containing 2.1-4.8 % of all village projects. Thus in the end we focus on column 4
where we constrain all 2nd and 3rd level project pairs to have the same coefficient.17
The pattern we see in columns 3 and 4 is that, relative to the base case of 1st level projects of
BRR, 1st level donor-implementer projects offer higher subjective quality projects by 0.44 on the scale to
3. International implementers offer higher subjective quality projects by about 0.33, regardless of project
level. That is a basic result. If the implementer in the village is an international agency (donorimplementer or international implementer) they offer higher quality housing, through better monitoring
and insistence on quality of construction. For other implementer types, BRR offers the same quality at its
2nd and 3rd level as its 1st level, not surprisingly. Domestic implementers offer projects at all levels where
quality does not differ significantly from BRR.
However, there is a twist for donor-implementers. The gain in quality for donor-implementer 1st
level projects evaporates at the 2nd and 3rd level. This could suggest that donor-implementers act
strategically to put less effort in quality as their prominence in a village fades. That is a relationship we
explore in the next table. For international implementers there is no quality decline as they lose
dominance: they seem to offer a generic good construction quality house.
The discussion presumes the effects we are talking about are causal, in the sense that village
quality levels are associated with the implementer type they draw, not directly with their own
characteristics. The idea is that agency housing quality policies are exogenous to the village, set by the
agency, with some randomness based on difficulties with specific contractors, construction crews, or
materials the agency happens to assign to any particular village. In Table 2 we argued that evidence of

17

We originally thought there were similarities to the child quality-quantity trade-off literature (in particular Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005), where parents make decisions about children’s education and numbers of children
and birth order matter. If villages were really in control of this, absent aid agency choices and strategic interaction
with agencies, we would model quality as a function of whether a project was in a 1, 2 or 3 project village and
whether “birth order” mattered, or whether this was the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd level project in the village. In this case, we are
ordering projects by size, and while our information on order is limited, it appears that in general the largest project
in a village was the first one. In such a formulation coefficients on number of projects and project order are usually
insignificant; and once we control for implementer types all traces of order and number of project effects go away.

20

matching, so that villages with more devastation or higher pre-tsunami measures of social capital villages
get better agencies, is at most very limited.18 Here we argue that even if there is matching, conditional on
type of implementer a village gets, there is no further consistent influence of the village on quality of aid
delivered. In column 1 without implementer types, no village covariates are correlated with quality. In
column 5, relative to 4, adding a fine control for culture and informal institutions in the form of 31 subdistrict fixed effects has no impact on implementer-type outcomes. Finally in column 6, when we remove
all village covariates and all fixed effects that has no real impact on point estimates of implementer-type
effects. We did experiment with IV work focusing on the major housing provider in a village. Instruments
would be based first on the weak matching covariates. Second, as noted earlier, individual NGOs tend to
cluster in sub-districts. So using RAN, we constructed measures of the extent of clustering by agency type
(outside the own village) in a sub-district. These as well as the matching variables are too weak
instruments to use in IV estimation.19
Before proceeding, we note that a number of projects have what we call “guarantees”: they test
for quality of cement used in construction and they may offer a six month to one year guarantee to repair
defects. There is an association between the offering of guarantees and quality, but we can’t argue the
relationship is causal as reported in Appendix 4. We don’t have evidence that failing a cement test or
failing to honor a repair “guarantee” brings any penalty. For some agencies, guarantees are not correlated
with better quality. While offering guarantees could mean some agencies may then build better houses, it
could also mean that, in the presence of within agency heterogeneity in quality, agencies only offer
guarantees for the better houses they provide. Better agencies like the Canadian or British Red Crosses or
Catholic Relief Services almost always offer both guarantees, but they also have an almost perfect record
for quality.
IV.2.2 The donor-implementer twist
An intriguing aspect of Table 7 is that donor-implementers shade quality once they lose dominance. We
now explore this finding in detail. We start with a general version, where to isolate effects we alter the
structure in column 3 of Table 7 by removing the constant term and having dummy variables for each
project level by type of implementer. Then for all 1st level projects by implementer type, we add that
variable interacted with the fraction provided by other projects in the village. While fractions are
endogenous, we note in the model that quality is only affected by the unobserved  through its effect on
fractions provided. That is, in optimizing in equation (4),  does not directly affect the choice of e2 . The

18

We also tried a multinomial logit regression focusing only on the lead housing implementer of the village. Similar
patterns arise with the arisan group positively matched with donor-implementers, but also negatively associated
with domestic-implementers.
19
Part of the issue on clustering could be that actual clustering is at the individual agency level, not at the type level.

21

only fraction variable across all implementer types that is significant is the one for donor-implementer.20
Accordingly, we run a restricted, “preferred” specification in column 1 of Table 8, based on column 4 of
Table 7 to illustrate that results are consistent with earlier discussion.
In column 1 of Table 8, as the fraction of housing provided by other projects rises from 0, donorimplementers reduce quality of their first level projects. By the time that fraction of others hits 40%
(generally about the maximum of others relative to a 1st level project), the advantage of quality for a
donor-implementer on a 1st level project is down from 0.6 to about 0.21. This suggests donorimplementers are sensitive to their degree of control in paying for better quality construction and
monitoring.
An issue with this finding concerns whether or not these effects reflect agency policies per se.
The effects might arise if there are differences in the composition of specific donor-implementers at
different project levels and differential overall policies of those NGOs. In particular, British and Canadian
Red Cross’s never have 2nd or 3rd level projects and almost always totally dominant housing provision in
their villages. Maybe the results arise because they have better quality housing than all other donorimplementers. We rerun the base specification in column 1 of Table 8 for two sub-samples. First in
column 2, we drop the British and Canadian Red Cross villages from the sample, getting almost the same
results as in column 1. Then as an extreme, we drop all villages except those where the 6 largest donorimplementers (UN, WVI, CRS, German Red Cross, Australian Red Cross, Turkish Relief) who routinely
operated at different levels in different villages appeared. The results in column 3 are not highly
significant given the small and special sample but the coefficient patterns are consistent with columns 1
and 2. Composition does not seem to be driving the results.21 Finally, we note that replacing district by
sub-district fixed effects in Table 8 has no significant effect on outcomes.22
IV.3 Individual level analysis: Quality ratings by fishermen
We now turn to a sample of several hundred fishing families who received a house on aid, name an
agency we can identify and categorize, and have corresponding information on different house quality
dimensions. The fisherman data have much more detail about individual house quality, but fishermen
reside in only 90 of our villages in 2009. We note before starting that the basic results in column 4 of
Table 7 are maintained in our sample of just 90 villages. As reported for relevant variables in Appendix 4,
column 3, the only noticeable change for this sample of 157 projects is that the coefficient on first level
projects for domestic implementers (relative to BRR) becomes strongly negative and significant.
20

The estimates of the coefficient [standard error] of the fraction variables are as follows: donor-implementers -0.98
[0.33], international implementers -0.23[0.74], domestic implementers -0.23[0.68], and BRR -0.43[0.59].
21
More generally, we also worked to find heterogeneity of donor-implementer effects by specific grouping such as
all the Red Cross’s or all Christian based NGOs, but found no consistent evidence of differential effects.
22
Column 1 and 2 results are not affected. In column 3 the coefficient on ratio of others is weakened (changed to .425) but the sample is tiny and spatially clustered.

22

For fishing families, of central interest, they are asked about specific faults: do they have a leaky
roof, cracked walls, a poor foundation, or faulty plumbing. We look at these as a count of total faults, as
well as individually. The question is whether the findings on house quality and implementer type from the
village level data are confirmed with individual micro data, for the sub-sample of villages where we
survey fishermen. By design, fishing families consist primarily of traditional fishing boat owners and
captains (rather than crew, where the typical boat (thep-thep) has a captain and 2-3 crew often family
members). We have results on two samples. First are 529 families, where we type housing agencies
according to the agency named by the household head. Second is a smaller sample of 371, where we
require an agency named by a household head to have a correspondence to one of the agencies named by
his village head. The intention is to reduce noise in household head responses. While the matching
worked well for BRR and domestic implementers (with Bahasa Indonesian names), for specific
international NGOs matching was not as good. Village heads negotiate and sign contracts with agencies,
so that they, rather than individual fishermen, have a good sense of specific names of foreign NGOs and
who really were the agencies responsible for housing. Given the myriad of agencies operating in villages,
villagers are sometimes confused about exact foreign names and what actual agency supervised the
contractor who built their house. 23 We match just over half the sample on name alone and add another
20% by matching by implementer type.24 We note our fishermen are representative of overall types of
agencies operating in the 90 villages. 25 Unfortunately, the small matched sample of 371 has only 29
international implementer projects which makes inference for this implementer type for this sample
tenuous.
As before, we keep BRR as the base, and compare with donor-implementers, internationalimplementers, and domestic implementers in terms of the quality of housing received by fishermen. For
fishing families, in Table 9 we examine overall fault counts and then probits for each individual fault. In
each column in the table (except one), we have the basic village controls from before, the type of
implementer providing housing to the family, and basic family controls of size and age and education of
the household head. None of these family and village controls are significant and we don’t report their
coefficients in this table. For the moment we focus on the total fault results. Estimation in column 1 is a
23

There are also other aspects of error in matching. A village head may name one agency (say, a donor) and the
villager may name another (say, the implementer) when both are involved, although we worked hard to overcome
this problem (a specific donor typically hires just one or from a small set of implementers). Finally, occasionally
village heads may group different affiliated agencies in a village under one name.
24
When the level 1 type is the same as the level 2 or 3 type we assign it as the level 1 type. There are 34 instances of
these and we also try dropping such cases but the results are similar.
25
To see, if our fishermen data represent the agency composition from the village data well we compare the actual
and expected (if randomly assigned within the village) counts of houses received by our fishermen by agency types
for the larger sample of fishermen. The actual counts and expected counts for donor implementer are [174, 178],
international-implementer [60, 46], domestic implementer [207, 189] and BRR [118, 146]. Though there are some
slight differences, the fishermen data seem to represent well the counts reported by the village heads.

23

Poisson count model with robust and village clustered standard errors. We note that households don’t
routinely report faults in all categories: in the larger sample 52% report none, 18% one fault, 17% two,
8.6% three, and 6.7% four.
For total faults in the set of column (1) results we report first for the 2 samples: (a) for the larger
and (b) for the better matched, with district fixed effects. Then as in Table 7 we report a column (c) with
no village or family controls and no fixed effects. In columns 1a-1c, consistent with village head results,
donor-implementers offer lower counts of faults than BRR—a 40% reduction for the larger sample and
about a 60% reduction for the better matched sample. International-implementers also have lower counts.
In the large sample the estimate is small (regardless of controls). In the better matched sample the
reduction is 81% with controls and 91% without, but both are insignificant. To column 1a, if we add subdistrict fixed effects, results are unaffected. In column 1b with its smaller sample, the only effect is to
strengthen (and make significant) the reduction in faults for international implementers. However, we
think that strengthening is probably spurious because of the restricted variation left in the data. The
inference is based on 29 international implementer observations, 13 of which are in one sub-district with
no donor-implementers and only 2 BRR projects.
We also looked at these effects on total faults according to whether the household got the
implementer-type house from a 1st, 2nd, or 3rd level project, as well as the extent to which a 1st level project
dominated aid in the village. Here we must use the better matched sample that distinguishes the levels of
the agency reported by the fishermen. The results are consistent with the column 4 results of Table 7 for
village head ratings. The noticeable difference is that, for donor-implementers, now 2nd or 3rd level
projects, as well as 1st bring significant reductions in counts of faults, but cell counts are small.
In Table 9, columns 2-5 report probits on whether the house has a leaky roof, cracked walls, poor
foundation, or faulty plumbing. We report just on the smaller better matched sample which has stronger
results for donor-implementers and international implementers, consistent with less measurement error in
for those two variables. In the probits, donor-implementers are significantly less likely to have 2 of the 4
faults at the 5% level, one significantly less at the 10% and one just missing the 10% mark. However for
international implementers, only one fault is significantly less at the 5% level and one at the 10% level.
Domestic implementers show no differences relative to BRR.
IV.3.1 Other dimensions of quality
In Table 10 in columns 1 and 2, we look at two “quality” related items. One is the fraction of houses in a
village provided with a piped water connection. Since these are village level data, we ask whether the
dominant house provider in a village affects the fraction of houses served. Not surprisingly in column 1,
the better quality donor-implementer houses are more likely to be connected; effects for international
implementers relative to BRR are positive but not significant.
24

The other dimension of quality is house size. We asked for total number of bedrooms (ranging
from 0-6, heavily centered on 2) and about additional special rooms, namely kitchen and bathroom. While
about 90% of houses come with a bathroom, in 1/3 of the cases agencies leave the family to build a
kitchen onto the house, rather than providing it up front. We get a count of total additional rooms
(additional to a one room box) by adding one if there is a kitchen and one if there is a bathroom to the
count of bedrooms. We estimate whether initial house size, in terms of count of additional rooms relative
to a one room box, is influenced by the implementer type. Here we report on the whole set of control
covariates in columns 3 of Table 10 for the larger fishermen sample. None are significant at the 5% level.
In particular, a larger family size does not mean a larger house, raising an issue of poor matching to
families.26 In terms of implementer effects, relative to BRR, the count of additional rooms is the same
across agencies except for domestic implementers. They provide on average 9% fewer rooms. Going to
the better matched sample doesn’t change results. Overall, the indication is that domestic implementers
offer lower quality and smaller houses than donor-implementers. As in Tables 7 and 8, results are not
significantly affected by replacing district with sub-district fixed effects.27
IV.4 Quantity of aid
In this sub-section we look at the determinants of the quantity of house aid provided in each village. In the
last two columns of Table 10, we examine also what determines the quantity of house aid offered in a
village, in a reduced form equation. In Table 10, column 3 shows that the level of house aid is related to
basics: increasing in houses destroyed (aid claim) and numbers of surviving households (need). In column
3 the only other significant determinant is the village population survival rate, where aid is decreasing in
survival rate, conditional on houses destroyed and surviving numbers of households. It may be that there
was more sympathy in giving to villages with the lowest population survival rates. Distance from Banda
Aceh and social capital measures have no significant effect on total house aid. In terms of aid agency
activities, in column 4 we add in controls for having two or more housing providers and for the dominant
implementer type. None of these variables are significant at the 5% level, although having a second
provider is significant at the 10% level. Adding sub-district fixed effects has no impact on implementertype coefficients. If we add agency fixed effects as a more general control on agency tastes for housing
provision, the multiple provider coefficient is completely insignificant (coefficient (s.e.) of .060 (.084)).
Having no multiple provider effects is consistent with the notion in the theory section that if all villages
have the same tastes for excess housing and heterogeneity is in first implementer tastes for, say,
26

If we restrict attention just to bedrooms, larger families got significantly more bedrooms, suggesting a trade-off in
terms of what an additional room is called); but the effect is tiny. Increasing family size by 4 (slightly more than
doubling mean size of 3.9) increases the number of bedrooms by about 8-10%.
27
In column 1, with its small sample, the key donor-implementer effect is unaltered. The other two implementertype coefficients are insignificant to begin with; with sub-district fixed effects the absolute values of their
coefficients are reduced. Column 2 results are unaffected.

25

domination or quality, villages will still opt for the same amount of housing regardless of their first
implementer tastes. 28
If villages are heterogeneous in their unobserved tastes for extra houses, there is a margin where
extra houses are associated with having an extra provider. As noted in the theory section, if we are just at
the margin of a corner solution where the main provider strategically dominates (as opposed to shares
provision), then an increase in village unobserved demand for housing will induce a solution with an extra
provider and more housing. This may create the weak correlation between quantity and having two or
more providers. [Note in cases where provision is already shared, an increase in village tastes for housing
creates no association between more houses and having a second agency.]

V. Social agendas: Why choose a domestic implementer for housing?
In this section we look at two issues. First, is there evidence that donor-implementers in our
model pursue and value social agendas? Second, why do some donors choose domestic implementers,
given they deliver low quality housing. Does the notion that domestic implementers may “work better
with the community” in the pursuit of village social goals have feet? We have no evidence meeting a
reasonable standard of causality on either set of issues. Matching by agencies to village unobservables is
now an explicit problem; village measured covariates now influence outcomes; and we are not looking at
specific agency actions, only associations with their presence. Still the patterns of association are so
pointed that we report them.
We look specifically at two types of village social outcomes: (i) public goods we recorded in the
form of public buildings and infrastructure (specifically paved roads and environmental protection of the
coast) and (2) preservation of local traditions specifically mosque attendance post-aid in 2009 and choice
of traditional occupation, fishing. For domestic implementers for public goods, the idea is that they are
more knowledgeable about the local scene (speak the language and know the culture), have a less topdown approach, and may be better connected personally with BRR officials who are the key providers of
many public goods. Thus domestic implementers may be more willing and able to help villages get more
public goods. Since generally housing NGOs don’t provide these facilities (and there is no “trade-off”, or
28

We also considered the issue of quantity-quality trade-off. This issue steps somewhat outside the domain of the
model, to ask, if village heads have a taste for more housing, does that affect the quality of housing they get,
implicitly through the choice of agencies which can be lobbied for more houses. This is not the micro quantityquality trade-off analyzed in the human capital literature on children—just correlations in the data. We computed
residuals for excess housing from column 3 of Table 10 and added them to a column 1 Table 7 quality specification
(with the full set of village covariates or one with a reduced list and in both cases with no implementer types). That
measure of excess housing and adding that measure also interacted with whether a village has two or more providers
produces zero coefficients on the excess housing variable and any interaction with multiple providers. It seems
excess housing per se is not associated with lower quality.

26

correlation between having more public buildings versus private housing), it means that the main house
provider would work with other implementers to help a village get particular public buildings or
infrastructure. For social agendas involving local traditions, Aceh is a conservative Islamic area of
Indonesia. Foreign NGOs in villages bring exposure to new ideas and social influences—an issue of
foreign “spiritual pollution”. Domestic implementers may associate more with village traditions and have
the same religion as villagers. For donor-implementers their objective function may weigh more heavily
on villages getting public goods than, say international implementers. They may possibly be more
sensitive and respectful of village traditions (as donors willing to be on-the-ground in the village).
Results are summarized in Table 11. The first four columns look at village level outcomes, where
we see if the main housing implementer type 29 is correlated with the count of public buildings, the count
of cooperatives and village enterprises, the fraction of roads paved, and whether coastal protection
initiatives were undertaken for the sub-sample of coastal villages through planting of mangroves, pines
and grasses.30 Public buildings include mosques, village halls, fishermen halls, Islamic and state schools
and health facilities. On the role of domestic implementers, they shine, being associated with consistently
better outcomes than BRR and relatively better outcomes than at least international implementers. On the
issue of donor-implementers and social agendas, donor-implementers do a better job than international
implementers, as presumed in the modeling section. Note that all NGO types dominate BRR; certainly
none are worse than BRR for any item in the first 4 columns.
In columns 5 and 6 of Table 11, we look at social outcomes. In column 5, mosque attendance in
2009 after aid delivery is complete, as a function of the type of major housing provider. 31 Village
tradition is that the household head answers the call to mosque once a day and we examine weekly
attendance with counts for household heads ranging from 0-7 days.32 Column 6 concerns the issue of
whether NGOs influence aspirations and occupational choice. Is the choice to remain fishing in 2009 for a
sample of pre-tsunami fishermen relates to the type of main house implementer? Both columns have a full
set of relevant controls with complete results presented in Appendix 5. In columns 5 and 6, compared to
either BRR or international implementers, domestic implementers are associated with higher mosque
attendance of adult males and higher probabilities of fishermen remaining in fishing (the difference
between domestic implementers and international implementers in column 6 is significant). Although
donor-implementers have an advantage in point estimates over international implementers, their
coefficients in columns 5 and 6 are not significantly different. In Appendix 5, we also take a different
29

We also experimented with a formulation where covariates are the fraction of houses in a village provided by each
type of agency. The sign and significance patterns are the same as for the dummy variables for dominant providers.
30
About 45% of coastal villages plant mangroves, pines and grasses.
31
For mosque attendance in 2007, with NGOs still directly present in villages, we find no agency effects.
32
In 09 we registered a few higher counts, for those who may have gone to mosque more than once a day. To be
comparable with 07 numbers we capped responses at 7. Uncapped results for 09 are little different.

27

perspective and look explicitly at whether the fraction of houses provided by Christian based NGOs had
differential effects. 33 The negative effect for evening prayer is quite large, though statistically not
significant. The effect on reduced fishing probabilities is large and significant.
Table 11 associations are consistent with the ideas that (1) some donors hire domestic
implementers compared to international ones or BRR to help preserve local traditions and work more
towards sustainable development and village quality of life and (2) donor-implementers work better with
villages than international implementers at least in securing village public goods. Adding sub-district
fixed effects does not alter these general results. In columns 1-4, with their small samples adding subdistrict fixed effects alters a number of point estimates, but the overall pattern of results is unaffected.34
Columns 5 and 6 with their focus on social outcomes are the one place in the paper where a tight control
on culture and informal institutions could be important. While the overall pattern of results is similar,
domestic-implementer effects are actually strengthened, although we worry about restrained variation
from the limited number of villages in 10 sub-districts. With sub-district fixed effects, in column 5 the
domestic implementer coefficient is a little higher and still significant at the 5% level; and in column (6)
the domestic implementer effect is strengthened rising to 0.14, significant at the 10% level.
While we have these associations, they may not be causal. For example unobserved devoutness in
a village may have induced matching with domestic implementers of the same religion and sensitive to
village traditions. We now turn to an explicit social agenda where we can draw strong inferences.
V.1 Imposition of social agendas: boat aid
For boats a social agenda imposed shared ownership on a substantial fraction of aid boats. As noted in the
introduction, some NGOs had a shared ownership agenda, to try to force a move away from the
traditional captain-owner-crew social and economic structure. From Figure 2, this sharing did not survive
well with time: by 2009 little sharing of ownership remained. But the examination is complicated by the
fact that failure is associated with sharing. It could be that the agencies where sharing was a strong social
agenda happened to also give poor quality boats. However, there is heterogeneity of boat quality within
agencies and aid boats were distributed by village heads or fishermen leaders. The question we explore
here is whether the village and lagoon fishing leaders who allocated boats further thwarted the unpopular
sharing agenda by assigning poor quality boats to shared ownership. That is, for boats from the same

33

We also tried specifications where we control for the type of provider of the individual fisherman’s house, in
addition to the village level controls. Those variables had no independent effect and left other results intact, so we
don’t report them.

34

Column 1 results show little change in coefficients but a modest increase in standard errors. In column 2 the
domestic implementer coefficient is halved but so is its standard error. Column 3 coefficients remain all positive
with 25-50% reduction in magnitudes. Column 4 coefficients are all increased in magnitude by 15% or more with no
change in standard errors.

28

agency, better quality ones were not shared, while worse ones were. Further, sharing is not random across
fishermen; it is disproportionately imposed on lower status fishermen. We assume (1) that leaders knew
which boats would fail, which is plausible since construction materials and ex post quality as well as
design are all observable to these experienced fishing leaders and (2) sharing per se did not induce failure,
a possibility we directly address.
We use individual fishermen data, which cover 88 villages in the estimating sample. These data
allow us to tease out the sharing-failure association in detail, which we can’t do with the village level
data. In the micro data, two international implementers, Triangle and International Medical Corps (IMC),
dominate boat implementation, providing over 45% of boats to the fishermen we sample, with no other
individual agency providing more than 5.5 % and most offering just a handful of boats in the survey.
Donor-implementers as identified in RAN for boats are a small group. Despite the limitation on villages
covered, we have strong findings.
V.2 Was sharing targeted?
In Table 12 columns 1 and 2, we look at the correlates of sharing as reported in 2007 by fishermen.
Family or fishermen characteristics are related to sharing— previous ownership and higher education
lower the likelihood of shared ownership. So sharing to some extent seems to have been imposed on
lower status fishermen, who had poorer claims to ownership. Across villages, keeping in mind that we
cover a limited sample of villages, sharing increases in villages with higher initial social capital (arisan
group), which have been more willing to better accept the equality agenda underlying shared ownership.
Sharing declines as boat aid rises in a village, suggesting that, in villages with fewer aid boats relative to
need, sharing was more likely to occur.
In terms of aid agencies which favored sharing, in the small sample of villages, it is difficult to
separate NGO effects from the 3 district fixed effects let alone 31sub-district fixed effects; and we include
no fixed effects. IMC which gave 16% of boats in the estimating sample with an 87% share rate are all in
one district. Triangle which gave 29% of boats with only a 36% share rate is entirely in another district.
As Table 12 shows, IMC has significantly more and Triangle significantly less than typical sharing
(compared to the base of small, ungrouped boat NGOs). Results with district fixed effects follow the same
pattern but are weaker. While we know specific agencies, such as the British Red Cross (BRC), imposed
shared ownership, they only appear rarely in the sample (3 boats for BRC). Given all agencies besides
IMC and Triangle appear infrequently in the sample, we tried other groupings. Getting a boat from a boat
donor-implementer identified in RAND (3.6% of boats), or from BRR (8.8% of boats) are unrelated to
shared ownership. Regardless, what drove differences in sharing across villages is not critical to the basic
results in columns 3 and 4.
V.3 Assigning sharing to failure
29

In columns 3 and 4 of Table 12, we turn to boat failure of aid boats, as recorded after aid is done in 2009.
Failure is not related to household or village observables; in general any traditionally built boat is
expected to last at least 5 years even with hard usage. However, sharing an aid boat significantly increases
the likelihood of boat failure, 30% more often in column 3.
Column 4 shows specifically that failure is associated with being assigned a shared boat, not with
an implementer type per se. In column 4, we examine how sharing versus non-sharing, in association with
the NGO group classification in column 2, affects failure. The base case is non-shared boats given by “all
other” agencies; there are no BRR boats left in the sample. No non-shared IMC boats fail so there is no
estimated coefficient. Triangle and IMC shared boats fail at significantly higher rates, by about 40%,
compared to the base and even more compared to Triangle non-shared boats. Non-shared boats by donorimplementers fail less than other non-shared boats, consistent with the house results, again the idea of
better resolved moral hazard problems.
Overall the results suggest that fishing leaders in allocating boats in villages knew which were
good and bad boats at the point of assignment. They then assigned the low quality boats to be shared, to
satisfy the shared ownership objectives of NGOs. Such sharing was assigned to villagers lower in the
social hierarchy (lower education, not pre-tsunami owners).35
One might worry that sharing is an institution that people did not like and so they used the boats
very hard to raise money to buy out partners. They could have used them so hard that rather than starting
to fail after 5 years they failed within 1-2 years or less. However, in a smaller matched sample of 2007
and 2009 fishermen, we control for intensity of use in 2007 in terms of length and numbers of trips per
week to make sure that higher usage of shared boats is not driving later failure rates. As reported in
columns 5 and 6 of Table 12, the two usage variables have tiny coefficients and are completely
insignificant; other results are the same as in columns 3 and 4. Boats which failed were simply badly built.
VI. Conclusion
In recent years, many countries have experienced major natural disasters and the massive
accompanying humanitarian aid efforts have not been well scrutinized at a micro level. Understanding
and analyzing the organization of aid delivery is essential to evaluating aid efficacy. The paper examines
the organizational structure of how implementing agencies are related to funding ones.
We find that donor-implementers offer the highest quality housing as rated by village heads and
have fewer counts of faults as reported by fishermen, reflecting their greater ability to deal with moral
hazard issues. However, evidence suggests they shade in quality as they lose dominance as the leading aid
agency in a village. International implementers fare relatively well in providing housing quality,
35

A “reduced” form for failure (remove sharing variables in columns 3 and 4) gives anticipated effects by status but
they are not statistically significant.

30

regardless of degree of dominance. In contrast, domestic implementers are associated with “sustainable
development” objectives through the construction of public buildings and seashore conservation, even
though they provide low quality housing. They also are associated with better maintenance of village
religious and occupational traditions
We investigate the interaction of aid quality and social agendas by examining boat aid. Shared
ownership was the primary social agenda pursued by many agencies delivering boat aid, perhaps in the
hopes of reducing within village inequality and improving contractual practices. However, boat aid was
extremely heterogeneous with many boats literally failing. We find that village and fishing leaders steered
poor quality boats towards those upon whom shared ownership was imposed, often lower status
fisherman. In other words, under heterogeneity of boat quality, shared ownership which was imposed as a
means to decrease inequality resulted in the contrary, where higher status fishermen receive better boats
and the lower status poorer quality boats.
We conclude with two general points relevant for policy. First, the behavior of an aid agency that
operates on the ground is a composite outcome of the organizational structure of the donating and
implementing arms. Depending on how that organization is set up, the quality of hard aid and the delivery
of social agendas may vary considerably within the same disaster area. Donors face potential trade-offs
between higher quality aid, pursuit of certain social agendas, and paying the cost to do their own
implementation. Second, the village is an integral part of aid distribution and the behavior of its leaders
affects how the agencies’ social agendas are delivered among village members. This can result in uneven
distribution of aid quality, especially when hard aid is tied directly to the agencies’ social agendas.

31

References
Alesina, A. and D. Dollar (2000), “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?” Journal of Economic

Growth, 5, 33-63.
Azam, J-P. and J-J. Laffont (2003), “Contracting for Aid”, Journal of Development Economics, 70, 25-58
Besley, T, S..Coate and G. Loury (1994), “Rotating Credit and Savings Associations, Credit Markets, and
Economic Efficiency”, Review of Economic Studies, 701-19.
Black, S.E., P.J. Deverux, and K.G. Salvanes (2005), “The More the Merrier? The Effect of Family Size
and Birth Order on Children’s Education”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 669-700.
Burnside, C. and D. Dollar (2000), “Aid, Policies, and Growth”, American Economic Review, 90, 847868.
Collier, P., P. Guillaumont, S. Guillaumont, and J.W. Gunning (1997), “Redesigning Conditionality”,

World Development, 25, 1399-1407.
Easterly, W (2003), “The Cartel of Good Intentions: the Problem of Bureaucracy in Foreign Aid”,

Journal of Policy Reform, 5, 1-28.
Eisensee, T. and D. Stromberg (2007), “News Droughts, News Floods, and U.S. Disaster Relief”,

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 693-728.
Epple, D. and R. Romano (1998), “Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers, and Peer
Group Effects”, American Economic Review, 88, 33-62.
Freire, T., J.V. Henderson, and A. Kuncoro (2011), “Volunteerism After the Tsunami: New Institutions
and Aid”, mimeo.
Gaynor, M., J.B. Rebitzer, and L.J. Taylor (2004), “Physician Incentives in Health Maintenance
Organizations”, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 915-931.
Kanbur R. and T. Sandler (1999) “The Future of Development Assistance: Common Pools and
International Public Goods”, ODC Policy Essay #25, Overseas Development Council, Washington.
Malani, A., T. Philipson, and G. David (2003) “Theories of Firm Behavior in the Nonprofit Sector. A
Synthesis and Empirical Evaluation”, Chapter in “The Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations,
NBER, 181-216.
Murrell, P, (2002) “The Interaction of Donors, Contractors, and Recipients in Implementing Aid for
Institutional Reform” in B. Martens, U. Mummert, P. Murrell, and P. Seabright (eds), The
Institutional Economics of Foreign Aid, Cambridge U. Press, 69-111.
Newhouse, J. (1970), “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of Hospitals”,

American Economic Review, 60, 64-7.
Nose, M. (2011), “Impact of Aid Quality on Career Decision: Labor Market Development after Natural
Disaster,” mimeo.
32

Paul, E. (2006), “A Survey of the Theoretical Economic Literature on Foreign Aid,” Asian-Pacific

Economic Literature, 20, 1-17.
Pedersen, K. (2001), “The Samaritan’s Dilemna and the Effectiveness of Development Aid”,

International Tax and Public Finance, 8, 693 – 70.
Skoufias, E. (2003), “Economic Crises and Natural Disasters: Coping Strategies and Policy Implications,”

World Development, 31, 1087-1102.
Svennson, J. (2003), “Why Conditional Aid Does Not Work and What Can Be Done About It?” Journal

of Development Economics, 70, 381-402.
Torsvik, G. (2005), “Foreign Economic Aid: Should Donors Cooperate”, Journal of Development

Economics, 77, 503-51.
Townsend, R. (1994), “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62, 539-59.
Varadharajan, S. (2004), “Explaining Participation in RoSCAs: Evidence from Indonesia”, Cornell
University, http://www.microfinancegateway.org/content/article/detail/2345
Wane, W. (2004), “The Quality of Foreign Aid: /Country Selectivity or Donors Incentives?” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 3325.

33

Figure 1. Housing Aid: Quality by types of aid agencies, village head and fishermen 2009
2.8

2.76
2.64

2.7
2.6
2.5

2.43

2.4
2.29

2.3
2.2
2.1
2
Donor
-Implementer

International
Implementer

Domestic
Implementer

BRR

Avg. village subjective rating

1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

1.28
1.15

1.14

International
Implementer

Domestic
Implementer

0.78

0.6
0.5
0.4
Donor
-Implementer

BRR

Avg. count of faults by fishermen

Figure 2. Boat aid: Shared ownership and boat failure, fishermen 2009
60%

53.2%

50%
40%

32.4%

30%
19.9%
20%
10%

16.4%

8.6%
0.0%

0%
Total boat aid
(324)

Shared ownership
(141)

% abandoned because of poor quality

Sole ownership (183)

Still sharing in 2009

34

Table 1. Destruction of population and housing
Survival
Pre-tsunami population a
b
Survival rate of population [original 05 villages, 104 covered]
Post-tsunami households, official

171783 (official)
65% [49%]
32876

House aid
Number of houses survive tsunami, survey
Survival rate houses
Number of temporary aid houses built (‘07 survey)
Number of permanent aid houses built (’07 survey)

5399
9%
6529
32277
117%
39899

c

Replacement rate by late 2007
Number of permanent aid houses built by late 2009
Other aid
Survival rate public buildings
Replacement rate, public buildings by late 2007
Replacement rate, public buildings by late 2009
Survival rate of boats [ ‘05 sample of villages]
d

Replacement rate, boats [2007 survey for 96 villages surveyed in ‘05]
Note: Based on 190 villages where there is both 2007 and 2009 information
a.
b.

c.

d.

6%
80%
96%
[6%]
[105%]

Official population counts pre-tsunami are from the P4B, a 2004 government pre-election census.
The official survival rate is the 2006 PODES count divided by the count in P4B. The PODES is a tri-annual
government inventory of village populations and facilities. The 2006 PODES in Aceh was conducted in the Spring
2005. It has lower counts of population and households compared to our 2005 survey (Summer and Fall, 2005). This
may be partly a “9/11 phenomenon”; as time goes on more missing families are discovered.
The replacement rate is the number of houses given in aid divided by the number of surviving households less the
number of surviving houses. Includes mosques, village halls, fishermen halls, public and Islamic elementary schools,
health facilities.
Defined as boats on water by late 2007/surviving captains 2005.

35

Table 2. Matching villages to types of agencies : Multinomial Logit
(1) Donor-Imp.

(2) Int'l Imp.

(3) Domestic Imp.

(4) BRR

0.0122
(0.0416)
0.00375
(0.0627)
0.00590
(0.0553)
0.179***
(0.0532)
0.0524**
(0.0229)
-0.0107
(0.0293)

0.000618
(0.0273)
0.00350
(0.0462)
-0.0129
(0.0466)
-0.0942*
(0.0543)
0.0342*
(0.0182)
0.0200
(0.0235)

0.0247
(0.0357)
-0.00324
(0.0655)
-0.0493
(0.0504)
-0.0890
(0.0566)
-0.0441**
(0.0213)
0.0248
(0.0267)

-0.0375
(0.0417)
-0.00401
(0.0690)
0.0563
(0.0534)
0.00431
(0.0561)
-0.0426*
(0.0242)
-0.0341
(0.0246)

349

349

349

349

Ln (no. households post-tsunami)
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Ln (distance to Banda Aceh)
Ln (no. houses destroyed)

Observations

Notes: Coefficients are marginal probabilities reported from a multinomial logit regression. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 3. Housing aid agencies

Agency

No. of
No. of
Houses
houses projects [No.
per
given
of villages] project

Percent
Percent villages Percent villages
where present, where present, projects where
minimal
where almost
where
provision
“sole” provider
dominant
(< 15% )
(> 90%)
provider

BRR

7541

117

66

34

17

34

All Donor-Implementers

18009

115 [107]

158

80

43

7

Canadian Red Cross

2358

11

214

100

91

0

Catholic Relief Service

2282

18

127

83

33

6

United Nations

2087

16

130

75

56

0

World Vision International

1977

12

165

75

42

0

British Red Cross

1247

7

178

100

57

0

10772

96 [85]

112

45

16

17

1390

15

97

73

33

7

4517

61 [56]

74

34

14

23

1392

14

99

50

21

14

All Domestic Implementers
Uplink
All International Implementers
Habitat for Humanity
(Indonesia)

36

Table 4. House implementers
Village Head reports
Name of housing agency

Type

No. of
No. of
village
houses
projects

Fishermen reports

Mean
quality

Mean
quality
(weighted)

Mean
count of
faults

No. of
fishermen

Canadian Red Cross

Donor-Imp.

10

1758

3.00

3.00

0.81

27

German Information Technology Executive Council(GITEC)1

Donor-Imp.

4

856

3.00

3.00

0.78

9

World Vision International

Donor-Imp.

11

1977

2.73

2.89

0.67

12

Spanish Red Cross

Donor-Imp.

2

250

2.75

2.84

UN

Donor-Imp.

14

2087

2.82

2.83

0.50

6

Catholic Relief Service

Donor-Imp.

18

2282

2.89

2.83

0.00

12

0.43

7

0.83

23

0.33

3

0.00

2

0.89

18

31

British Red Cross

Donor-Imp.

8

1247

2.63

2.82

German Red Cross

Donor-Imp.

4

652

2.75

2.78

Turkey2
Australian Red Cross

Donor-Imp.

8

842

2.50

2.58

Donor-Imp.

6

493

2.58

2.49

CARE

Donor-Imp.

3

544

2.17

2.40

Samaritan's Purse

Donor-Imp.

5

1232

2.30

2.05

Save the Children

Donor-Imp.

2

75

1.50

1.93

Concern Worldwide

Donor-Imp.

2

9

1.00

1.00

GenAssist/CRWRC [Tearfund UK, Mennonite Central Committee]

Int'l Imp.

10

398

2.60

2.93

International Organization for Migration [Various Governments]

Int'l Imp.

5

328

2.70

2.93

CHF International [Direct Relief International, USAID]

Int'l Imp.

7

380

2.86

2.84

Emergency Architects [French Red Cross, French Government]

Int'l Imp.

3

325

2.83

2.69

Oxfam [UK Disaster Emergency Committee]

Int'l Imp.

9

514

2.67

2.66

Habitat for Humanity Indonesia [Mercy Corps International]

Int'l Imp.

13

1392

2.62

2.57

Church World Services [ACT Alliance]

Int'l Imp.

2

192

2.00

2.00

Muslim Aid Indonesia [Oxfam]

Int'l Imp.

6

390

2.33

1.92

KOMPAK s

Domestic Imp.

8

599

2.88

2.92

Caritas d

Domestic Imp.

5

890

2.60

2.90

Education and Information Center for Child Rights(KKSP) [Terre des
Hommes]

Domestic Imp.

3

600

2.67

2.77

Indonesian Government Agencies d
Diakonie Emergency Aid [Katahati Institute]

Domestic Imp.

5

842

2.30

2.64

Domestic Imp.

3

97

2.67

2.53

United Methodist Committee on Relief d
Uplink Indonesia [Canadian Government]

Domestic Imp.

3

31

2.67

2.52

Domestic Imp.

8

1390

2.44

2.42

1.23

Asian Development Bank d
SOS Desa Taruna Indonesia [SOS Kinderdorf International]

Domestic Imp.

5

388

2.40

2.37

0.40

5

Domestic Imp.

3

520

2.33

2.23

1.13

32

Aceh Relief Fund [Compassion International]

Domestic Imp.

4

198

1.38

1.69

3.00

4

Salam Aceh s
MAMAMIA [Caritas]

Domestic Imp.

2

172

1.50

1.68

1.75

8

Domestic Imp.

6

1068

1.42

1.33

1.50

16

Serambi Kasih/Serasih Indonesia
Nor Link/North Link [World Relief]

Domestic Imp.

2

177

1.50

1.25

1.50

2

Domestic Imp.

2

66

1.00

1.00

2.36

14

BRR

BRR

112

7241

2.33

2.32

1.45

86

s

Notes: For international and domestic implementers the main donor agencies are listed in brackets.
d. Agencies named by the village head that are primarily donor agencies. In this case, implementing agencies are domestic
implementers unnamed by the village head.
s. Agencies named in the survey by the village head but that does not show up in the RAN database.
1. GITEC includes the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the German Development Bank (KFW)
2. Turkey includes ABS Turkey, the Istanbul International Brotherhood and Solidarity Association (IBS), and the Turkish Red
Crescent

37

Table 5. Boat NGOs
No. of village
projects

No. of boats
provided

Failure rate

Failure rate
(weighted)

Mercy Corps (several)
Church World Services
Samaritan's Purse
CARDI/NRC(Norwegian Refugee Council)
CHF International
Asian Development Bank
TRIKONI
Yayasan Tanggul Bencana di Indonesia
Yayasan Panglima Laot
Austin International Rescue Operation
Padi Nusatra (California Origin)
Oman
GenAssist/CRWRC
International Red Cross
Triangle Generation Humanitaire
Salam Aceh - Greeting Aceh
Austrian Tourism Export Council

8
5
3
5
3
9
2
2
5
4
2
3
2
11
38
10
3

177
82
55
43
32
25
24
22
18
15
11
8
3
67
502
131
52

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.09
0.17
0.12
0.33

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.01
0.08
0.12
0.15

Government1
World Vision International
BRR
Rumah Zakat Indonesia
International Medical Corps
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Kuwait
Africa Islamic AL-AMIN
France
Oxfam
Yayasan PUGAR
Serambi Kasih/Serasih Indonesia

50
6
9
3
15
2
5
3
2
6
3
2

326
31
21
7
101
9
42
19
36
215
19
10

0.31
0.17
0.50
0.33
0.50
0.50
0.62
0.72
0.50
0.42
0.67
1

0.19
0.32
0.38
0.43
0.50
0.56
0.57
0.58
0.83
0.84
0.95
1

Name of boat agency

Notes: 1. Government includes various Indonesian government agencies including the Minsitry of Fishing Affairs.

Table 6. Agency typing in the model and outcomes

House quality

(q 

B e


2

)

BRR

Donor-implementer

International
implementer

Domestic
Implementer

B=8.94, z=1,
θ =A=0

B=12, θ=.9

B=12, θ=.2

B=10, θ=.6

High house value,
low social value to
dominance
68.2

Low house value,
medium social value
to dominance
46.4

High house value,
Low house value, no
high social value to
social agenda
dominance
40
66.7

Δ(max, or corner at 20)
Per house effort (e 2 )

n.a.

19.5

14.4

19.2

20

30.9

32.2

21.5

Total social effort (e 1 )

n.a.

58.2

57.4

58.1

38

Table 7. Quality of housing
Dependent Variable:
Ln(no. households post-tsunami)
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Ln(distance to Banda Aceh)
Ln(no. houses destroyed)

(1)
0.00822
(0.0648)
-0.0790
(0.0933)
0.117
(0.0996)
0.124
(0.107)
0.0983
(0.106)
-0.0265
(0.0381)

Provider: Donor-Implementer

(2)
0.00713
(0.0608)
-0.0913
(0.0920)
0.130
(0.0942)
0.109
(0.101)
0.0915
(0.103)
-0.0261
(0.0347)
0.300***
(0.0951)

Subjective Quality
(3)
(4)
0.00430
0.0140
(0.0582)
(0.0592)
-0.103
-0.110
(0.0871)
(0.0875)
0.157
0.154
(0.0962)
(0.0956)
0.0928
0.0930
(0.0994)
(0.0981)
0.0743
0.0783
(0.102)
(0.0995)
-0.0300
-0.0328
(0.0322)
(0.0327)

0.444***
(0.138)
-0.0732
(0.186)
0.295
(0.314)

x 1st project
x 2nd project
x 3rd project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: International
Implementer

(6)

0.443***
(0.137)

0.482***
(0.152)

0.496***
(0.129)

0.0240
(0.181)

0.00445
(0.193)

0.100
(0.188)

0.330*
(0.180)

0.412**
(0.204)

0.349**
(0.176)

0.352**
(0.147)

0.313*
(0.162)

0.361**
(0.142)

-0.188
(0.186)

-0.206
(0.186)

-0.199
(0.186)

0.166
(0.162)

0.135
(0.169)

0.162
(0.155)

0.105
(0.154)

0.0631
(0.144)

Yes
322
0.237

341
0.109

0.312***
(0.101)
0.330*
(0.182)
0.364**
(0.168)
0.335*
(0.173)

x 1st project
x 2nd project
x 3rd project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: Domestic
Implementer

-0.0331
(0.120)
-0.187
(0.188)
0.102
(0.186)
0.332*
(0.171)

x 1st project
x 2nd project
x 3rd project
x 2nd or 3rd project

0.0819
(0.155)
-0.0728
(0.197)

Provider: BRR x 2nd project
x 3rd project

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.0433
(0.147)
Yes

322
0.064

322
0.116

322
0.163

322
0.153

x 2nd or 3rd project
Kabupaten fixed effects
Kecamaten fixed effects
Observations
R-squared

(5)
0.0609
(0.0852)
-0.0906
(0.0843)
0.107
(0.110)
0.106
(0.0949)
0.0711
(0.260)
-0.0495
(0.0380)

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

Table 8. Donor-implementer quality shading, robustness to composition of NGOs
(1)

Subjective Quality
(2)

(3)

0.601***
(0.139)
-0.972***
(0.331)
0.0199
(0.181)
0.340*
(0.181)
0.347**
(0.148)
-0.196
(0.186)
0.148
(0.162)
0.0344
(0.147)

0.536***
(0.154)
-0.740**
(0.365)
0.0181
(0.183)
0.341*
(0.182)
0.343**
(0.150)
-0.199
(0.185)
0.144
(0.162)
-0.0376
(0.149)

0.802*
(0.421)
-0.801*
(0.425)
0.675*
(0.379)
0.925**
(0.426)
0.684
(0.458)
0.454
(0.474)
0.711*
(0.405)
0.272
(0.473)

Yes
322
0.169

Yes
299
0.165

Yes
106
0.273

Dependent Variable:

Provider: Donor-Imp. x 1st project
x ratio of others
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: Int'l Imp. x 1st project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: Dom Imp x 1st project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: BRR x 2nd or 3rd proj
Kabupaten fixed effects
Observations
R-squared

Notes: All specifications include village characteristics variables as in Table 7. Robust standard errors clustered at the village
level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 9. Housing quality from fishermen data
Cracked
Walls
(3)

Poor
foundation
(4)

Faulty
plumbing
(5)

(1a)

(1b)

(1c)

Leaky
roof
(2)

Provider:
Donor-Implementer

-0.417
(0.257)

-0.596**
(0.271)

-0.673**
(0.276)

-0.192***
(0.0695)

-0.168*
(0.0919)

-0.111
(0.0681)

-0.139**
(0.0698)

Provider:
International Implementer

-0.171
(0.370)

-0.812
(0.526)

-0.908
(0.582)

-0.265***
(0.0346)

-0.170
(0.133)

-0.123*
(0.0666)

-0.0981
(0.0905)

Provider:
Domestic Implementer

0.0606
(0.170)

0.0602
(0.207)

-0.0826
(0.204)

-0.0927
(0.0690)

0.0176
(0.0888)

0.0623
(0.0889)

0.0702
(0.0878)

Household controls
Village controls
Kabupaten fixed effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

529

371

371

371

371

371

Count of faults

Dependent variable:

371

Notes: In addition to the same village level controls in Table 7, household size, age, and household head education level are
included. For columns (2)-(5), reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from a probit regression. Robust standard errors
clustered at the village level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

40

Table 10. Other elements of quality
Dependent Variable:

Percent piped
water
(1)

Family size
Age of household head
Education of HH head (levels 1-8)
Ln(no. households post-tsunami)
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Ln(distance to Banda Aceh)
Ln(no. houses destroyed)
Two or more housing provider
Agency type: Donor-Implementer
Agency type: International Implementer
Agency type: Domestic Implementer
Kabupaten fixed effects
Observations

-5.162
(5.260)
-0.896
(9.172)
11.28
(7.233)
1.393
(8.342)
-15.23*
(8.244)
1.065
(3.087)
-11.90
(7.945)
16.19*
(9.794)
-5.686
(12.62)
-9.357
(10.54)
Yes
169

Count of rooms
(2)
0.00402
(0.00722)
-0.000140
(0.00158)
-0.00232
(0.0101)
0.0349
(0.0223)
0.00199
(0.0425)
0.0560*
(0.0340)
-0.0153
(0.0303)
0.0285
(0.0239)
0.00294
(0.00961)

-0.00975
(0.0366)
-0.0262
(0.0476)
-0.0881**
(0.0376)
Yes
486

Ln(Count of houses in aid in
2009)
(3)
(4)

0.576***
(0.0892)
-0.190***
(0.0727)
0.00180
(0.0720)
0.0504
(0.0676)
-0.0895
(0.0667)
0.239***
(0.0715)

Yes
179

0.568***
(0.0894)
-0.185***
(0.0694)
0.000658
(0.0697)
0.0570
(0.0721)
-0.0768
(0.0706)
0.234***
(0.0708)
0.107*
(0.0646)
0.0179
(0.0924)
-0.0304
(0.112)
0.0384
(0.105)
Yes
179

Notes: Implementer types in column (1), (2), and (4) are for the major housing provider in the village. Coefficients are reported
from Poisson regression in column (2) and OLS in the others. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 11. Other physical capital and village traditions

Count public Count co-op
Percent
bldgs
bldgs
roads paved

Major housing provider:
Donor-implementer
Major housing provider:
Int'l implementer
Major housing provider:
Domestic Implementer
Additional village
controls

Evening pray Occupational
Plant pines
count per
choice to stay a
or grasses
week in 09
fisherman in 09

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.256**

1.083

16.07**

0.241*

0.0608

-0.0701

(0.102)

(0.817)

(7.509)

(0.133)

(0.0753)

(0.0750)

0.175

-0.183

22.89**

0.296*

-0.115

-0.169*

(0.122)

(1.003)

(10.10)

(0.171)

(0.0948)

(0.0990)

0.198*

1.532*

20.64***

0.351***

0.159**

0.0591

(0.120)

(0.868)

(7.765)

(0.135)

(0.0744)

(0.0716)

Public bldgs
destroyed

Buildings
destroyed

Houses
destroyed

No. of mosques
& dusans

Family controls

Yes

Yes

Kabupaten fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

184

184

174

147

586

571

Notes: Columns (1), (2), and (5) are Poisson, Column (3) is OLS, and Columns (4) and (6) are probit regressions. All
specifications include the first five village variables in Table 7. Column (4) is based on coastal villages only. Column (6)
additionally includes the number of aid boats and fishing family in 07, and whether one was a pre-tsunami boat owner or a
succeeding fishing household. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

42

Table 12. Sharing and boat failure in fishermen data
Dependent variable:

Family size
Age of household head
Education of HH head
(levels 1-8)
Pre-tsunami boat owner
Ln (boat aid 07)
Ln (no. fish families 07)
Ln(no. households posttsunami)
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Ln(distance to Banda
Aceh)

Shared boat ownership
in 07
(1)
(2)
-0.0205
(0.0188)
-0.00111
(0.00244)
-0.0326
(0.0238)
-0.0929
(0.0623)
-0.151***
(0.0446)
0.0345
(0.0256)
-0.0607
(0.0743)
-0.139
(0.0967)
0.0520
(0.0921)
0.196**
(0.0762)
0.206***
(0.0647)

Discard boat because of poor quality in 09
(3)

0.000334
(0.0180)
-0.00238
(0.00263)
-0.0466*
(0.0251)
-0.137**
(0.0613)
-0.122***
(0.0419)
0.0422
(0.0265)
-0.188**
(0.0762)
-0.0475
(0.115)
0.0513
fishing
0.166**
(0.0727)
0.0811
(0.0773)

-0.183**
(0.0901)
0.482**
(0.193)
0.150
(0.221)
0.0946
(0.137)

Boat NGO : IMC
Boat NGO: Boat D-I
Boat NGO: BRR

0.292***
(0.0892)

TGH*Share
IMC*Share
Boat D-I*Share
Rest*Share
TGH*Not share
IMC*Not share
Boat D-I*Not share

0.425***
(0.151)
0.370**
(0.154)
0.151
(0.233)
0.107
(0.132)
-0.137
(0.107)

0.381*
(0.212)
0.457***
(0.162)
0.0971
(0.205)
0.180
(0.166)
0.0121
(0.150)

n.a.

n.a.

-0.312***
(0.0629)
0.00724
(0.0150)
0.0492
(0.0506)

-0.298***
(0.0648)
-0.00567
(0.0160)
0.0785
(0.0551)

212

192

Number of trips per
week
389

389

(6)

0.295***
(0.0954)

Hours per fishing trip

Observations

(5)

-0.0179
-0.0362
-0.0143
-0.0273
(0.0222) (0.0273) (0.0233) (0.0310)
0.00140 0.00384 4.86e-05 0.00382
(0.00343) (0.00335) (0.00379) (0.00392)
0.0102
0.0239
0.0319
0.0477*
(0.0224) (0.0255) (0.0221) (0.0263)
-0.0396
-0.113
-0.0216
-0.0924
(0.0656) (0.0718) (0.0745) (0.0903)
-0.0335
-0.0272
-0.0264
-0.0256
(0.0339) (0.0396) (0.0420) (0.0479)
0.0123
0.0224
0.0332
0.0485*
(0.0171) (0.0174) (0.0266) (0.0290)
0.0379
0.0494
-0.0236
-0.0233
(0.0564) (0.0625) (0.0600) (0.0695)
-0.430** -0.303* -0.432**
-0.222
(0.189)
(0.176)
(0.202)
(0.192)
0.0511
0.0581
0.0821
0.116
(0.0929) (0.0958) (0.0987)
(0.100)
-0.0739
-0.0716
-0.135
-0.161
(0.0801) (0.0836) (0.0985) (0.0985)
0.122**
0.115
0.163***
0.133
(0.0542) (0.0714) (0.0574) (0.0876)
Shared ownership

Boat NGO : TGH

(4)

281

257

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

43

Appendix 1. Map and survey area
The figure shows a map of the survey area, with a blow-up (right side in figure) of the Banda Aceh area (upper-left
part of coastal area). 1 We cover all villages in three contiguous districts (Banda Aceh, Aceh Jaya, and Aceh Besar)
going south and north-east of the capital Banda Aceh. In addition we covered the fishing villages in two other
districts, up to a defined geographic limit moving east from Banda Aceh into Pidie (the last sub-district surveyed is
Meurah Dua) and moving south into Aceh Barat (the last sub-district surveyed is Meuruebo). These include villages
on islands offshore. The map shows household survival rates by village (yellow being the worst). Unfortunately, the
map is based on the post-tsunami government rendering of village boundaries which is grossly inaccurate. We took
GPS readings of the center (the mosque) of the living area of each village. In only 6% of the cases is the GPS
reading within the supposed village boundaries. In 15% of the cases, it is over 10 kilometers away. Coastal villages
are drawn as non-coastal and vice-versa which explains why, in parts of the map, a yellow (low survival) village
may be shown next to a supposed coastal village which is dark (high survival). Nevertheless the map depicts the
general survey area.

44

Appendix 2. House and boat NGOs operating in one village
a. House NGOs operating in one village
Village Head reports
Name of housing agency
Yayasan Budha Tzu Chi
Islamic Relief
Indonesia Red Cross
Yayasan Budha Suci
The Salvation Army
Brunei Darussalam
Terre des Hommes
World Relief
Qatar
Bakrie Group
CARDI/NRC(Norwegian Refugee Council)
Chamber of Commerce and Industry of
Indonesia(KADIN)
Atlas Logistique
Islamic Development Bank
Jesuit Refugee Services
Sara Henderson
Sinohidro China
P2KP (Program Penanggulangan Kemiskinan di
Perkotaan)
Lion's Club
GAA and Hivos funds
Welthungerhilfe
Yayasan Sosial Kreasi
YAKKUM Emergency Unit
Plan International
Yayasan Tanggul Bencana di Indonesia
Yayasan SHEEP
World Bank
Chinese Red Cross
Kuwait
The Saudi Charity Campaign
Yayasan Berkati Indonesia
CORDIA Medan
Soroptimist International of Jakarta
Mercy Corps (several)

Type
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.
Donor-Imp.

No. of
No. of
village
houses
projects
1
850
1
668
1
401
1
241
1
109
1
70
1
48
1
42
1
170
1
204
1
202

Fishermen reports

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
2.00

Mean
quality
(weighted)
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
2.00

Mean
count of
faults
1.33
0.00
1.00

No. of
fishermen
3
4
2

3.00
0.00
2.00
1.33

5
3
1
3

Mean
quality

Donor-Imp.

1

100

1.00

1.00

0.00

3

Int'l Imp.
Int'l Imp.
Int'l Imp.
Int'l Imp.
Domestic Imp.

1
1
1
1
1

274
167
106
51
606

3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00

3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00

0.00

6

0.00

2

Domestic Imp.

1

400

3.00

3.00

Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.
Domestic Imp.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

250
184
174
118
118
96
38
31
309
300
2
256
90
72
220
200

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.50
2.50
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.50
2.50
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00

0.00

1

0.60
2.00

10
4

1.00
2.00

3
1

45

b. Boat NGOs operating in one village
Name of boat agency

No. of village
projects

No. of boats
provided

Failure rate

Failure rate
(weighted)

German Information Technology Executive
1
50
0
0
Council(GITEC)1
Catholic Relief Service
1
35
0
0
Saragih (rich person)
1
34
0
0
Tearfund
1
17
0
0
Yayasan Sosial Kreasi
1
10
0
0
CARE
1
8
0
0
Yayasan Berkati Indonesia
1
7
0
0
Aceh Relief Fund
1
6
0
0
AUSTCARE
1
6
0
0
ACTED - Agency for Technical Cooperation
1
5
0
0
YPK
1
5
0
0
Personal Aid
1
3
0
0
Save the Children
1
2
0
0
British Red Cross
1
1
0
0
Obor Berkat Indonesia
1
1
0
0
YJK
1
1
0
0
Diantama (Rich Person)
1
5
0.20
0.20
World Relief
1
25
0.40
0.40
UN
1
50
0.50
0.50
Food and Agricultural Organization
1
9
0.89
0.89
Notes: 1. GITEC includes the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the German Development Bank (KFW)

46

Appendix 3. Relation between housing quality and excess housing
The top figure illustrates the case where r=0.0002. As the excess housing requested by the village head increases
from 20, via reduction in γ, the quality of housing aid declines. However, note that this relationship is positive when
excess housing requested is less than 20. This relationship between housing quality and excess housing is sensitive
to r as can be seen in the bottom figure. Raising r to 0.00022 makes the relationship monotonic over the whole
domain.

Appendix 4. Guarantees and housing quality reported by village heads and fishermen
In column 1 of the table to this Appendix, the offering of guarantees is only significantly correlated with
one village characteristic, whether the mullah survived the tsunami or not. This might suggest that there is some
modest room for negotiation about whether guarantees are offered. Donor-implementers are more likely to offer
guarantees than other types of agencies, and all types are more likely than BRR. In terms of possible impacts, in
column 2, with the exception of BRR, interacting implementer type with the count of guarantees offered (0, 1, 2)
suggests overall that the offer of guarantees is correlated with higher house quality. A breakdown (not shown) into
each type of guarantee shows both types matter, with the cement composition test being much more widespread and
having stronger associations. The fact that guarantees by BRR, a big provider, are not associated with quality
improvements suggests the guarantees do not always have real value. Columns 3 and 4 concern other matters
discussed in the text.

47

Appendix 4 table
Dependent Variable:
Ln(no. households post-tsunami)
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Ln(distance to Banda Aceh)
Ln(no. houses destroyed)
Provider: Donor-Implementer x 1st project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: Int'l Implementer x 1st project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: Dom. Implementer x 1st project
x 2nd or 3rd project
Provider: BRR x 2nd or 3rd proj

Guarantees+
(1)
0.0494
(0.0777)
0.120
(0.0918)
0.215**
(0.0992)
-0.0352
(0.107)
-0.0115
(0.0944)
-0.0460
(0.0383)
0.806***
(0.137)
0.366***
(0.128)
0.246
(0.197)
0.367**
(0.147)
0.269**
(0.134)
0.221*
(0.114)
0.163
(0.117)

Gurantee x Donor-Implementer x 1st project
Gurantee x Donor-Implementer x 2nd or 3rd
proj.
Gurantee x Int'l Implementer x 1st project
Gurantee x Int'l Implementer x 2nd or 3rd proj.
Gurantee x Dom. Implementer x 1st project
Gurantee x Dom. Implementer x 2nd or 3rd
proj.
Gurantee x BRR x 1st project
Gurantee x BRR x 2nd or 3rd proj.
Fishermen level covariates
Kabupaten dummies
Observations

Yes
349

Subjective quality
(2)
(3)
0.00262
0.0486
(0.0539)
(0.0847)
-0.129*
-0.201
(0.0773)
(0.180)
0.130
0.0633
(0.0922)
(0.113)
0.0831
0.230*
(0.0974)
(0.123)
0.0720
0.161
(0.0964)
(0.109)
-0.0262
-0.105*
(0.0307)
(0.0600)
0.470**
0.303
(0.205)
(0.199)
-0.113
-0.438*
(0.282)
(0.255)
0.298
0.192
(0.303)
(0.237)
0.548**
0.364**
(0.213)
(0.180)
-0.619***
-0.367
(0.232)
(0.241)
0.111
0.0211
(0.262)
(0.210)
0.124
0.0228
(0.212)
(0.176)
0.166*
(0.0897)
0.677***
(0.150)
0.295**
(0.125)
0.0448
(0.128)
0.329*
(0.169)
0.323**
(0.131)
0.0983
(0.197)
0.109
(0.144)
Yes
322

Yes
157

Count of faults
(4)
0.0953
(0.198)
0.0370
(0.313)
0.166
(0.228)
-0.109
(0.170)
0.119
(0.143)
0.0113
(0.0567)
-0.696**
(0.340)
-1.192**
(0.566)
-0.717
(0.540)
-2.688***
(0.965)
-0.148
(0.292)
-0.0827
(0.361)
-0.369
(0.383)

Yes
Yes
371

Notes: The sample for Column (3) is village projects where fishermen are interviewed and for column (4) is the fishermen where
agency levels are known. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
+
Guarantees are whether the NGO offered to test cement quality used in construction or offered a six month to one year
guarantee to repair defects. If the project has both types of guarantee a two is assigned, and if the project has only one type of
guarantee a one is assigned.

48

Appendix 5. Religious practices and traditional occupations
Dependent variable:

Family size
Age of household head
Education of HH head (levels 1-8)
Ln(distance to Banda Aceh)
No. of mosques
No. of dusan
(sub-villages)

Poisson: Evening pray count per
week, 09
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.00612
(0.0140)
0.00626***
(0.00205)
0.0218
(0.0177)
-0.0370
(0.0556)
0.0659
(0.0435)
-0.0187
(0.0209)

0.0112
(0.0137)
0.00577***
(0.00211)
0.0160
(0.0180)
-0.0439
(0.0571)
0.0613
(0.0401)
-0.0341
(0.0224)

0.0352***
(0.0131)
-0.0108***
(0.00242)
-0.0995***
(0.0191)
-0.205***
(0.0480)

0.0375***
(0.0132)
-0.0112***
(0.00240)
-0.102***
(0.0187)
-0.181***
(0.0442)

0.0941**
(0.0457)
0.127*
(0.0669)

0.109**
(0.0456)
0.132*
(0.0681)

Pre-tsunami boat owner
Successor fishing family
Major housing provider:
Donor-implementor
Major housing provider:
Int'l implementor
Major housing provider:
Domestic Implementor
Fraction houses by
Christian agency

Probit: Occupational choice to stay a
fisherman in 09

0.0608
(0.0753)
-0.115
(0.0948)
0.159**
(0.0744)

-0.0701
(0.0750)
-0.169*
(0.0990)
0.0591
(0.0716)
-0.123
(0.118)

Village controls

Yes

Yes

Kabupaten dummies

Yes

Yes

-0.226**
(0.0937)
Yes + no. of aid boats and fishing
family in 07
Yes

Yes

Observations
586
586
571
571
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

49

Data Appendix
The village surveys in summer and fall 2005, fall 2007 and fall 2009 ask questions about education,
experience, and survival of village and religious leaders; population composition by sex and age both before and
after the tsunami; migration; occupational structure; destruction of village lands, seawalls, aquaculture areas,
docking areas and mangroves; pre- and post-tsunami data on political, legal, and social institutions; pre and post
tsunami information on physical capital (houses, boats, public buildings); detailed information on initial and
ongoing operations of NGOs, local governments, and relief agencies providing housing, boats, public buildings and
restoration of the coast line; and detailed information on the village fishing industry pre- and post-tsunami, including
questions on marketing, fishing fleet composition, catch composition and boat replacement. The 2005 survey of 111
villages focused on benchmarking destruction and village conditions. The 2007 and 2009 surveys of 199 villages
(including the original 111) focused on aspects of the aid effort and institutional transformation of villages, such as
the democratic evolution and quality of aid as related to different types of aid agencies.
The fishermen surveys ask about family structure, occupations, social status, income and aspect of debt and
wealth, housing and boat destruction and aid, fishing productivity, and family participation in village activities. The
2005 survey focused on 475 original boat owners and captains in 77 villages (about 40% of surviving captains and
owners in those villages), benchmarking family destruction of people, housing and boats, as well as pre-tsunami
productivity. The 2007 and 2009 surveys follow these families, marking their rebuilding of families, new
occupational choices, aid received, re-establishment or not of fishing activities, and evolving family participation in
village life. In the second wave as followed in the third, besides the original families we extended village coverage
and added a module for new boat owners— villagers given an aid boat who had never owned a boat. In the second
wave (2007) we have about 700 families in 96 villages and in the third wave (2009) after some sorting and attrition
we drop coverage to about 635 fishing families in 90 villages.Here our focus is on the quality of aid received and
response to low quality boat aid.
We need to empirically classify the aid agencies in Aceh. The agencies we focus on are those reported by
the village head in 2009 as having delivered aid in their villages. We classify each agency that shows up in the
survey as whether it is international or local, government or private, and its religious affiliation if it has any.
However, we are unable to classify each agency’s principal or agent, i.e., donor or implementer status in Aceh
simply based on agency names. For this we utilize an additional source of data. The Indonesian government,
working with the UN, has also recorded aid delivery aspects in the “RAN” [Recovery Aceh-Nias] database
[http://rand.brr.go.id/RAND/reference]. We use the RAN database to classify agency types, particularly whether it
was an implementing agency or a funding agency or both in Aceh. In RAN, for each project in a village a first level
implementer is named as well as the underlying donors, often many in number. A first level implementer is the
leading agency that either directly hires the labor to be used in construction or monitors any sub-contractors.
We classify an agency named by the village head as a donor-implementer if it appears as both a donor and
implementer in at least 30% of the villages it provides housing in RAN.36 Although we drew a 30% cutoff, almost
all agencies we classify as donor-implementers are always both donor and implementer in our villages. Donorimplementers typically have on the ground operations with central offices in Banda Aceh (capital of Aceh), and
large teams of trained people in the field. All agencies in this category are considered international agencies as
well37.
We define an international implementer, if the agency named by the village head is an international first
level implementer representing a different, usually international donor in RAN. While their donors face the agency
problem of monitoring the quality of aid delivered by the implementer, these implementers have international
reputations at stake.
The domestic implementer category occurs when a village in our survey names an aid agency that is a
domestic implementer or an agency which according to RAN is just a donor and not an implementer. As such, the
underlying domestic or international donors must hire a domestic implementer. As the visible aid agency, sometimes
the village head names the international donor rather than the domestic implementer— perhaps a function of greater
visibility. For example, some international donors (such as religious NGOs) sent delegations for short visits to
villages where their money was being spent. Some international donors and their domestic implementers are
36

In some cases an NGO has multiple projects in the same village. We require for at least one of those they are both
the donor and implementer
37
One organization, the Bakrie Group, is actually a domestic agency. However, unlike the many temporary local
NGOs, the Bakrie Group is one of the largest Indonesian business conglomerates and is not short lived and has a
reputation to take care for. Hence, we classify it into the donor-implementer category rather than including it in the
domestic implementer category.

50

intertwined by village heads. Either their names are explicitly linked, or in one year one agency is named and in
another the other is named. Common examples include NORLINK/Salam Aceh and Caritas/Mammamia. Appendix
Table 1 summarizes the agency classification based on RAN.
Variables

Obs

Mean

A. Village level variables
Total housing aid in 09
No. of households post-tsunami
Survival rate population
Mullah survive
Pre-tsunami arisan group
Distance to Banda Aceh
No. of houses destroyed
Dominant provider is BRR
Dominant provider is D-I
Dominant provider is Int'l Imp.
Dominant provider is Dom Imp.
Number of housing projects
Percent centrally piped water
Number of public buildings
Number of Co-op buildings
Percent roads paved
Plant pines, grasses

190
190
188
189
190
188
185
190
190
190
190
190
180
190
190
185
160

199.211
177.105
0.749
0.651
0.684
67.659
210.984
0.200
0.432
0.116
0.247
1.947
40.706
3.679
0.516
53.319
0.450

B. Project level variables
Subjective quality
Objective quality
Agency is D-I
Agency is BRR
Agency is Int'l Imp.
Agency is Dom Imp.
1st level D-I
2nd level D-I
3rd level D-I
1st level BRR
2nd level BRR
3rd level BRR
1st level Int'l Imp.
2nd level Int'l Imp.
3rd level Int'l Imp.
1st level Dom Imp.
2nd level Dom Imp.
3rd level Dom Imp.

341
370
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570
570

2.4619
0.7351
0.1912
0.1930
0.1070
0.1579
0.1439
0.0351
0.0123
0.0667
0.0982
0.0281
0.0386
0.0421
0.0263
0.0825
0.0526
0.0228

Variable

Obs

Mean

C. Fishermen level variables
Count of faults in house
Count of additions in house
Count of rooms
Family size in 09
Household head age in 09
Household education in 09
Agency is D-I
Agency is BRR
Agency is Int'l Imp.
Agency is Dom Imp.
1st level D-I
2nd or 3rd level D-I
1st level Int'l Imp.
2nd or 3rd level Int'l Imp.
1st level BRR
2nd or 3rd level BRR
1st level Dom Imp.
2nd or 3rd level Dom Imp.
Have leakyroof
Have cracked wall
Have poor foundation
Have faulty plumbing
Have kitchen
Have bathroom
Have plumbing
Evening pray count
Household size in 09
Fishermen in 09
Previous boat owner
Fishing family succession

643
643
577
643
640
637
587
587
587
587
289
289
289
289
289
289
289
289
643
643
643
643
643
643
643
632
643
643
643
645

1.036
2.300
1.920
4.005
42.923
3.551
0.317
0.104
0.210
0.370
0.208
0.014
0.028
0.014
0.135
0.166
0.370
0.066
0.260
0.328
0.207
0.241
0.628
0.890
0.782
4.220
4.005
0.664
0.499
0.081

51

