                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EXPORT PRICES OF U.S. FIRMS

                                         James Harrigan
                                          Xiangjun Ma
                                        Victor Shlychkov

                                       Working Paper 17706
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17706


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2011




We thank David Weinstein, Eric Verhoogen, Antoine Gervais, and audiences at the NBER, EIIT-Purdue,
and World Bank for very helpful comments. This paper uses restricted data that was analyzed at the
U.S. Census Bureau’s Research Data Centers in New York City and North Carolina. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information
is disclosed. James Harrigan thanks the University of Virginia’s Bankard Fund for Political Economy
for financial support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by James Harrigan, Xiangjun Ma, and Victor Shlychkov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Export Prices of U.S. Firms
James Harrigan, Xiangjun Ma, and Victor Shlychkov
NBER Working Paper No. 17706
December 2011, Revised June 2012
JEL No. F1,F10,F23

                                             ABSTRACT

Using confidential firm-level data from the United States in 2002, we show that exporting firms charge
prices for narrowly defined goods that differ substantially with the characteristics of firms and export
markets. We control for selection into export markets using a three-stage estimator. We have three
main results. First, we find that highly productive and skill-intensive firms charge higher prices, while
capital-intensive firms charge lower prices. Second, U.S. firms charge slightly higher prices to larger
and richer markets, and substantially higher prices to markets other than Canada and Mexico. Third,
the correlation between distance and product-level export prices is largely due to a composition effect.


James Harrigan                                      Victor Shlychkov
Department of Economics                             Columbia University
University of Virginia                              vs2109@columbia.edu
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
harrigan@nber.org

Xiangjun Ma
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
xm2e@virginia.edu
                                               1.   INTRODUCTION

   Economists now know a lot about the characteristics of exporting plants and firms: they
are bigger and more productive than non-exporters, and in many countries they are also more
skill-intensive and capital-intensive.2 For U.S. firms, recent research by Bernard, Jensen,
and Schott (2005) and Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2007) shows that exporters
are also quite likely to import, and big firms trade many di!erent products with many
di!erent countries. These facts about heterogeneous exporters have informed a vibrant
theory literature, beginning with Melitz (2003) and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum
(2003).

   Economists have also documented systematic heterogeneity in the prices that are charged
for the same traded products. Starting with Schott (2004), it has been established that
even within narrowly defined product categories, average prices di!er systematically with
the characteristics of importing and exporting countries. Since many firms may sell even in
narrowly defined product catergories, explaining these product-level findings requires firm-
level data. There have been only a few studies that examine export price variation across
markets using firm-level data, including Martin (2012) for France, Bastos and Silva (2010)
for Portugal, Gorg, Halpern, and Murakozy (2010) for Hungary, and Manova and Zhang
(2012) for China. Our paper is the first to use U.S. firm-level data to look at export pricing,
and we establish some new facts:


   • Within country-product categories, firms that are more productive and skill-intensive
     charge higher prices, while larger and more capital-intensive firms charge lower prices.
   • Within narrow product categories, exporting firms charge higher prices to larger and
     wealthier markets, and to countries other than Canada and Mexico.
   • The product-level correlation between export prices and destination market character-
     istics is largely due to a selection e!ect, where firms that charge higher prices are more
     likely to select into tougher markets, where "tougher" refers to both the costs of market
     access and the degree of competition.

   Understanding firm-level export pricing has implications for both theory and price index
measurement in international economics. The facts we establish are broadly supportive of
models where consumers value quality, but quality is expensive to produce. With hetero-
geneous producers, as in the models of Verhoogen (2008), Kugler and Verhoogen (2012),
Johnson (2012), Hallak and Sivadasan (2009) and Baldwin and Harrigan (2011), in equilib-
rium more successful firms produce higher cost and higher quality goods which command
higher prices. What we mean by price in this context is the ordinary definition of money
per unit, although consumers who value quality can be thought of as choosing goods on the
basis of "quality-adjusted" prices: an expensive, high quality good may have a lower "quality
adjusted" price than a cheap, shoddy good.
   2 The literature documenting these facts is vast. Good summaries of the evidence include Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and

Schott (2007) for the United States and Mayer and Ottaviano (2008) for Europe. Wagner (2012) reviews the most recent
evidence.




                                                           2
   An implication of these models of quality competition and heterogeneous firms is that the
marginal firm has low quality and sells at a low price. When more firms enter, the entering
firms charge lower prices, and thus average unit value in a market will fall. This extensive
margin of firm entry can be thought of as happening across markets that di!er in their level
of competition, with more entry and thus lower average prices in less competitive markets.
A simple comparison of average money prices across markets, however, will have misleading
implications for welfare, since with quality competition the true price index can be lower
when the average money price is higher.

   The extensive margin of firm entry may also operate at business cycle frequencies, with
less competitive firms entering in booms and exiting during busts, as in the models of Ghironi
and Melitz (2005) and Feenstra, Obstfeld, and Russ (2009). In Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and
Feenstra, Obstfeld, and Russ (2009) there is no quality competition, firms compete only on
price, and the best firms have the lowest prices. Average export prices rise in booms, since the
marginal entering firms have high costs and prices. With quality competition, as suggested
by our results, this implication is reversed: average export prices fall in booms, since the
marginal entering firms have low costs and prices. While our data analysis looks only at
cross-sectional variation in export prices, the support that we find for quality competition
thus has implications for models of international business cycles.


                               2.   ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

   In this section we discuss our hypotheses and how we will test them. Subsequent sections
discuss data and measurement issues, and report our results.


            2.1.   Firm-level export prices and destination market characteristics

   Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) found that there is a strong and robust relationship between
destination market characteristics and export prices at the HS10 product level: product-
level U.S. export prices in 2005 increase strongly with distance and decrease with GDP,
GDP per capita, and remoteness. Their theoretical explanation for these findings comes
from a variation on the Melitz (2003) model. In their model, heterogeneous firms compete
on quality as well as price, with the most profitable firms producing high quality, high price
goods. Selection implies that only the best firms will enter the toughest markets, which
theory suggests will be small, distant, and well-served by other exporters. The empirical
findings are then explained as a composition e!ect: since only the best firms sell in the
toughest markets, and these firms charge high prices, average prices at the product level will
be increasing in measures of market toughness. An alternative explantion is simple price
discimination, with firms charging systematically higher prices in more distant markets. The
importance of these firm-level mechanisms, selection and/or price discrimination, can only
be evaluated with firm-level data.




                                               3
2.1.1.   A simple decomposition

   As a matter of arithmetic, the average price of a given product exported to destination
d is a quantity-weighted average of the prices charged by all the N firms f that export the
good,

                                              !
                                              N
                                                                                           qf d
                                    p̄d =            wf d pf d ,                wf d =            ,                             (1)
                                                                                          "
                                                                                          N
                                              f =1                                           qf d
                                                                                          f =1

where pf d and qf d are the price and quantity respectively of the good sold by firm f in
destination d, N is the number of exporting firms selling the good, and the weight wf d is
firm f’s quantity market share in market d, that is, the quantity share of firm f among all
firms selling in destination d. For each good, we also define a given firm’s quantity-weighted
average price across all D markets,

                                               !
                                               D
                                                                                           qf d
                                     p̄f =           ! f d pf d ,               !f d =                  ,
                                                                                          "
                                                                                          D
                                               d=1                                               qf d
                                                                                         d=1

The weight ! f d is firm f ’s quantity share of its total worldwide sales that take place in
destination d. The overall average world price for a good is
                                 "
                                 D "
                                   N                                                                    "
                                                                                                        D
                                            p f d qf d                                                 qf d
                                 d=1 f =1                    !
                                                             N
                                                                                                   d=1
                        p=                               =          p̄f w̄f ,          w̄f =                          ,
                                   "
                                   D "
                                     N                                                            "
                                                                                                  D "N
                                              qf d           f =1                                              qf d
                                   d=1 f =1                                                       d=1 f =1

where w̄f is firm f ’s average quantity market share in the world market, defined as f ’s total
quantity sold divided by total quantity sold by all firms. With these definitions, we establish
a decomposition that shows how the destination d average price p̄d di!ers from the world
average price p̄:
   L!""# 1. price decomposition across destinations

                        !
                        N                                !
                                                         N                               !
                                                                                         N
           p̄d ! p̄ =          (pf d ! p̄f )w̄f +               (wf d ! w̄f )p̄f +               (wf d ! w̄f )(pf d ! p̄f ) .   (2)
                        f =1                             f =1                             f =1
                        #          $%           &        #             $%          &     #                      $%         &
                        price discrimination                  market share                                  interaction

   Proof. By substitution from the above definitions,
                                                             !
                                                             N                    !
                                                                                  N
                                           p̄d ! p =                wf d pf d !          p̄f w̄f .
                                                             f =1                 f =1

                                    "
                                    N                            "
                                                                 N
Adding and substracting                    wf d p̄f and                w̄f (pf d ! p̄f ) from the right hand side of the
                                    f =1                        f =1
above, collecting terms, and re-arranging gives (2)

                                                                       4
   If a given firm charges the same price in all destinations, then pf d = p̄f , and the first and
third summations in (2) will be zero. As a consequence, the average price across destinations
will di!er only because of di!erences in the quantities sold by di!erent firms. More generally,
the average export price can also di!er because a given firm charges di!erent prices in
di!erent destinations, in which case the first and third summations in (2) will be non-zero.

2.1.2.   An econometric model

   We now turn to a closer examination of firm-level export pricing behavior across markets.
We begin with two descriptive linear equations. Let Xd denote a vector of destination
country characteristics including distance, real GDP, etc. Linear projections of log export
prices from the US of product i by firm f to destination d are given by

                                     ln pif d = "1i + !Xd + #if d ,                                   (3)
                                    ln pif d = "1if + !Xd + #if d   .                                 (4)
The parameter "1i is a product fixed e!ect, while "1if is a product-firm fixed e!ect. The
error term is #if d . The vector ! is the parameter of interest, as it answers the question:
how do firm-level export prices di!er across destinations? Equation (3), which includes
only product fixed e!ects, identifies ! through variation both within firms across markets
and across firms. In this way it is very similar to the specifications estimated by Baldwin
and Harrigan (2011) using product level data. By contrast, equation (4), which includes
product-firm fixed e!ects, identifies ! using only within-firm variation across markets, and
thus allows a direct test of the hypothesis that firms vary their export prices systematically
with export market characteristics Xd .

   Any model of product market competition suggests that market entry is a key choice for
the firm, and that firm characteristics will determine which markets are entered. Theory also
suggests that the price charged conditional on entry will be a key determinant of entry, which
implies that the interpretation of ! in equations (3) and (4) is complicated by a selection
bias. In particular, if firms compete on quality so that higher-price firms are the most
competitive, ! will conflate selection and price discrimination e!ects. The key statistical
issue is that we only observe a firm’s pricing decision when it chooses to sell in a market.
Consider the reduced form export volume equation

                                ln yif d = M ax[0, "2i + "Xd + uif d ] ,                              (5)
where yif d is export sales of product i by firm f in market d. Economic theory suggests that
the errors uif d from the export volume equation (5) will be correlated with the errors #if d
from the export price equations (3) and (4), E[#if d |"1i , "2i , Xd , uif d ] = $uif d . This correlation
is what gives rise to selection bias in the price equations (3) and (4). Given a consistent
estimate ûif d of the errors uif d from (5), selection bias can be controlled for by including ûif d
as a regressor in (3) and (4), leading to the estimating equations

                                ln pif d = "1i + !Xd + % ûif d + #if d ,                             (6)
                                ln pif d = "1if + !Xd + % ûif d + #if d .                            (7)



                                                    5
If uif d in (5) is assumed to be normally distributed, then (5) can be estimated by Tobit, with
the residuals ûif d from the estimated export participation equation (5) used as a regressor
in the export price equations (6) and (7), which are estimated by OLS. This is the two-step
estimator developed by Wooldridge (1995). A notable feature of Wooldridge’s estimator
in our context is that identification of the price equations does not require an exclusion
restriction: that is, the model is identified even if the vector of country characteristics Xd is
the same in both the selection equation (5) and the price equations (6) and (7). The intuition
is that the export volume ln yif d functions as an excluded variable in the price equations.
That is, variability in ln yif d is an independent source of variation which allows ! in the price
equations to identified.

   A drawback of Wooldridge’s two-step estimator is that assuming that uif d in (5) is nor-
mally distributed is unnecessarily restrictive. To avoid this assumption, instead of estimating
(5) by Tobit we estimate it using a two-step Heckman estimator, which assumes normality
only in the Probit step but not for the equation errors uif d . To be precise, in our first step
we estimate the probability of entry using a reduced form Probit,

                                  Pr (yif d > 0) = ! ("2 + "Xd ) .                            (8)
Equation (8) is estimated over all possible product"firm"destinations. From (8) we obtain
the estimated inverse Mills ratio &ˆ if d . We then estimate the export volume equation for
                                                                          ˆ if d as an additional
positive levels of exports by OLS, with the estimated inverse Mills ratio &
regressor,

                                                        ˆ if d + uif d .
                                ln yif d = "2 + "Xd + % &                                     (9)
                                  ˆ2 ! ˆ
The residuals ûif d = ln yif d ! "    "Xd from the two-step Heckman procedure are then used
as the control for selection in the export price equation (6). When estimating (7), which
includes product-firm fixed e!ects, equation (9) also includes product-firm fixed e!ects.


                    2.2.   Firm-level export prices and firm characteristics

   The analyses above focus only on how destination market characteristics a!ect firms’
pricing decisions. For the subset of our data that consists of exports of manufactured
goods we can go one step further and see how firm characteristics such as productivity, skill
intensity, and capital intensity are related to export pricing. Adding firm characteristics Xf
to the analysis in the preceding subsection leads to selection and pricing equations

                           ln yif d = M ax[0, "2 + " 1 Xd + " 2 Xf + uif d ]                 (10)
                           ln pif d = "1i + ! 1 Xd + ! 2 Xf + % ûif d + #if d               (11)
Equation (11) is our most general descriptive equation for export pricing, since it includes
both destination and firm characteristics. But for the purposes of consistently estimating
the e!ects of firm characteristics, a model with destination-product fixed e!ects is preferable,

                                ln yif d = M ax[0, "2 + " 1 Xf + uif d ]                     (12)
                               ln pif d = "1id + !Xf + % ûif d + #if d                      (13)

                                                   6
For each product-destination, equation (13) uses only variation across firms to identify ".
Thus, equation (13) answers the question: within a group of firms selling product i in
destination d, how do firm characterisistics covary with the prices that firms charge?

                                    3.   DATA SOURCES AND MEASUREMENT

   We use both firm-level and country-level data, and discuss sources and measurement
issues in the next two subsections.

                                                  3.1.    Firm-level data

   We use data on firm-level U.S. exports in 2002. For manufacturing firms, the export
data is linked with production data from the 2002 Census of Manufactures. Use of this data
was pioneered by Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2005), who provide a detailed discussion of
numerous important issues related to construction of the dataset. The data has also been
analyzed by Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2007).3

   The firm-level export data comes from transaction-level export declarations filed by ex-
porting firms with the U.S. Customs. The transaction-level data contain information about
value, HS10-digit product code, quantity, relationship (intra-firm or arm’s-length), export
destination, date, and transport mode for every shipment. Firm-level data are simply sums
of transaction-level data.4

    Our empirical definition of a product in all of what follows is an HS10-digit code, of
which there were almost 9,000 in 2002. Our measure of price is unit value (value divided
by quantity) for a given exporter-product-country observation. The 10 digit HS system
is the most disaggregated product classification sytem in use in the United States, but it
is important to keep in mind that what ordinary people (whether consumers or business
managers) think of as a product is yet more disaggregated. For example, consider the
following 10 digit HS codes:

    8703.10.50.30                   Golf carts
    8708.30.50.20                   Brake drums
    8501.10.60.20                   Small electric motors, alternating current
    9006.53.01.10                   35mm film cameras, with built in flash

   It is easy to imagine a given firm exporting many distinct products, which have di!erent
characteristics and sell for di!erent prices, under one of these headings. This implies that
our observed unit values are averages of these di!erent prices. Therefore, the unit values
of exports sent by a single firm may vary across destinations due simply to di!erences in
product mix, with no di!erence in the prices of individual products (for example, a golf
cart manufacturer may sell its di!erent models for the same price throughout the world,
but if it sells relatively more of its high-priced models to Japan than to Canada, then the
export unit value will be higher to Japan than to Canada). The trade data includes many
di!erent definitions of unit, depending on the product: number, dozens, kilogram, liter,
   3 We are very grateful to J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott for extensive and gracious help with the data.
   4 According to Section 402(e) of the Tari! Act of 1930 the firms are defined as "related parties" if one of them owns, controls,
or holds voting power equivalent to 6 percent of the outstanding voting stock or shares of the other organization.


                                                                7
square meter, etc. Comparing unit values across products is inherently meaningless due to
this heterogeneity of units, and when constructing our unit values we are careful to make
sure that the definition of units is consistent within a given HS10 code. For many products,
there are two units reported, where the first unit is (for example) number and the second
is kilograms. In these cases, we always use the first unit instead of kilograms, because
these natural units are more likely to be comparable within products.5 As final controls for
potential data problems, we drop all observations where quantities are imputed, and also
drop the top and bottom one percent of unit values by HS code.

   The production data for 2002 comes from the Census of Manufactures, which collects
information on the universe of U.S. manufacturing plants. For the purposes of computing
firm-level productivity, we also use Annual Survey of Manufactures data from 1997 to 2002.
In each of these years the sample consists of 50,000-60,000 plants.6

   The unified dataset contains annual plant information that includes total value of ship-
ments, change in inventories, total employment, numbers of production and nonproduction
workers, cost of materials, and 6-digit NAICS industry. Due to missing data on capital
stocks in the Annual Survey of Manufactures, the capital series was constructed using data
for capital from the Census of Manufactures, industry depreciation rates from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, and investment series available for all years.

   Plant-level revenue total factor productivity (TFP) is computed using the now-standard
methods of Olley and Pakes (1996). Firm-level TFP is constructed as a shipment-weighted
average of plant level revenue TFP.

   The export and manufacturing data sets are linked at the level of the firm. The links
between the data sets are made using the Employer Identification Number (EIN) where
possible and using “alpha”, an identifier of multi-unit firms that have exports to Canada,
when the EIN is not available (in particular, for exports to Canada). This identifier is
assigned using the business name information from the Census Bureau Business Register,
also called Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL).


                                               3.2.    Country-level data

   Our measurements of country characteristics are much the same as those used in Baldwin
and Harrigan (2011), and our discussion here is drawn from Baldwin and Harrigan (2011).
The objective is to measure features of export markets that a!ect competition in the market,
and that will thus have e!ects on which firms enter and what prices they charge when they
do enter.

   Trade costs While trade costs are likely to be weakly monotonic in distance, there is no
reason to expect them to have any particular functional form, so we specify the distance
   5 To see the issue, consider the example of HS 8802.40.00.40, Airplanes weighing at least 15,000kg. Larger airplanes are more

expensive, but might not be more expensive per kilogram, so it is more meaningful to define the unit value of an airplane as
"dollars per plane" rather than "dollars per kilogram of plane".
   6 Some 10,000 plants are selected with certainty (including all plants with total employment above 250 workers), and

more than 40,000 plants are selected with probability proportional to a composite measure of establishment size. See
http://www.census.gov/ for details.



                                                               8
proxy in two ways. The first is simply log distance, which we measure as kilometers from
Chicago to the capital city of the importer, which comes from CEPII.7 Our second trade cost
measure breaks distance down into bins, derived from looking for natural breaks in distance
among U.S. trading partners. The first bin includes Canada and Mexico. The second
bin, 1-4000km, includes countries in the Caribbean basin and northern South America.
The third bin, 4000-7800km, includes Western Europe and Brazil. The fourth bin, 7800-
14000km, includes Eastern Europe and most of Asia (Japan, China, India, etc). The final
bin, 14,000+km, includes Australia and Indonesia.

   Market size: Our measure of market size is real GDP, from the Penn World Tables. We
also include real GDP per worker as a demand-related control.

    Remoteness: The structural gravity literature (including Eaton and Kortum (2002) and
Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003)) emphasizes that demand conditions in country d depend
on the supply conditions of all countries that potentially sell there. The proper specification
of this "remoteness" e!ect is model-specific, but most theoretically consistent measures of
remoteness have a common structure as they all work via the average price of goods sold
in a destination market. This average price in turn depends upon the number of varieties
produced locally in the destination market, and the number of imported varieties and the
bilateral trade costs they face. As the number of varieties coming from each exporting nation
is — roughly speaking — related to the origin-nation’s size, a reasonable proxy for remoteness
involves market-size weighted sums of an inverse power function of trade costs. Following
this logic, we adopt the following measure of remoteness in our empirical work,
                                                   '                     (!1
                                                       !
                                                       C
                                           Rd =              Yo dist!!
                                                                    od         ,          (14)
                                                       o=1

where Yo is real GDP in origin country o, and distod is distance between countries o and
d. Harrigan (2003) shows that this remoteness index is an approximation to the model-
specific measures of Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), and Novy (2012) shows that similar
expressions hold in the model of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and other bilateral trade models
with CES preferences. Empirical implementation of (14) involves some potentially important
choices about how to measure within-country distance distdd and what value to use for the
exponent '. Fortunately, our empirical results are entirely insensitive to any reasonable
choice of how to construct (14), and in what follows we include within country distance
as reported in the CEPII data, and set ' equal to 1. The reason for this robustness is
simply that the cross section variation in (14) is overwhelmingly dominated by di!erences in
the GDP-weighted raw distances (consider New Zealand versus Belgium), so that di!erent
choices about including own distance and what value to choose for ' lead to very highly
correlated measures.


                       4.   EMPIRICAL RESULTS: FIRM-LEVEL EXPORT PRICES

  In this section we investigate the relationship between export prices, firm characteristics,
and destination market characteristics. We begin by analyzing our full sample of U.S. firms
  7 http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm




                                                              9
in 2002, which includes exporters of both manufactured and non-manufactured goods. Our
second set of results uses data only on manufactured goods exports, and we establish new
facts about how export prices vary with firm characteristics.


                               4.1.   Export price decompositions

   Our data on export prices has three dimensions of variation: HS10 products, firms,
and destination markets. Comparing prices across HS10 products is meaningless, so all
of our analysis of log price variation is relative to means: either product, firm"product, or
destination"product.

   We begin with a very simple variance decomposition exercise for log export prices. Once
we remove product means, so that price variation is comparable across products, we find
that the standard deviation of log export price variation within products is 1.508. Some
of this variation is certainly due to measurement error of various kinds, but nonetheless
a standard deviation of 1.508 implies an enormous amount of within-product variation in
prices: if we treat log prices as approximately normally distributed, then prices at the 90th
percentile are a factor of 48 higher than prices at the 10th percentile. Next, we remove
firm"product means from log export prices, so that we retain only variation across export
markets within firm"products. The resulting standard deviation is 0.709, implying a 90-
10 ratio of 6, one-eighth the level of variation in prices that we find when we remove only
product means.

    This simple exercise clearly illustrates two features of our data. First, most of the variation
in product-level prices is between firms rather than within. Second, there is still a substantial
amount of within-firm price variation across destination markets. There are two possible
explanations for this within-firm variation. The first is simple price discrimination: a firm
sells the same product across markets, but the markup varies. But a 90-10 price ratio of
6 is inconsistent with a simple price discrimination explanation. To see this, let ' c be the
elasticity of demand in market c, implying a markup of ' c / (' c ! 1). If markups di!er by a
factor of 6 between two markets A and B, then it must be the case that
                                                 6' B
                                          'A =
                                              1 + 5' B
This relation implies, for example, that highly elastic demand in B such as ' B = 10 or 20
coexists with an extremely inelastic value of ' A # 1.18. This much cross-market variation in
the demand elasticity for the exact same product seems implausible. It is also inconsistent
with the possibility of even very costly arbitrage. Thus we conclude that there must be at
least some compositional variation within firm"products across markets.

   Our next results come from implementing the product-level decomposition of how export
prices di!er across destinations which is given by (2). The decomposition in (2) holds for each
HS10 product, and to make the results comparable across products we divide by p̄d ! p, so
that the three terms on the right hand side in (2) sum to one for all products and destinations.
We compute the scaled decomposition for the 187,300 product"destination observations in
our data for 2002. The results are reported in Table 1, and illustrated vividly in Figure
1. The figure shows that in the bulk of cases the market share e!ect accounts for all or

                                                 10
nearly all of the variation in average prices across markets, with the price discrimination
and interaction terms tightly clustered around zero. This means that when it comes to
explaining cross-country price di!erences, average price di!erences across firms are much
more important than within-firm di!erences across markets. This conclusion is consistent
with our simple analysis of variance for log export prices discussed just above.

   A further implication of our implementation of equation (2) is that the di!erences in
product-level average prices across destination documented by Baldwin and Harrigan (2011)
are due primarily to di!erences in which firms sell to which markets. Since tougher markets
have higher product-level prices, it follows that high-price firms have larger market shares
in tougher markets. Figure 1 thus supports the mechanism conjectured by Baldwin and
Harrigan (2011).


                  4.2.   Export prices and destination market characteristics

   We now look more carefully at what explains export price variation across markets. In this
subsection we report the results of estimating equations (6) and (7), which relate export prices
to characteristics of the destination market. Equations are estimated by the three-stage
selection correction procedure described above, with third-stage standard errors clustered by
country. We estimate the equations on various sub-samples of the data:

  • all firms/manufacturing firms only
  • all countries/excluding Canada and Mexico


We also report results using di!erent specifications:

  • log linear distance/distance step function
  • OLS/controlling for selection
  • product fixed e!ects/product"firm fixed e!ects

   Our estimates of equations (6) and (7) are reported in Tables 2 and 3. Panel A of Table
2 reports our benchmark estimates, which includes the broadest sample (all countries and
firms). The first two columns of Table 2A are the simplest: distance is measured as log
kilometers, and there is no control for selection. Consistent with the simple decomposition
results of the previous section, moving from product to product"firm fixed e!ects leads
to much smaller e!ects of country characteristics: the distance elasticity falls from 0.263 to
0.195, the real GDP elasticity falls from 0.027 to -0.02, etc. When we control for selection the
e!ects are smaller still: in column 4, the distance elasticity is 0.168, and the real GDP and real
GDP per worker e!ects are statistically insignificant. The remoteness e!ect is statistically
significant but economically small: the sample standard deviation of log remoteness is 0.05,
so the estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in remoteness reduces within
product"firm export prices by just 6 log points.

                                               11
   When we allow for a non-linear e!ect of distance, the story changes somewhat. Focusing
on our preferred specification (product"firm fixed e!ects, selection control) in column 8 of
Table 2A, we find that the e!ect of distance is to raise log prices by about 0.25 relative
to the excluded category (Mexico and Canada). While much smaller than the e!ect found
when we control for neither selection nor firm e!ects (see column 5, as well as the results of
Baldwin and Harrigan (2011)), this is nonetheless a large e!ect. Interestingly, the e!ect is
not increasing in distance, with the estimated e!ects for the di!erent distance categories all
statistically insignificant from each other. The e!ects of GDP (0.046) and GDP per capita
(0.071) in this specification are statistically significant but rather small in economic terms:
bigger and richer countries are charged slightly higher export prices within product"firms.
Remoteness has a small and statistically insignificant e!ect.

   Table 2B, which excludes exports to Canada and Mexico, tells a similar story8 . Focusing
on the last column of Table 2B, we find that export prices are statistically significantly
lower relative to the excluded category (1 to 400km), but the size of the e!ect is not very
economically important, nor does it vary by distance. The real GDP and real GDP per
worker elasticities remain statistically significant but small. The two panels of Table 3,
which exclude non-manufacturing observations, are generally consistent with the message of
Table 2, though the distance e!ect is a bit larger (in column 8 of Table 3A, for example, the
e!ect relative to Canada/Mexico is around 0.30, as opposed to 0.25 when all products are
included in the corresponding column of Table 2A).

   Our conclusions from Tables 2 and 3 can be summarized simply. Controlling for firm
e!ects (through the use of product"firm fixed e!ects) and selection into exporting leads to
much smaller e!ects of country characteristics on export prices than those found in specifi-
cations which include only product fixed e!ects. Real GDP and real GDP per capita have
small positive elasticities, while the distance e!ect is well approximated by a simple step
function, where prices sold to markets other than Canada and Mexico are 25 to 30 log points
higher. The e!ect of remoteness is somewhat fragile, though in most specifications it is
negative but of negligible economic importance.

   What might account for the large within product"firm price premium for selling to coun-
tries other than Canada and Mexico? This e!ect seems too large to be accounted for by
price discrimination, and in any case there is no particular reason to think that demand for
U.S. exports is more elastic in North America than elsewhere. Our conjecture is that the
Canada/Mexico price e!ect has to do with vertical integration. As argued by Yi (2003),
low transport costs (such as across a border) make it possible for firms to adopt o!shoring
strategies that involve low-value trade transactions which would not be profitable if transport
costs were higher. To the extent that such trade occurs within product categories that also
feature higher-value finished exports, it would explain our findings that within product"firm
export prices to destinations other than Canada and Mexico are substantially higher.

   8 The reason that there are more observations in Table 2B than in Table 2A despite the fact that 2B excludes Canada and

Mexico has to do with which firm identifier we use. Whenever we use exports to Canada we are forced to use a more aggregate
firm identifier (called "alpha") which reduces the number of firms in the sample. Columns 3 and 4 in Table 2B are blank
because the estimator failed to converge in this specification.




                                                            12
              4.3.   The price-distance e!ect: comparing our results to existing literature

   There are four recent papers that also analyze firm-level export pricing across markets:
Martin (2012) for France, Bastos and Silva (2010) for Portugal, Gorg, Halpern, and Murakozy
(2010) for Hungary, and Manova and Zhang (2012) for China. Each of these four papers
works with a specification similar to our equation (4), and each finds that firm-level export
prices are systematically correlated with destination market characteristics. Here we discuss
the relevant results of these four papers in some detail.

   Manova and Zhang (2012) analyze firm-level export prices from China. They perform a
wealth of interesting empirical exercises, including estimating an equation which is essentially
identical to our equation (4). They find small but statistically significant elasticities of
within-firm export prices with respect to export market GDP, distance, and remoteness: for
example, their estimated distance elasticity is about 0.01, with a standard error of about
0.002.9

   Unlike China, France is economically similar to the United States, so it might be reason-
able to expect that French and U.S. export prices would behave similarly. Martin (2012)
finds no e!ect of real GDP on French firm-level export prices, but he does find substantial
e!ects of distance: for example, export prices are 11 to 14 log points higher for markets that
are at least 3000 kilometers from Paris, when compared to more nearby destinations.10 The
most direct comparison between Martin’s results and ours is between his Table 2 and our
Table 2A. Martin (2012) finds a distance elasticity of between 0.02 and 0.05 with standard
errors of around 0.01, while in Column 4 of our Table 2A we find an elasticity of 0.17 with a
standard error of 0.02. We regard these results as quantitatively similar, although our point
estimate is somewhat bigger.

   The results of Bastos and Silva (2010) for Portugal are quite consistent with the results
of Martin (2012) for France. In the specification closest to our equation (4)11 , without a
selection correction, Bastos and Silva (2010) find a distance elasticity of around 0.05 with a
standard error of 0.013.

    Gorg, Halpern, and Murakozy (2010) looks at firm level export prices for Hungary. Re-
sults from their version of our equation (4), without a selection correction, are remarkably
consistent with the results of Martin (2012) and Bastos and Silva (2010): a distance elas-
ticity of between 0.05 and 0.07 depending on the year, with standard errors of about 0.0212 .
Unlike the other three papers discussed here, Gorg, Halpern, and Murakozy (2010) make
an attempt to address the selection issue in later specifications, but they do so in a model
without product"firm fixed e!ects. This makes their results that correct for selection both
hard to interpret and not comparable to ours, since their parameters are identified using
cross-firm and cross-product variation.

   In summary, our results on the price-distance e!ect are quite consistent with the results
of the four previous papers that have looked at export price variation within product"firms.
   9 Table 7, columns 5 and 6, Manova and Zhang (2012).
  1 0 Table3, Martin (2012)
  1 1 Reported in columns 5, 6, 11, and 12 of Table 6, Bastos and Silva (2010).
  1 2 Reported in Table 2, Gorg, Halpern, and Murakozy (2010). It appears that these standard errors are clustered by importing

country, as is appropriate.


                                                              13
Data from France, Portugal, and Hungary all give essentially the same answer: within
product-firms and across export destinations, the distance elasticity of export unit values is
close to 0.05, with a 95% confidence interval of about [0.03,0.07]. The results from Chinese
data show a smaller elasticity, while our results for the United States are somewhat higher.
The papers just discussed do not analyze the connection between firm characteristics and
export pricing, which is the relationship that we estimate next.


                         4.4.   Export prices and firm characteristics

    We now turn to estimation of equations (11) and (13) , which relate export prices to firm
characteristics. Because we only have data on the characteristics of manufacturing firms,
all the results in this section are for manufacturing firms.

   Tables 4A and 4B report our estimates of equation (11) , which includes product fixed
e!ects, a control for selection, and both country and product characteristics. Thus the pa-
rameters are identified from variation within products, across firms and destinations. The
estimates of the country-level e!ects are broadly similar to what we found in the correspond-
ing columns of Table 3 (that is, the columns reporting results with product fixed e!ects),
which is an interesting finding, since it suggests that firm characteristics are not highly cor-
related with country characteristics within products, after controlling for firm selection into
exporting. Turning to the e!ects of firm characteristics on export prices, we find that more
productive firms charge higher prices on average: looking at columns 3 and 4 of Table 4A,
the TFP elasticity of 0.39 means that firms with ten percent higher total factor productivity
charge about 4 percent higher prices. Equally striking are the large and precisely estimated
e!ects of factor shares on export prices: skill intensity raises export prices with an elasticity
of about 0.17, while capital intensity lowers prices with an elasticity of around -0.1. Inter-
estingly, the e!ect of firm size is zero: the point estimates are very close to zero, and the
standard errors are small. Table 4B repeats the analysis excluding Canada and Mexico, and
the coe"cients on the firm characteristics are essentially the same, except that the firms size
e!ect is precisely estimated and very slightly negative, at about -0.02.

    Table 5 reports our estimates of equation (13), which includes country"product fixed
e!ects. Thus the estimated e!ects of firm characteristics are estimated purely across firms,
within country-products. The results are similar in sign and statistical significance to what
we found in Table 4, but somewhat smaller in size: the overall TFP elasticity is 0.35, the
skill elasticity is 0.16, and the capital elasticity is -0.08. The e!ects are somewhat larger
when we exclude Canada and Mexico (Panel B): the TFP elasticity is 0.38, the skill elasticity
is 0.19, and the capital elasticity is -0.1. The total employment elasticity is zero in the full
sample, and -0.02 for the sample excluding shipments to Canada and Mexico.

   Our conclusions from this section are quite strong: firms that are more productive and
more skill-intensive charge substantially higher prices, while more capital-intensive firms
charge lower prices. We emphasize how we identify these e!ects: they are found within
narrowly defined products across export markets. If HS10 products were homogeneous,
the law of one price implies that our results are impossible: the lowest price firm would
simply take the entire market. The fact that highly productive, skill-intensive firms charge
higher prices is suggestive of quality competition: the higher measured prices in our data

                                               14
are probably hiding important quality variations across firms, with higher quality associated
with higher costs and thus higher prices. This interpretation is consistent with the evidence
of Gervais (2011), who uses plant-level data from the U.S. Census of Manufactures to show
that higher quality firms have both higher productivity and charge higher prices.


                   4.5.   Firm-level export prices: interpreting our results

    To summarize our findings, we focus on the specifications with the cleanest identifica-
tion: the columns from Table 2 with product"firm fixed e!ects, and Table 5, which includes
product"country fixed e!ects. The cross-country variation that is used in Table 2 shows
that firms charge systematically higher prices to destinations other than Canada and Mex-
ico, and to larger and richer destinations. These results may be partially explained by price
discrimination, but our conjecture is that they are driven primarily by within-firm compo-
sition e!ects instead: firms sell more expensive varieties to richer markets, and sell fewer
semi-finished products to markets other than Canada and Mexico.

   The cross-firm variation that is used in Table 5 shows that more productive and skill-
intensive firms charge higher prices, while more capital-intensive firms charge lower prices,
and these e!ects are economically sizeable and precisely estimated. This pattern is suggestive
of quality competition within export markets, with the most capable and skill-intensive U.S.
exporters producing higher quality goods that sell for a premium over goods sold by more
capital-intensive and less productive firms. Conversely, more capital intensive firms may
produce more standarized products that, loosely speaking, compete on price rather than on
quality.


                                       5.   CONCLUSION


   This paper is the first to analyze firm-level data on the export pricing decisions of U.S.
exporters. We use a three-stage estimator to control for firm selection into di!erent ex-
port markets. Using restricted firm-level information on exports and firm characteristics,
combined with widely available data on country characteristics, we find that


  • More productive and skill-intensive firms charge higher unit prices, while more capital-
    intensive firms charge lower prices.
  • In the markets that they choose to serve, firms charge prices that are weakly correlated
    with real GDP and real GDP per capita, and prices are substantially higher for goods
    sold outside North America
  • The strong correlations between product-level prices and country characteristics found
    by Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) are largely due to a selection or composition bias,
    which is the mechanism that they conjectured but could not test with their data.




                                               15
   Our results on correlations between export prices and country-level are broadly consistent
with earlier studies on export pricing by firms in China, France, Hungary, and Portugal. To
our knowledge, we are the first to connect firm-level characteristics to export pricing, and
our results are supportive of models of monopolistic competition where firms compete on
quality rather simply unit cost.




                                             16
                                    REFERENCES

Anderson, J. and E. Van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with gravitas: a solution to the border
   puzzle. The American Economic Review 93 (1), 170—192.
Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan (2011). Zeros, quality, and space: Trade theory and trade
   evidence. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (2), 60—88.
Bastos, P. and J. Silva (2010). The quality of a firm’s exports: Where you export to
   matters. Journal of International Economics 82 (2), 99 — 111.
Bernard, A., J. Eaton, J. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and productivity in
   international trade. American Economic Review 93 (4), 1268.
Bernard, A., J. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2007). Firms in international trade.
   The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 105—130.
Bernard, A., J. Jensen, and P. Schott (2005). Importers, exporters, and multinationals: A
   portrait of firms in the US that trade goods. NBER working paper.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70 (5),
   1741—1779.
Feenstra, R., M. Obstfeld, and K. Russ (2009). In Search of the Armington Elasticity.
   Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Davis.
Gervais, A. (2011, June). Product quality, firm heterogeneity, and international trade.
   Unpublished manuscript, University of Notre Dame.
Ghironi, F. and M. Melitz (2005). International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
   Heterogeneous Firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 865—915.
Gorg, H., L. Halpern, and B. Murakozy (2010). Why Do within Firm-Product Export
   Prices Di!er Across Markets? (CEPR Working Paper 7708).
Hallak, J. C. and J. Sivadasan (2009). Firms’ Exporting Behavior under Quality Con-
   straints. Unpublished paper, University of Michigan.
Harrigan, J. (2003). Specialization and the Volume of Trade: Do the Data Obey the Laws?
   Handbook of international trade, 85.
Johnson, R. (2012). Trade and prices with heterogeneous firms. Journal of International
   Economics 86, 53—56.
Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2012). Prices, plant size, and product quality. The Review
   of Economic Studies 79 (1), 307—339.
Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2012). Export prices across firms and destinations. The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics 127 (1), 379—436.
Martin, J. (2012). Markups, quality, and transport costs. European Economic Review 56,
   777—791.
Mayer, T. and G. Ottaviano (2008). The happy few: The internationalisation of european
   firms. Intereconomics 43 (3), 135—148.
Melitz, M. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate in-
   dustry productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695—1725.
Novy, D. (2012). Gravity redux: measuring international trade costs with panel data.
   Economic Inquiry.

                                          17
Olley, G. and A. Pakes (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
   equipment industry. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263—1297.
Schott, P. (2004). Across-Product Versus Within-Product Specialization in International
   Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), 647—678.
Verhoogen, E. (2008). Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
   Manufacturing Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 489—530.
Wagner, J. (2012). International trade and firm performance: a survey of empirical studies
  since 2006. Review of World Economics 148, 235—267.
Wooldridge, J. (1995). Selection corrections for panel data models under conditional mean
  independence assumptions. Journal of Econometrics 68 (1), 115—132.
Yi, K. (2003). Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade? Journal of
   political Economy 111 (1), 52—102.




                                          18
Table 1
Distribution of Export Unit Price Change Decomposition Elements

      Percentile          Price Discrimination            Market Share                Interaction
         0.05                    -0.416                        -0.552                   -1.680
         0.10                    -0.053                        -0.003                   -0.528
         0.25                     0.000                        0.575                    -0.003
         0.50                     0.000                        1.000                    0.000
         0.75                     0.057                        1.000                    0.276
         0.90                     0.536                        1.336                    0.854
         0.95                     1.107                        2.072                    1.568



Sources: U.S Census Bureau, authors’ calculations.
Notes: This table reports results of computing equation (2) across all products, scaled by product-means. The table
reports quantiles of the empirical distribution of the three terms in equation (2).




                                                          19
!


!
Figure 1
$%&'(%)*'%+,!+-!./0+('!1,%'!2(%34!567,84!$43+90+&%'%+,!.:494,'&!
!
!
!
!




    This figure illustrates the decomposition results reported in Table 1.
                                                                             !




                                                     "#!
                       Table 2: Impact of Importing Country Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of All Firms
                                                  Panel A: Exports to All Countries

                                                      Linear Distance                               Distance Step Function
                                           OLS Estimation       Selection Correction      OLS Estimation         Selection Correction
                   Log Distance         0.263***    0.195***    0.248***    0.168***
                                         (0.016)     (0.021)     (0.016)     (0.021)
                   1<km≤4,000                                                            0.326***   0.386***       0.204      0.261**
                                                                                          (0.111)    (0.093)      (0.133)      (0.105)
                 4,000<km≤7,800                                                          0.584***   0.485***      0.323**     0.239**
                                                                                          (0.091)    (0.091)      (0.139)      (0.115)
                7,8000<km≤14,000                                                         0.603***   0.493***      0.339**     0.248**
                                                                                          (0.095)    (0.089)      (0.144)      (0.115)
                    14,000<km                                                            0.632***   0.473***    0.390***      0.248**
                                                                                          (0.084)    (0.088)      (0.131)      (0.111)
                  Log Real GDP            0.027**   -0.020***    0.036***     -0.004     0.039***    -0.010*     0.100***     0.046***
                                          (0.011)    (0.007)      (0.011)    (0.008)      (0.013)    (0.005)      (0.018)      (0.009)
               Log Real GDP/Worker       0.079***     -0.017     0.093***      0.01        0.046      -0.006    0.126***     0.071***
                                          (0.025)    (0.016)      (0.025)    (0.015)      (0.042)    (0.016)      (0.044)      (0.016)




21
                  Log Remoteness        -2.495***   -1.343***   -2.365***   -1.183***   -1.417***     -0.344     -1.075**       -0.114
                                          (0.347)      0.191      (0.336)    (0.184)      (0.489)    (0.249)      (0.486)      (0.234)
                 Selection Control                              -0.074***   -0.058***                           -0.072***    -0.056***
                                                                  (0.014)    (0.007)                              (0.014)      (0.007)
               Product Fixed Eﬀects        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                      Yes
            Firm×Product Fixed Eﬀects                 Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
                    R2 (within)           0.030       0.015       0.035       0.019       0.029       0.015       0.034        0.019
                        N               1,185,000   1,185,000   1,185,000   1,185,000   1,185,000   1,185,000   1,185,000    1,185,000


     Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of all U.S. export trade flows over $250 to all destination countries.
     Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product and destination. Independent variables are characteristics
     of export destinations. The first four columns measure distance as kilometers and the last four columns measure distance using
     the step function. Results of HS10 product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th columns and results
     of firm-product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the the rest of the columns. The 1st, 2nd, 5th and 6th columns use OLS
     as the method of estimation. The 3rd, 4th, 7th and 8th columns use the 3-stage selection correction procedure. Standard
     errors are clustered at the country level. Asterisks denote statistical significance.
     *** Significant at the 1 percent level
     ** Significant at the 5 percent level
     * Significant at the 10 percent level
                       Table 2: Impact of Importing Country Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of All Firms
                                    Panel B: Exports to Countries excluding Canada and Mexico

                                                      Linear Distance                              Distance Step Function
                                           OLS Estimation       Selection Correction       OLS Estimation        Selection Correction
                   Log Distance          0.125***      0.019         -           -
                                          (0.036)     (0.016)        -           -
                  4,000<km≤7,800                                                         0.180***      0.033*       0.069    -0.052***
                                                                                           (0.050)    (0.018)       (0.05)     (0.018)
                 7,8000<km≤14,000                                                         0.236***   0.058***     0.125***     -0.027*
                                                                                           (0.043)    (0.014)      (0.047)     (0.015)
                    14,000<km                                                            0.229***      0.013      0.130***   -0.062***
                                                                                           (0.045)    (0.018)      (0.045)     (0.018)
                   Log Real GDP           0.048***     -0.008        -           -        0.041***   -0.011***    0.086***    0.026***
                                           (0.011)    (0.005)        -           -         (0.010)    (0.004)      (0.012)     (0.005)
               Log Real GDP/Worker        0.119***     0.005         -           -       0.118***       0.010     0.180***   0.065***
                                           (0.022)    (0.008)        -           -         (0.024)    (0.008)      (0.023)     (0.009)




22
                  Log Remoteness         -1.656***     -0.167        -           -       -1.414***     -0.083    -1.175***      0.058
                                           (0.364)    (0.138)        -           -         (0.388)    (0.170)      (0.371)     (0.158)
                 Selection Control                                   -           -                               -0.058***   -0.041***
                                                                     -           -                                 (0.005)     (0.003)
                Product Fixed Eﬀects       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
             Firm×Product Fixed Eﬀects                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                  R2 (within)              0.012       0.000         -           -         0.013       0.000       0.015       0.003
              Number of Observations     1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000   1,210,000


     Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of U.S. export trade flows over $250 to destination countries except
     Canada and Mexico. Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product and destination. Independent
     variables are characteristics of export destinations. The first four columns measure distance as kilometers and the last four
     columns measure distance using the step function. Results of HS10 product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the 1st, 3rd,
     5th and 7th columns and results of firm-product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the rest of the columns. The 1st, 2nd, 5th
     and 6th columns use OLS as the method of estimation. The 3rd, 4th, 7th and 8th columns use the 3-stage selection correction
     procedure. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
                 Table 3: Impact of Importing Country Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of Manufacturing Firms
                                                 Panel A: Exports to All Countries

                                                      Linear Distance                              Distance Step Function
                                           OLS Estimation       Selection Correction       OLS Estimation       Selection Correction
                    Log Distance         0.269***    0.203***    0.228***    0.157***
                                          (0.015)      0.02       (0.015)     (0.021)
                    1<km≤4,000                                                            0.345***   0.411***      0.245*    0.283***
                                                                                           (0.109)    (0.086)     (0.136)     (0.100)
                  4,000<km≤7,800                                                           0.602**   0.521***   0.373***     0.313***
                                                                                           (0.093)    (0.084)     (0.134)     (0.106)
                 7,8000<km≤14,000                                                         0.626***   0.527***   0.394***     0.318***
                                                                                           (0.090)    (0.082)     (0.135)     (0.106)
                    14,000<km                                                             0.643***   0.499***   0.446***    0.320***
                                                                                           (0.080)    (0.080)     (0.120)     (0.101)
                   Log Real GDP           0.023**    -0.023***    0.053***     0.009      0.035***    -0.012*    0.090***    0.036***
                                          (0.011)     (0.008)      (0.012)    (0.009)      (0.012)    (0.006)     (0.017)     (0.009)
               Log Real GDP/Worker        0.050**      -0.021     0.088***     0.026        0.021      -0.008     0.089**   0.058***




23
                                          (0.024)     (0.017)      (0.026)    (0.017)      (0.041)    (0.017)     (0.043)     (0.017)
                  Log Remoteness         -2.579***   -1.412***   -2.194***   -1.060***   -1.448***     -0.318    -1.210**      -0.184
                                          (0.342)     (0.208)      (0.318)    (0.198)      (0.506)    (0.281)     (0.493)     (0.259)
                  Selection Control                              -0.085***   -0.063***                          -0.084***   -0.060***
                                                                   (0.016)    (0.008)                             (0.016)     (0.008)
                Product Fixed Eﬀects       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes
             Firm×Product Fixed Eﬀects                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes
                    R2 (within)           0.031       0.017       0.038       0.023       0.030       0.019      0.037        0.024
                        N                652,000     652,000     652,000     652,000     652,000     652,000    652,000      652,000


     Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of all U.S. export trade flows over $250 from manufacturing firms to all
     destination countries. Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product and destination. Independent
     variables are characteristics of export destinations. The first four columns measure distance as kilometers and the last four
     columns measure distance using the step function. Results of HS10 product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the 1st, 3rd,
     5th and 7th columns and results of firm-product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the rest of the columns. The 1st, 2nd, 5th
     and 6th columns use OLS as the method of estimation. The 3rd, 4th, 7th and 8th columns use the 3-stage selection correction
     procedure. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
                 Table 3: Impact of Importing Country Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of Manufacturing Firms
                                     Panel B: Exports to Countries excluding Canada and Mexico

                                                     Linear Distance                             Distance Step Function
                                           OLS Estimation     Selection Correction       OLS Estimation        Selection Correction
                    Log Distance         0.104***     0.016     0.071**      -0.004
                                          (0.028)    (0.018)    (0.028)     (0.016)
                  4,000<km≤7,800                                                         0.128**     0.051*       0.007       -0.028
                                                                                         (0.053)    (0.026)      (0.052)     (0.023)
                 7,8000<km≤14,000                                                       0.195***   0.075***      0.070*       -0.006
                                                                                         (0.034)    (0.015)      (0.036)     (0.015)
                     14,000<km                                                          0.163***      0.007      0.086*     -0.041**
                                                                                         (0.046)    (0.022)      (0.046)     (0.020)
                   Log Real GDP           0.040***   -0.014**    0.080***    0.017**    0.035***   -0.020***    0.101***    0.028***
                                           (0.012)    (0.007)     (0.012)    (0.007)     (0.011)    (0.005)      (0.012)     (0.006)
                Log Real GDP/Worker       0.081***      0.009    0.141***   0.059***    0.086***      0.016     0.173***   0.082***
                                           (0.022)    (0.012)     (0.022)    (0.011)     (0.024)    (0.011)      (0.024)     (0.012)




24
                   Log Remoteness        -1.498***     -0.183   -1.102***     0.051    -1.325***     -0.026    -1.063***      0.113
                                           (0.405)    (0.188)     (0.400)    (0.184)     (0.416)    (0.216)      (0.388)     (0.193)
                  Selection Control                             -0.081***     -0.051                           -0.081***   -0.050***
                                                                  (0.005)    (0.003)                             (0.005)     (0.003)
                Product Fixed Eﬀects       Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes
             Firm×Product Fixed Eﬀects                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes
                    R2 (within)           0.008       0.000      0.014       0.005      0.008       0.001       0.014        0.005
                        N                377,000     377,000    377,000     377,000    377,000     377,000     377,000      377,000


     Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of all U.S. export trade flows over $250 from manufacturing firms to
     destination countries except Canada and Mexico. Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product
     and destination. Independent variables are characteristics of export destinations. The 1st four columns measure distance as
     kilometers and the last four columns use the step function to measure distance. Results of HS10 product fixed eﬀects estimation
     are shown in the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th columns and results of firm-product fixed eﬀects estimation are shown in the rest of the
     columns. The 1st, 2nd, 5th and 6th columns use OLS as the method of estimation. The 3rd, 4th, 7th and 8th columns use the
     3-stage selection correction procedure. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
 Table 4: Impact of Importing Country and Firm Characteristics on Export
                         Unit Prices of All Firms
                     Panel A: Exports to All Countries

                               OLS Estimation          Selection Correction
                            Linear   Distance Step    Linear     Distance Step
                           Distance     Function     Distance       Function
        Log Distance       0.263***                  0.287***
                            (0.015)                   (0.016)
        1<km≤4,000                     0.037***                    0.413***
                                         (0.109)                    (0.104)
      4,000<km≤7,800                   0.588***                    0.671***
                                         (0.094)                    (0.082)
     7,8000<km≤14,000                   0.611***                   0.692***
                                         (0.091)                    (0.080)
         14,000<km                      0.624***                   0.696***
                                         (0.082)                    (0.072)
       Log Real GDP          0.021*     0.034***        0.005         0.014
                             (0.011)     (0.013)       (0.012)      (0.013)
    Log Real GDP/Worker      0.042*       0.015         0.022        -0.009
                             (0.024)     (0.041)       (0.022)      (0.043)
       Log Remoteness      -2.480***   -1.358***     -2.711***    -1.462***
                             (0.336)     (0.500)       (0.340)      (0.493)
          Log TFP           0.377***    0.378***      0.392***     0.392***
                             (0.066)     (0.062)       (0.065)      (0.061)
          Log S/L           0.172***    0.171***      0.171***     0.169***
                             (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.016)
          Log K/L          -0.085***   -0.089***     -0.096***    -0.101***
                             (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.013)
    Log Total Employment      -0.003      0.000        -0.005*       -0.003
                             (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
      Selection Control                              -0.081***    -0.080***
                                                       (0.016)      (0.016)
         R2 (within)        0.042        0.042        0.049         0.048
             N             643,000      643,000      643,000       643,000

Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of U.S. export trade flows
over $250 from manufacturing firms to all destination countries. Dependent
variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product and destination.
Independent variables are characteristics of exporting firms and export
destinations as well as HS10 product fixed eﬀects. The first four columns
measure distance as kilometers and the last four columns measure distance
using the step function. The method of estimation of the first two columns is
OLS. We use the 3-stage selection correction procedure in the last two
columns. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.


                                       25
 Table 4: Impact of Importing Country and Firm Characteristics on Export
                          Unit Prices of All Firms
        Panel B: Exports to Countries excluding Canada and Mexico

                               OLS Estimation          Selection Correction
                            Linear   Distance Step    Linear     Distance Step
                           Distance     Function     Distance       Function
        Log Distance       0.096***                  0.120***
                            (0.028)                   (0.026)
      4,000<km≤7,800                    0.117**                    0.139***
                                         (0.051)                    (0.048)
     7,8000<km≤14,000                   0.181***                   0.202***
                                         (0.034)                    (0.033)
         14,000<km                      0.149***                   0.164***
                                         (0.045)                    (0.044)
       Log Real GDP         0.038***    0.033***        0.012       0.022**
                             (0.012)     (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.010)
    Log Real GDP/Worker    0.071***    0.076***        0.036*      0.064***
                             (0.021)     (0.024)       (0.021)      (0.023)
       Log Remoteness      -1.407***   -1.253***     -1.710***    -1.311***
                             (0.393)     (0.396)       (0.382)      (0.375)
          Log TFP           0.378***    0.379***      0.392***     0.394***
                             (0.023)     (0.023)       (0.022)      (0.022)
          Log S/L           0.188***    0.188***      0.186***     0.189***
                             (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)
          Log K/L          -0.098***   -0.098***     -0.111***    -0.108***
                             (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
    Log Total Employment   -0.019***   -0.019***     -0.024***    -0.021***
                             (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)
      Selection Control                              -0.070***    -0.070***
                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)
         R2 (within)        0.024        0.024        0.028         0.028
             N             372,000      372,000      372,000       372,000

Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of U.S. export trade flows
over $250 from manufacturing firms to destination countries except Canada
and Mexico. Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10
product and destination. Independent variables are characteristics of
exporting firms and export destinations as well as HS10 product fixed eﬀects.
The first and the third columns measure distance as kilometers and the other
two columns use the step function to measure distance. The method of
estimation of the first two columns is OLS. We use the 3-stage selection
correction procedure in the last two columns. Standard errors are clustered at
the country level.



                                       26
 Table 5: Impact of Firm Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of All Firms
                     Panel A: Exports to All Countries

                          OLS Estimation              Selection Correction
                                              Using Linear         Using Distance
                                             Distance in the      Step Function in
                                             First Two Steps    the First Two Steps
         Log TFP            0.342***             0.350***            0.349***
                             (0.048)              (0.048)             (0.048)
         Log S/L            0.162***             0.163***            0.162***
                             (0.011)              (0.011)             (0.011)
         Log K/L            -0.072***           -0.083***           -0.084***
                             (0.011)              (0.011)             (0.011)
   Log Total Employment       -0.007             -0.009**            -0.009**
                             (0.004)              (0.004)             (0.004)
     Selection Control                          -0.076***           -0.076***
                                                  (0.003)             (0.003)
        R2 (within)           0.011               0.018               0.018
            N                684,000             643,000             643,000

Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of U.S. export trade flows
over $250 from manufacturing firms to all destination countries. Dependent
variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10 product and destination.
Independent variables are characteristics of exporting firms as well as
country-product fixed eﬀects. The method of estimation of the first column is
OLS. We use the 3-stage selection correction procedure in the last two
columns. In the first two stages, distance is measured as kilometers in the
second column and measured using the step function in the third column.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                        27
 Table 5: Impact of Firm Characteristics on Export Unit Prices of All Firms
        Panel B: Exports to Countries excluding Canada and Mexico

                          OLS Estimation              Selection Correction
                                              Using Linear         Using Distance
                                             Distance in the      Step Function in
                                             First Two Steps    the First Two Steps
         Log TFP            0.376***             0.378***            0.379***
                             (0.062)              (0.064)             (0.064)
         Log S/L            0.184***             0.186***            0.189***
                             (0.015)              (0.015)             (0.015)
         Log K/L            -0.089***           -0.105***           -0.102***
                             (0.014)              (0.014)             (0.014)
   Log Total Employment     -0.021***           -0.026***           -0.023***
                             (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.007)
     Selection Control                          -0.074***           -0.074***
                                                  (0.004)             (0.004)
        R2 (within)           0.015               0.020               0.020
            N                405,000             372,000             372,000

Note: This table contains the estimation of a sample of U.S. export trade flows
over $250 from manufacturing firms to destination countries except Canada
and Mexico. Dependent variable is log unit price of exports by firm, HS10
product and destination. Independent variables are characteristics of
exporting firms as well as country-product fixed eﬀects. The method of
estimation of the first column is OLS. We use the 3-stage selection correction
procedure in the last two columns. In the first two stages, distance is
measured as kilometers in the second column and measured using the step
function in the third column. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                        28
