NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COMPETITIVENESS IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION POLICIES
Joseph E. Aldy
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 17705
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17705
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

We benefited from the excellent research assistance provided by Evan Herrnstadt, Napat Jatusripitak,
and Carlos Paez. We thank Wayne Gray for providing electricity expenditure and quantity data from
the Annual Survey of Manufactures. This research was supported by the Pew Center on Global Climate
Change and Resources for the Future. Elliot Diringer, Garth Heutel, Trevor Houser, Arik Levinson,
Joanna Lewis, Steve Lin, Carol McAusland, David Popp, and two referees, and seminar participants
at the Mannheim Climate Policy Network meeting, the Pew Center on Global Climate Change Business
Environmental Leadership Council meeting, Resources for the Future, Duke, UNC, and Harvard provided
helpful comments on an earlier version of the paper. All errors and omissions remain the responsibility
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Joseph E. Aldy and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Competitiveness Impacts of Climate Change Mitigation Policies
Joseph E. Aldy and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 17705
December 2011, Revised July 2015
JEL No. F18,Q52,Q54
ABSTRACT
The pollution haven hypothesis suggests that unilateral domestic climate change mitigation policy
would impose significant economic costs on carbon-intensive industries, resulting in declining output
and increasing net imports. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, we undertake a two-step empirical
analysis. First, we use historic energy prices as a proxy for climate change mitigation policy. We estimate
how production and net imports change in response to energy prices using a 35-year panel of approximately
450 U.S. manufacturing industries. Second, we take these estimated relationships and use them to
simulate the impacts of changes in energy prices resulting from a domestic climate change mitigation
policy that effectively imposes a $15 per ton carbon price. We find that energy-intensive manufacturing
industries are more likely to experience decreases in production and increases in net imports than less-intensive
industries. Our best estimate is that competitiveness effects – measured by the increase in net imports
– are as large as 0.8 percent for the most energy-intensive industries and represent no more than about
one-sixth of the estimated decrease in production under a $15 per ton carbon price.
Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 382, Mailbox 57
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu
William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu

I. Introduction
The debate over climate change policy has largely focused on the design of instruments
that will impose a price on the emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases. In
the context of this debate, attention has turned to the prospect that the cost of using fossil fuels
could increase under various climate change policy instruments, including economy-wide capand-trade and carbon tax policies, as well as state cap-and-trade programs (such as in California
and the northeastern states), state renewable and alternative energy mandates in the power sector,
and greenhouse gas regulatory mandates under the Clean Air Act. The policy-induced higher
energy prices could cause adverse competitiveness effects for energy-intensive firms in
developed countries, such as in Western Europe and the United States, if they move forward with
mitigation efforts while major developing countries postpone action.
The concerns about competitiveness are consistent with the pollution haven hypothesis
that suggests that firms relocate economic activity from high regulatory cost to low regulatory
cost countries. While sometimes framed as an “economy versus the environment” question with
regard to conventional pollution (Morgenstern et al. 2002), this effect is especially troubling in
the context of climate change policy. The relocation of economic activity would increase CO2
emissions in developing countries, thereby undermining the global environmental benefits of the
developed country's emission mitigation policy. That is, it is an “economy and the environment”
problem.
In this paper, we present evidence that energy price increases due to carbon pricing
($15/tCO2) lead to declines in output of as much as 5 percent for the most energy-intensive
manufacturing industries – one-sixth of which is due to competitiveness effects. To draw these
conclusions, we begin by defining the competitiveness effect as the change in net imports due to
the implementation of a domestic carbon pricing policy. We employ an empirical strategy that
examines the historical relationship between energy prices and production and net imports in the
U.S. manufacturing sector. Taking advantage of the fact that market-based CO2 policy
instruments such as cap-and-trade and emission taxes operate primarily by raising energy prices,
as would a carbon performance standard under the Clean Air Act (U.S. EPA 2014), we use this
estimation to infer the competitiveness effect of U.S.-only CO2 regulation.

1

Our approach uses within-industry energy price variation over time to identify the
competitiveness effect, variation that arises from both geographical differences in industry
location (and energy prices) as well as differences in each industry’s energy mix. This is akin to
estimating the various elasticities related to energy prices underlying the computable general
equilibrium models that have yielded previous economy-wide competitiveness and emission
leakage estimates. However, we generate results in a reduced-form regression framework of
equilibrium outcomes at a much more disaggregated level (4-digit industry).1 In particular,
through interaction terms, we allow the estimated effects to vary with the energy intensity of
production, allowing us to differentiate impacts among more or less energy-intensive industries.
Our analysis employs manufacturing industry data over the 1974-2009 period and employs
industry-specific energy prices as a proxy for market-based carbon pricing regulation. Like much
of the literature on estimating energy price elasticities, we estimate output and competitiveness
effects in an empirical framework that focuses on short-run responses to a change in energy
prices. In practice, a firm may respond to a carbon price – expecting it to be permanent –
differently than to an idiosyncratic energy price shock. We note, however, that the volatility in
allowance market prices, such as in the EU Emission Trading Scheme for carbon dioxide and
other cap-and-trade programs (Aldy and Viscusi 2014), may undermine firms’ abilities to predict
and plan for carbon prices. In this case, a short-run response through our empirical approach may
provide a plausible simulation of firm behavior under climate change regulation characterized by
volatile carbon prices.
We use our estimated model to simulate the impacts of a U.S.-only $15 per ton CO2
price, translated into the likely changes in energy prices. We focus on $15 per ton CO2 because
the energy price changes are consistent with the observed variation in our historic energy price
data; $15 per ton is also in line with prices expected under various cap-and-trade and carbon tax
legislative proposals in recent years. Moreover, the California cap-and-trade program has had
allowance prices in this range in recent years (allowances traded for $12 per ton on average in
2014) and the proposed electricity price impacts under the Environmental Protection Agency’s

1

Emission leakage is typically a broader concept than the competitiveness measure we define and estimate in this
paper. Emission leakage includes the relocation of emissions associated with a change in net imports as we describe
here, but can also include an increase in emissions in countries without carbon mitigation policy as a result of
changes in world energy prices and / or changes in the terms of trade.

2

proposed Clean Power Plan are consistent with this carbon price (Aldy and Pizer 2015).2 We
apply this price to an economy-wide carbon price simulation, consistent with an economy-wide
tax or cap-and-trade program.
We find that the higher energy prices associated with this carbon price would lead to a
production decline of as much as 5 percent among key energy-intensive sectors (e.g., iron and
steel, aluminum, cement, etc.). We also find, however, that this energy price increase would
translate into a smaller-than-one-percent increase in net imports, reflecting either a lack of
substitutability with foreign goods or a lack of additional global capacity over the horizon we
examine (one to three years via various lagged models). The approximately eight-tenths of a
percent shift in energy-intensive production overseas is our estimated adverse competitiveness
effect. Put another way, as a share of the total 5 percent effect on the most energy-intensive
industries, the “competitiveness” component is only about one-sixth.
Quantitatively, the overall results suggest the competitiveness effects associated with a
$15 per ton CO2 price is consistently no more than 1 percent of production. To put this estimated
impact in context, consider that the standard deviation of the annual growth rate in the value of
shipments was 12.9 percent during our sample. Some energy-intensive industries, such as iron
and steel and aluminum, experienced variation in growth in excess of the manufacturing sector
average. For other energy-intensive industries, including paper, cement, and bulk glass, the
variation was in the 10 to 12 percent range, on average.
Our work builds on a substantial literature that has examined the question of whether
environmental regulations adversely affect the competitive position of American industry.
Numerous theoretical analyses have suggested that environmental policy could create so-called
“pollution havens” in developing countries:
“The conventional wisdom is that environmental regulations impose significant
costs, slow productivity growth, and thereby hinder the ability of U.S. firms to
compete in international markets. This loss of competitiveness is believed to be
reflected in declining exports, increasing imports, and a long-term movement of
manufacturing capacity from the United States to other countries, particularly in
‘pollution-intensive’ industries” (Jaffe et al. 1995, p. 133).
2

U.S. EIA (2013) estimates that an economy-wide $15/tCO2 price would increase all-sector retail electricity prices
by 0.6 ¢/kWh on average nationwide. U.S. EPA (2014) estimates that the proposed Clean Power Plan would
increase all-sector retail electricity prices by 0.4-0.7 ¢/kWh across four scenarios.

3

Empirically evaluating this conventional wisdom has proven challenging (Jaffe et al.
1995; Levinson and Taylor 2008). A variety of factors may mitigate or dominate the effect of
environmental regulatory costs in determining manufacturing location decisions. First, the
availability of relevant factors of production, such as appropriately skilled labor, natural
resources, and capital, can play a more significant role than pollution control costs (Antweiler et
al. 2001). Second, transportation costs may discourage relocation to countries far from the major
markets for manufactured goods (Ederington et al. 2005). Third, firms with a significant share of
their investments in large, fixed physical structures also appear to move activity less in response
to environmental regulations (Ederington et al. 2005). Fourth, proximity to firms that produce
inputs or purchase outputs – e.g., agglomeration economies – also discourages relocation
(Jeppesen et al. 2002).
Since the most pollution-intensive industries tend to be relatively immobile by these
measures of “footlooseness,” the empirical literature typically finds quite limited impacts of
environmental regulations on international competitiveness. Levinson and Taylor (2008) show
that U.S. pollution abatement costs in the 1970s and 1980s increased net imports in the
manufacturing sector from Mexico and Canada. The estimated increase in net imports roughly
equaled about 10 percent of the total increase in bilateral trade for both Mexico and Canada,
suggesting that other factors played much more substantial roles in the evolution of trade among
the North American trading partners. An extensive literature on the competitiveness effects of
variation in environmental policies across the U.S. states has shown more significant impacts on
domestic firm relocation resulting from variation in the stringency of environmental regulations
(Henderson 1996; Greenstone 2002). Kahn and Mansur (2013) find even larger effects looking
at adjacent counties. The larger domestic competitiveness effects may reflect the fact that labor
costs and availability of capital do not vary much across the U.S. states and counties, and
transportation costs are less important, relative to the international context.
This empirical literature has focused on retrospective analyses of U.S. environmental
regulations. The absence of a domestic CO2 regulatory or taxation regime precludes us from
taking exactly the same approach. The popular alternative has been to use applied computable
general equilibrium models to simulate potential competitiveness impacts of pricing carbon
(IPCC 2001). These CGE models have been useful in quantifying aggregate leakage rates as
4

well as important interaction effects across markets that only a general equilibrium model can
capture. A limitation of these models is their focus on aggregate effects that obscures effects on
individual industries. While informative, this approach provides little to no differentiation among
industries with different energy intensities and elasticities with respect to energy prices. Indeed,
it is typical to make a common set of assumptions that yield a common response across the entire
manufacturing industry to a carbon pricing policy. As our analysis shows below, this approach
can underestimate the impacts on the more energy-intensive manufacturing industries. In this
way, our work is a natural complement to this literature.
The next section presents our empirical methods and data. Section three presents the
results of our empirical analyses of the relationships between energy prices and net imports and
production. Section four illustrates the results of our simulation of a near-term unilateral U.S.
CO2 mitigation policy on the U.S. manufacturing sector. The final section concludes with
comments on future research and implications for policy design.
II. Methods and Data for Empirical Analysis
The pollution haven hypothesis suggests that a climate change policy would impose
significant economic costs on carbon-intensive industries, resulting in declining output and
increasing net imports. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, we undertake a two-step empirical
analysis. First, we use historic energy prices as a proxy for climate change mitigation policy. We
estimate how production and net imports change in response to energy prices in the U.S.
manufacturing sector. Second, we take these estimated relationships to simulate the impacts of
changes in energy prices resulting from a climate change mitigation policy that effectively prices
CO2 emissions.
In evaluating the pollution haven hypothesis, we take two issues into consideration. The
costs of climate policy are anticipated to be greater for carbon-intensive industries. With 80+
percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions occurring as a result of fossil fuel combustion, carbon
intensity and energy intensity are effectively the same in the context of domestic mitigation
policy. Thus, we test for how energy prices affect production and net imports as a function of
industries’ energy intensity. Moreover, we explicitly discern impacts on production from impacts
on net imports. The change in net imports reflects the adverse competitiveness impacts of a
5

domestic mitigation policy. The change in production could reflect these competitiveness effects
– and a one-for-one substitution of net imports for domestic production would suggest that the
entire change in production was driven by competitiveness pressures. It is possible, however, that
domestic production could decline more than the change in net imports, representing a decline in
domestic consumption. For example, customers of energy-intensive manufactured goods could
exploit opportunities for economizing on their consumption – e.g., an auto manufacturer may use
less steel in response to climate policy induced increases in steel prices. At the same time,
frictions in trade and differences between domestic and imported goods may preclude one-forone substitution by net imports.
As a result, our empirical strategy tests two hypotheses. First, do idiosyncratic energy
price changes cause manufacturing production to decline? Second, do idiosyncratic energy price
changes cause manufacturing net imports to increase? In investigating these hypotheses
empirically, we will allow for energy price impacts to vary with industry energy intensity. We
will also assess the ratio of these two effects. That is, the fraction of changes in production
resulting from changes in net imports, i.e., from competitiveness effects. Understanding these
two impacts will provide a better understanding of the likely economic mechanisms driving
changes in U.S. manufacturing under a climate change mitigation policy. Discerning
international competitiveness effects from reduced domestic consumption effects would also
inform very different policy responses, as discussed in our final section.
To estimate production and competitiveness effects, we use a sample of nearly 450 U.S.
industries at the 4-digit industry (SIC 1987) level of disaggregation over the 1974-2009 period,
with a primary sample over 1979-2005 given data limitations. The general reduced-form
regression specification takes this form:
(1)

,

,

,

,

,

ln

,

,

,

Where Yit represents the outcome measure – either the natural logarithm of production or the
ratio of net imports to lagged production – for 4-digit industry i and year t; the α’s and θ’s are
fixed effects for industries and years, respectively; the function f(⋅ ) defines the responsiveness of
the outcome to energy prices as a flexible function of lagged energy intensity ei,t-1 and parameters
γ and β; ln

,

represents the level of U.S. carbon regulation – which we proxy with the
6

natural logarithm of domestic industry-specific energy prices; and Xit is a vector of additional
determinants of the industry outcome measures. In our preferred model specifications reported
below, we estimate (1) as the following:
(1ʹ)

ln

,

ln

ln

ln

,

,

,

ln

,

,

,
,

,

where Xit includes the interaction of the world oil price and lagged energy intensity, average
industry tariffs (TAR) and factor intensity variables (to estimate the returns to physical capital,
PCS, and human capital, HCS). The fixed effects
fixed effects (the grouping function

,

represent year by 2-digit industry group

maps each of the 448 4-digit industries into 20 2-

digit aggregates).3 Including the interaction of the world oil price and lagged energy intensity
permits us to control for energy price impacts in foreign trade partners that might vary based on
energy intensity (versus non-varying effects picked up by

,

). In effect, our models attempt

to estimate the impact of domestic industry energy prices on industry outcomes conditional on
the energy prices faced by foreign manufacturers. Note that the energy intensity function is
included alone, as well as interacted with energy prices. The use of lagged energy intensity is
designed to limit potential endogeneity, described below. In estimating (1ʹ), we weight each
observation by the 1974-2009 average value of shipments for that industry. This solves the
empirical problem that industries with very small shipment values can have explosive net import
values, an issue we test in our robustness checks. Summary statistics for our data are presented
in Table 1.We now describe our model specification and variable construction in more detail.

Domestic Production
Our outcome variables are constructed from the NBER-CES manufacturing database
(Bartlesman et al. 2000) and from Schott (2008, 2010). We use the value of shipments by
industry from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (SIC-87 version) as our measure
of domestic production. This provides value of shipments data for 459 industries over the 1958-

3

We appreciate a referee’s suggestion that we should account for aggregated industry-specific trends in our
empirical model.

7

2009 period in millions of dollars. Given the significant variation in size of U.S. manufacturing
industries, we estimate all production models with the natural logarithm of value of shipments.4

Net Imports
For net imports, we use Peter Schott’s public database (2008, 2010) on SIC-87-level
trade data. This provides gross imports and gross exports data for 403 industries over the 19722005 period and 446 industries over the 1972-1989 period measured in millions of dollars. We
constructed net imports as the difference between the gross imports and gross exports variables
and then scaled this value by the lagged value of shipments measure (we examine these variables
separately in our robustness checks). Scaling by production addresses the significant variation in
size of U.S. manufacturing industries, and is the norm in this literature (e.g., Ederington et al.
2005). We use lagged, rather than current, value of shipments because of the endogeneity of
domestic production and net imports.

Energy Prices
We use energy prices as a proxy for regulation under a hypothetical carbon pricing
regime because both cap-and-trade programs, including the EPA Clean Power Plan, and carbon
taxes affect behavior by raising energy prices. While historic price changes were not caused by
carbon pricing, we hypothesize that future carbon pricing would have a similar effect. We
construct an energy price index,

(2)

∑

where
state,

∑

, that varies by 4-digit industry and year:

∑

∑

∑

denotes the 2-digit SIC-87 industry corresponding to 4-digit industry i, s denotes
∈

denotes fuel, which includes coal, distillate oil, natural gas, residual oil, coke,

liquefied petroleum gas, and electricity, and (as before) t is year. At the top level, to aggregate
prices across the set of fuels, F, we estimate 2-digit-industry-by-year fuel shares,
4

All measures of output, net imports, and prices have been deflated to constant 2009 dollars.

8

∑

. The U.S.

Energy Information Administration Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey provides annual
fuel consumption by 2-digit SIC-87 manufacturing industry and fuel,

, for 1974-1990 and

1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, and 2010. We construct fuel shares as the ratio of consumption
(in MMBTU) for a specific fuel to all energy consumption (in MMBTU) by that 2-digit industry
in that year. We use linear interpolation to construct fuel shares in non-survey years of the
MECS post-1991.
To construct a 4-digit industry electricity price,

, we use the Annual Survey of

Manufactures SIC-87 classified electricity expenditures and quantity of electricity consumed by
4-digit industry for 1974-2001. Wayne Gray provided the same data from the Annual Survey of
Manufactures for 1978 and 1997-2009. We construct the electricity price as the ratio of
expenditure to quantity. We convert electricity prices to dollars per million BTU to permit
comparability with the fuel price data described below. Refer to the data appendix for further
details.
For all other fuels, we construct a 2-digit-industry-by year fuel price
by-year industrial energy prices by fuel,

. We use state-

, for 1970-2009 from the U.S. Energy Information

Administration State Energy Data System (measured in dollars per million BTU).5 We map
state-by-year fuel prices to 2-digit-industry-by-year fuel prices using 2-digit industry-by-stateby-year output. We construct a state’s share of 2-digit industry national output, ∑

, using

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis gross state product data. Summing the product of the stateby-year fuel price and the industry-by-year state shares of national output yields 2-digit-industryby-year fuel prices. To address potential endogeneity concerns of using output to construct
energy prices, we employ the one year lag of state industry share of national output.6 In sum, we
use 4-digit industry electricity prices and 2-digit industry state-weighted non-electricity fuel
prices aggregated by 2-digit industry fuel consumption weights to produce our energy price
variable.

Energy price – energy intensity interaction

5

The Annual Survey of Manufactures collects expenditures but not physical quantities or prices of non-electricity
fuel inputs.
6
We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.

9

The flexible function f(⋅ ) captures the variation across industries and time in the net
import and production elasticities with respect to energy prices in our estimation equation (1ʹ).
We expect energy intensity is the key driver of this variation, as higher energy intensities imply
larger cost impacts from rising energy prices. Without knowing exactly how the elasticities
would vary, we considered various specifications ranging from a constant value, to linear and
quadratic functions of energy intensity. We are unable to reject that the hypothesis that the
quadratic simplifies to a linear function of logged energy intensity (f(⋅ )) and that remains our
preferred specification.
We define energy intensity as the ratio of all energy expenditures to value of shipments.
Energy costs are reported in the Annual Survey of Manufactures and Bartlesman et al. (2000).
To address endogeneity concerns, we employ the one-year lag of energy intensity in our various
specifications. Figure 1 presents the cumulative distribution function for each industry’s average
energy intensity in 2009.

Other determinants of industry outcomes
We also control for average industry tariff rates, the physical capital share of value added,
and the human capital share of value added, consistent with Ederington et al.’s (2005) analysis of
the impacts of domestic environmental regulation on net imports, as well as world oil prices.
The average tariff is expressed in percentage points, and represents the average industry-level
tariff based on the total duties collected scaled by total customs value and multiplied by 100
(constructed from data provided by Schott 2008, 2010). The physical capital share is represented
by one minus the ratio of total payroll to value added (constructed from data provided by
Bartlesman et al. 2000). The human capital share is calculated as total payroll minus payments
to unskilled labor, scaled by industry value added. Payments of unskilled labor are estimated
from the Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing Rotation Group data files as the number
of workers, multiplied by average annual income of workers with less than a high school
diploma (constructed from NBER n.d. and Bartlesman et al. 2000). The oil price variable is
defined as the crude oil acquisition cost from EIA’s Annual Energy Review. See the data
appendix for more details.

Fixed effects and identification
10

Finally in our specification, industry fixed effects capture time-invariant characteristics of
industries that may affect these measures of competitiveness and year fixed effects account for
common shocks, such as those from monetary policy, tax policy, etc. that affect all industries in a
given period of time. In addition, we correct the standard error estimates to control for
heteroskedasticity across industries as well as auto-correlation within industries.
Given that our sample spans 35 years, we chose a preferred specification with distinct
year-fixed effects for each of 20 2-digit industry classifications (2-digit-industry-by-year) in
order to address the possibility of slow moving trends in manufacturing and energy prices that
might confound our estimation.7 In Section III, we verify that our results are robust to a simpler
model with only a single set of aggregate year effects. This specification of fixed effects reduces
the remaining energy price variation to identify the relationship with our outcome variables.
Nonetheless, the variation that remains – a standard deviation of 8 percent (evident in the column
reporting standard deviations when accounting for 2-digit SIC-by-year fixed effects in Table 1) –
is still consistent with the magnitude of a price effect we wish to simulate, as discussed in
Section IV. Qualitatively, we are using variation over time within a 4-digit industry relative to
the average variation for that industry’s 2-digit SIC aggregate.
With these flexible trends at the 2-digit SIC level, one might question the use of our
industry-specific fuel prices that are constructed at approximately the 2-digit SIC level (refer to
the data appendix for details regarding the exception in the classification of SIC-87 industry 37
by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis). Even without price variation beyond the 2-digit
level, however, we can still identify the difference in the energy price elasticity between more or
less energy intensive industries. The term ln

ln

,

presence of 2-digit-industry-by-year fixed effects
ln

,

,
,

in (1') contains variation in the
even if aggregate energy prices

varied only at the 2-digit SIC level. Within 2-digit SIC classifications, if the high

energy intensity industries are more sensitive to price changes, that will show up as a significant
parameter estimate without requiring any within-2-digit SIC energy price variation.
Variation in energy prices in the presence of 2-digit-industry-by-year fixed effects is necessary to
estimate

7

in (1'). The 4-digit industry electricity component of

We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.

11

thus plays an important

role in estimating this coefficient, noting that electricity represents a majority of energy
expenditures for 88 percent of the industries in our sample.
Ultimately, our use of energy prices as a proxy for regulatory stringency circumvents a
number of problems noted in the empirical pollution haven literature, which typically uses the
ratio of regulatory compliance costs to value added as a proxy for the stringency of
environmental regulations. Levinson and Taylor (2008) note that changes in production levels
can affect this ratio of pollution abatement cost expenditures (PACE) to output and create an
endogeneity problem. Production levels change this regulatory cost burden measure directly, as
production or a related variable is the denominator of the PACE share. Production levels can
also change the numerator of the PACE share indirectly, as changes in production affect plant
turnover, scale economies, and the difficulty in meeting regulatory standards – all of which affect
regulatory compliance costs. In contrast, energy prices are less likely to be endogenous to
individual industry production decisions. In related work, we find that most of the variation over
time in industry-level energy prices (which represent production-weighted state energy prices)
comes from variation in state energy prices, not changes in relative production levels across
states (Aldy and Pizer 2015).
III. Empirical Estimates of the Effects of Energy Prices on Production and Net Imports
Table 2 presents our main results estimating the relationship between energy prices and
production (left side of table) and net import share (right side of table). We focus on the results
using data from 1979-2005, which permits us to account for available trade and human capital
data. We present constant, linear, and quadratic specifications for f(⋅), describing the elasticity as
a function of logged energy intensity. The models (columns 1 and 4) specifying a constant
elasticity are akin to previous papers that regress domestic production and/or net imports on the
level of environmental compliance costs or on the ratio of environmental compliance costs to the
value of shipments (for example, Levinson and Taylor, 2008; Ederington et al., 2005; and
Grossman and Krueger, 1991). In each of these three previous papers, the ratio of net imports to
value of shipments is regressed on the ratio of pollution abatement costs to value of shipments
(or value added), as well as other controls that enter the regression equation linearly. Our
estimated net import share elasticity with respect to energy prices is small and not statistically
12

distinguishable from zero (column 4). Considering a 95 percent confidence interval, we would
rule out an elasticity of more than +0.06. This is true despite a large and statistically significant
elasticity of -0.14 on production (column 1); that is, production clearly declines in response to
higher domestic energy prices but it is not replaced by higher imports. One could interpret these
estimates as the average manufacturing sector impacts resulting from changes in energy prices.
Our more flexible regression specifications (columns 2-3 and 5-6) allow these elasticities
to vary with the previous year’s energy intensity through interaction terms between ln
and ln

,

,

. The energy intensity variable is the log of the percentage value and equals 0 when

the energy share is 1 percent. Examining the more flexible specifications, the linear terms,
,

,

, are statistically significant and have signs consistent with hypothesized

competitiveness impacts. Industries that use more energy per unit of output are more sensitive,
in terms of production and net imports, to energy price changes. The negative production-energy
price elasticity becomes more negative and the net import-energy price elasticity becomes more
positive with higher energy intensity. Neither of the quadratic interaction estimates,
ln

ln

,

,

, are statistically significant (columns 3 and 6). The direct effect of

energy intensity is negative and statistically significant in the production models (columns 1-3),
but generally not statistically significant in the net import models (columns 4-6).
We find that changes in physical capital and human capital shares are positively
associated with higher production, but have no statistically meaningful impacts on net imports.
The interaction of the world oil price and energy intensity is also statistically significant and
positive for the production models, but small and not statistically different from zero in the net
imports models. Our results for tariffs in the net imports models – small, statistical zeroes – are
consistent with the results in Ederington et al. (2005), who evaluate the impacts of environmental
regulatory costs on net imports while controlling for tariffs in the same way as in our model. We
find that tariffs are associated with reduced production, which may reflect the political economy
of declining industries fighting against trade liberalization. In our robustness checks (see below),
we find that inclusion of tariffs does not materially impact the estimation of our energy price and
price interacted with energy intensity coefficients of interest. We chose the linear-interaction
models (2 and 5) as our preferred specifications for the illustration of elasticities and policy
simulations.

13

Figure 2 presents the elasticity estimates from models 2 and 5, with associated 95 percent
confidence intervals, over the range of energy intensities for the manufacturing industries in our
sample in 2009. The point estimates of the domestic production-energy price elasticity (top
panel) are negative for all industries with an energy intensity greater than 0.7 percent (which
corresponds to about 86 percent of our sample industries in 2009) and statistically significant
when greater than 2.5 percent. Estimates for the most energy-intensive industries are nearly
triple the constant elasticity estimate of -0.14 in column 1. In particular, we estimate an
elasticity slightly larger in magnitude than -0.4 for industries with an energy intensity exceeding
15 percent, and the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence interval exceeds the constant
elasticity of -0.14. The differences between models 1 and 2 for the production-energy price
elasticity are statistically and economically significant.
The point estimates of the net import-energy price elasticity (bottom panel of Figure 2)
are all statistically indistinguishable from zero, although those for the most energy-intensive
industries rise to almost 0.1. Moreover, the upper end of a 95 percent confidence interval
approaches 0.2 for the most energy-intensive industries, nearly ten times the upper end for the
median industry (measured along the left vertical line). While neither model 4 nor model 5
produces statistically significant elasticity estimates within the observed range for energy
intensity, model 5 does reveal statistically that energy intensity makes it more likely that an
energy price increase would increase net imports.
Figure 3 presents what may be the most relevant results for the competitiveness debate,
the fraction of domestic production impacts that are associated with increased net imports. The
point estimates range from negative values for the median industry to 15 percent for the most
energy intensive. Driven by the net import results, none of the estimates are statistically
significant. The upper bound of the 95 percent confidence interval, however, is consistently
about 50 percent for energy-intensive industries, suggesting a useful upper bound based on our
model. In other words, for an industry with 15 percent energy intensity, we can observe that a 10
percent increase in energy prices would (a) lower production by about 4 percent and (b) raise net
imports by about 0.4 percent. This suggests (c) that shifts to foreign production account for
around 10 percent of the domestic decline and (d) a reasonable upper limit based on sampling
variability is 50 percent. The share of production decline offset by rising net imports increases to

14

about one-sixth for the most energy-intensive industries. We now turn to various empirical
questions and address the robustness of these estimates.

Robustness checks
We undertook an array of robustness checks regarding data and model construction.
Table 3a presents the robustness checks for the production model and Table 3b presents the
robustness checks for the net imports model. In each table, column 1 represents our preferred
specification for production (Table 2, column 2) and net imports (Table 2, column 5). Our first
check, for both production and net imports, considers whether the results are affected by the
missing observations associated with tariffs and human capital variables. As Table 1 indicates,
most of the data are relatively balanced, but we do not have human capital data before 1979 or
tariff and trade data after 2005 (and after 1989 for 43 industries). Excluding these two variables
permits us to estimate the production model over 1975-2009 (the use of lagged energy intensity
precludes inclusion of 1974 data in the estimation) and the net imports model over 1975-2005.
Those results, in column 2 of Tables 3a and 3b, are qualitatively similar to the preferred
estimates in column 1. The coefficient estimate on the price-intensity interaction term in the
production model is a statistically significant -0.192. This would increase the price elasticity of
the most energy intensive industries in our sample from about -0.4 in our preferred model to
about -0.6 in this specification. The coefficient estimates for net imports suggest that net imports
increase with energy intensity, but still cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.
In our second check, we further streamline the specification by dropping the physical
capital share and the oil price-energy intensity interaction. Column 3 presents qualitatively
similar results for the energy price and energy price-energy intensity interaction coefficient
estimates.
Our third check examines whether there is temporal dynamic pattern to the results we are
estimating. In column 4 of Tables 3a and 3b, we estimate a model that includes 2 lagged values
of energy prices as well as interactions of those lagged energy prices with our lagged energy
intensity variable. If there is any change in the effect of energy prices on production or net
imports over time, either positive or negative, we would see that in the estimated coefficients on
lagged prices (Tables 3a and 3b report the sum of the coefficient on those two lagged price
variables and the two lagged price interactions). None of the individual coefficients is
15

statistically significant, nor is the sum of each pair reported in the table, nor is a joint test of all
four coefficients (p-values of 54 percent for the production regression and 49 percent for the net
import regression). Similar results were obtained with regressions including anywhere from 1 to
3 lags.
Our fourth check employs lagged physical capital and human capital shares. To address
concerns about endogeneity, we include one-year lagged measures of these two variables in the
models presented in column 4 of Tables 3a and 3b. Accounting for lagged capital shares results
in no qualitative changes to the magnitudes or statistical significance of the energy price and
price-intensity interaction coefficient estimates.
In our fifth check, we substitute year fixed effects for the 2-digit industry-by-year fixed
effects (column 6). The 2-digit-industry-by-year fixed effects are intended to control for (2-digit)
industry time trends that might otherwise confound estimation. By omitting these, we implement
a more restrictive model (year effects that do not vary by industry) but increase the remaining
price variation used to estimate the elasticities of interest. In doing so, we find that production
still declines as energy intensity increases – the price-intensity interaction terms have statistically
significant coefficient estimates – but theelasticity function is positive for a large fraction of the
range of energy intensity (e.g., those industries where energy intensity < 10 percent). Likewise,
for the net imports specification, we observe the same relationship with respect to energy
intensity as with our preferred specification, although the change in magnitudes suggests that a
larger fraction of the sample of industries experience negative net import changes. These results
are consistent with the idea that there are long-term trends where industrial activity and energy
prices are rising together in some areas, hence the more positive association on average (negative
for net imports), but this is unrelated to the pattern of energy intensity, which still finds a more
negative effect (positive for net imports) for more energy-intensive industries.
In the sixth check, we estimate our preferred specification without regression weights.
Regression weights based on the value of shipments are used partly to capture the idea that in our
simulations (e.g., Table 4), we weight based on value of shipments to construct both an overall
industry average and averages for various sub-groups of industries. Regression weights also deal
with an empirical problem that net import values can be explosive when the denominator, value

16

of shipments, is small. This weighting scheme effectively downweights those observations so
they do not dominate the regression (which otherwise requires censoring or robust regression).8
For the production model (Table 3a column 7), we again find a statistically significant
estimate on the price-intensity interaction term, and the magnitudes of the price and interaction
coefficient estimates are larger. As a result, an even larger fraction of the sample of industries –
more than 94 percent – have energy intensities associated with a negative elasticity with respect
to energy prices. The elasticity for the industry with the median energy intensity is about -0.14
and the elasticity exceeds -0.55 in magnitude for the most energy-intensive industries. For the net
imports model (Table 3b, column 7), the price and price-intensity interaction coefficient
estimates are each statistically significant and larger than in the preferred specification. The
relationship continues to show how net imports increase with energy intensity and the elasticity
is about 0.13 for the most energy-intensive industries. The point estimate for those industries
with low energy intensity, however, is negative and statistically significant—reflecting
sensitivity to a small number of relatively extreme net import values.
In our seventh check, we address concerns about an unbalanced sample by imputing
values for missing observations to construct a balanced sample. For all variables, we impute
values for missing observations via linear interpolation of nearest observations.9 The results for
the balanced with interpolated observations sample in column 8 of Tables 3a and 3b are nearly
identical for both models.
In addition, Table 3b includes three net imports-specific robustness checks. We reran the
net imports models using average production as opposed to lagged production as the
denominator (Table 3b, column 9). Endogeneity concerns motivated our use of lagged rather
than current production, and one might worry that persistent errors would make even this lagged
approach problematic. Average production over 25 years is unlikely to be as sensitive—but can
be increasingly irrelevant for industries that have undergone significant changes. In any case,
this does not qualitatively change the magnitudes or statistical significance of the coefficient
estimates relative to the preferred specification.
Finally, we estimate the competitiveness model with gross imports (Table 3b column 10)
and the negative of gross exports (Table 3b column 11). We find a very similar relationship – in

8
9

We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.
We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.

17

magnitudes and statistical significance – in the gross imports model as in the net imports model.
The gross exports model yields small and statistically insignificant coefficient estimates on price
and price interacted with lagged energy intensity.

Summary
In summary, our preferred models suggest a statistically significant effect of higher
energy prices on domestic production. Our best estimate is an elasticity of -0.08 for the industry
with the median energy intensity of 1.5 percent, rising in excess of -0.4 for the most energyintensive industries, as reflected in Figure 2. We do not find a statistically significant increase in
net imports, however, suggesting that the production decline primarily reflects a decline in
domestic consumption. Our best estimate is a negative elasticity for the least energy-intensive
industry (i.e., a decrease in net imports as domestic energy prices rise) rising to 0.07 for the most
energy-intensive industry. This means that for the most energy-intensive firms, we estimate onesixth of the reduced production arising from higher domestic energy prices will be offset by
increased net imports, with a 95 percent confidence interval being as high as 50 percent.
IV. Simulation of Near-term Effects of a CO2 Mitigation Policy
We can use these statistically-estimated relationships to simulate the effects of a
unilateral U.S. climate change policy. In particular, we illustrate the potential manufacturing
sector competitiveness impacts of an economy-wide $15 per ton CO2 price. This carbon price is
similar to allowance prices expected at the start of cap-and-trade programs proposed in recent
legislation, including U.S. EPA’s (2009) estimate of a $13 per ton CO2 price under the WaxmanMarkey Bill (H.R. 2454, 111th Congress), U.S. EPA’s (2010) estimate of a $17 per ton CO2 price
under the American Power Act (draft legislation from Senators Kerry and Lieberman) as well as
the first year carbon tax of $15 per ton CO2 in a 2009 Republican-sponsored carbon tax bill
(H.R. 2380, 111th Congress).10 The $15 per ton CO2 price is also generally consistent with statelevel efforts, ongoing in California cap-and-trade (with allowance prices averaging $12/tCO2 in
10

The simulation focuses only on carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels. Since this represents 98 percent of all
carbon dioxide emissions, and more than 80 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions in the United States, this should
serve as a sufficient simulation of the impact of climate policy on U.S. manufacturing industries competitiveness.
The key exception may be the cement industry, which has substantial process emissions of carbon dioxide.

18

2014) and what is expected for the power sector under the proposed Clean Power Plan (U.S.
EPA 2014).
Based on the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2013) modeling of an economywide cap-and-trade program, a $15 per ton CO2 price would increase industrial sector energy
prices by about 11 percent, which is slightly larger than a one standard deviation increase in
energy prices in our sample.11 Based on these estimated model parameters, this energy price
increase then drives the domestic production and competitiveness impacts in our simulation.
We multiply the elasticity estimates in Figure 2 from our preferred model of net import
share by 11 percent to obtain the estimated competitiveness effects shown in the top panel of
Figure 4. Along with the estimated domestic production effect, shown in the bottom panel, these
estimates are exactly a rescaled version of Figure 2. We see a net import effect of between
negative 2 and (positive) 1 percent while the production effect is on the order of (negative) 2-4
percent for most industries but rises to more than (negative) 4 percent for the most energyintensive industries.
Table 4 summarizes the results in Figure 4 for all manufacturing and for several of the
most energy-intensive industries, with the results weighted by industry-specific value of
shipments (Columns 3 and 5). 12 The energy-intensive industries of iron and steel, aluminum,
pulp and paper, cement, glass, and industrial chemicals would bear total percentage declines in
domestic production, on the order of 3 to 5 percent, in excess of the manufacturing sector
average of 1.5 percent. Most of the lower domestic production apparently reflects lower
demand, however, not an influx of net imports; the net import effect ranges from -0.1 to 0.8
percent for these energy intensive industries. That is, in these industries no more than about onesixth of the decline in domestic production results from an increase in net imports (column 6). If
we consider a 95 percent confidence interval for this ratio, it might be as high as 50 percent.
Given the empirical model’s structure that yields common production and net import
elasticities with respect to energy prices for all industries with comparable energy intensity, the
simulation produces similar outcomes for industries with similar energy intensity. Therefore, we
11

From Table 1, the standard deviation of logged energy prices after removing industry fixed effects and 2-digit
SIC-by-year fixed effects is 0.08 or 8 percent. We could examine larger effects, but that would involve
extrapolating impacts for price changes beyond the scope of this analysis since it would reflect an out-of-sample
prediction.
12
In constructing the group aggregates, we estimate each of the component-industry percentage change based on
that industry’s energy intensity, and then add up these changes based on the component-industry’s share of domestic
production within the industry group.

19

cannot rule out that some individual industries with a particular energy intensity may face a
larger or smaller impact than the average that we calculate.

V. Policy Implications and Further Research
These results suggest that consumers of energy-intensive goods do not respond to higher
energy prices by proportionally consuming more imports. To a large part, they economize on
their use of these higher-priced manufactured goods, perhaps by using less of the good in the
manufacture of their finished products or by substituting with other, less energy-intensive
materials. This suggests that the imported versions of domestically-produced goods may be
imperfect substitutes. Such imports may represent different products or it may be that other
determinants of trade flows – such as transport costs, tariffs, etc. – may limit the substitution
possibilities. Quantitatively, competitiveness effects are less than 1 percent of production, even
among energy-intensive industries, for the carbon dioxide prices that we examined. A 1 percent
change in production due to carbon pricing induced competitiveness impacts is smaller than the
annual fluctuations in production, whose standard deviation during our sample period ranged
from 10 to 15 percent for energy-intensive industries. Compared to the overall effect on
production from proposed policies, this competitiveness effect still counts for roughly one-sixth
of the production effect among energy-intensive domestic suppliers.
Based on our findings, attempting to “protect” energy-intensive U.S. manufacturing firms
from international competitive pressures through various policies may have only a limited impact
on these firms. The estimated competitiveness impacts, while fairly modest at $15 per ton CO2,
suggest the need to target policies to those most likely to face adverse impacts, such as some
narrowly defined industries that may face competitive pressures from abroad as their energy
costs rise with a greenhouse gas mitigation policy. Indeed, given the magnitude of the
competitiveness impacts on climate policy in our simulation, the potential economic and
diplomatic costs of such policies may outweigh the benefits and justify no action.
Regardless, energy-intensive firms operating under the EU Emission Trading Scheme, a
CO2 cap-and-trade program, have lobbied extensively to receive free allowances in the post-2012
ETS. Similar firms in the U.S. have echoed this request as they lobbied Congress during its
20

deliberations of a U.S. cap-and-trade program in 2009 and 2010 (see Interagency
Competitiveness Analysis Team 2009). The estimated competitiveness impacts in this analysis
could provide a basis for the amount of the gratis allowance allocation necessary to offset output
losses associated with a reduced competitive position under climate policy. For example, if
primary aluminum production declines 0.8 percent through competitiveness impacts (see Table
4), then the government could grant free allowances equal in value to 0.8 percent of their output
in order to secure broader political support for the cap-and-trade program.13
There are limitations to these estimates. First, given the historical experience represented
in the data used to estimate our model, we cannot simulate the impacts of significantly higher
CO2 prices.14 Second, our estimates represent near-term impacts over one (or perhaps a few
years). Arguably with more time to adjust, beyond the horizon of our robustness checks using
several years of lagged prices, U.S. industry could fare better (if they can reduce energy usage)
or worse (if they have more time to move operations). U.S. firms may respond differently to a
change in long-run policy (and hence energy prices) than to the temporary variance in energy
prices that serves as the basis for our identification. Third, even with our disaggregated data and
flexible model, we still cannot flexibly capture all of the features relevant for every industry in
every international trading situation. The effects for some firms and sectors could be different
than what we have estimated. Fourth, in using historical data, we are necessarily assuming the
past is a useful guide to future behavior. To the extent there have been or will be substantial
institutional or market changes, this assumption is flawed.
Additional research can further inform our understanding of the competitiveness effects
of climate policy. First, the EU implemented in 2005 a CO2 cap-and-trade program covering the
most energy-intensive manufacturing firms and the utility sector. A similar analysis could be
undertaken of the manufacturing sector in Europe and the simulated results could be compared
with realized outcomes under the EU ETS. Second, as emission-intensive firms shed some

13

This is analogous to Bovenberg and Goulder’s (2001) work showing the magnitude of free allowances necessary
to fully compensate firms for the costs of climate policy. Our estimates would represent a fraction of Bovenberg
and Goulder’s since these would only offset losses associated with increased net imports and not the direct costs of
modifying capital to mitigate emissions. And, while such an allocation might address distributional impact, it will
not avoid the underlying problem of some emissions reductions in the United States being thwarted by shifts in
production overseas.
14
It is important to note that our analysis identifies the effect of energy prices on impact and competitiveness
measures after controlling for economy-wide factors. It is the residual variation after accounting for economy-wide
energy price shocks that drives our results.

21

capital and labor under climate policy, emission-lean firms may benefit by absorbing some of
these factors. While some proponents of climate policy have made anecdotal claims about
economic winners under CO2 regulation, a rigorous econometric analysis of industries in and
beyond manufacturing could explore whether the general equilibrium capital and labor effects
dominate the modest burdens emission-lean firms bear under climate policy. It may be
especially interesting to also consider how a sectoral (as opposed to economy-wide) emission
mitigation policy affects the allocation of capital and labor in the U.S. economy among regulated
and non-regulated sectors. This could complement one of the main findings of this work that the
majority of the decline in domestic manufacturing production results from apparent declines in
domestic consumption.

22

References
Aldy, Joseph E., and William A. Pizer. 2015. The impacts of power sector carbon regulations
on U.S. manufacturing employment. Working paper.
Aldy, Joseph E., and W. Kip Viscusi. 2014. Environmental risk and uncertainty. In Handbook of
the economics of risk and uncertainty, Volume 1, eds. Mark J. Machina and W. Kip
Viscusi. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Antweiler, Werner, Brian R. Copeland, and M. Scott Taylor. 2001. Is free trade good for the
environment? American Economic Review 91(4): 877-908.
Bartlesman, Eric J., Randy A. Becker, and Wayne B. Gray. 2000. NBER-CES manufacturing
industry database. http://www.nber.org/nberces/nbprod96.htm.
Blanford, G., R. Richels, and T. Rutherford2009. Feasible climate targets: The roles of
economic growth, coalition development and expectations. Energy Economics 31: S82S93.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2001. Neutralizing the adverse industry impacts
of CO2 abatement policies: what does it cost? In Behavioral and distributional effects of
environmental policy,eds. Carlo Carraro and Gilbert E. Metcalf. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. n.d. Regional economic accounts download. Internet:
www.bea.gov/regional/downloadzip.cfm.
Burtraw, Dallas, Arthur G. Fraas, and Nathan Richardson. 2012. Tradable standards for Clean
Air Act carbon policy. RFF Discussion Paper 12-05, Resources for the Future,
Washington, DC.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2014. Economic report of the President 2014. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.
Ederington, J., A. Levinson, J. Minier. 2005. Footloose and pollution-free. Review of
Economics and Statistics 87(1): 92-99.
Gray, Wayne. 2007. Personal Communication. August 22, 2007.
Gray, Wayne. 2012. Personal Communication. June 23, 2012.

23

Greenstone, Michael. 2002. The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity:
Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of
Manufactures. Journal of Political Economy 110(6): 1175-1219.
Grossman, Gene M., and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. Environmental impacts of a North American
Free Trade Agreement. NBER Working Paper 3914, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Harrell, F. E., Jr. 2001. Regression modeling strategies: With applications to linear models,
logistic regression, and survival analysis. New York: Springer.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1996. Effects of air quality regulation. American Economic Review 86:
789-813.
Interagency Competitiveness Analysis Team. 2009. The effects of H.R. 2454 on international
competitiveness and emission leakage in energy-intensive, trade-exposed industries. An
interagency report responding to a request from Senators Bayh, Spector, Stabenow,
McCaskill, and Brown. Washington, DC: U.S. Government.
www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/pdfs/InteragencyReport_CompetitivenessEmissionLeakage.pdf
Jaffe, Adam B., Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney, and Robert N. Stavins. 1995.
Environmental regulation and the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing: What does the
evidence tell us? Journal of Economic Literature 33(1): 132-163.
Jeppesen, Tim, John A. List, and Henk Folmer. 2002. Environmental regulations and new plant
location decisions: Evidence from a meta-analysis. Journal of Regional Science 42(1):
19-49.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Erin T. Mansur. 2013. Do local energy prices and regulation affect the
geographic concentration of employment? Journal of Public Economics 101: 105-114.
Levinson, Arik, and M. Scott Taylor. 2008. Unmasking the pollution haven effect.
International Economic Review 49(1): 223-254.
Morgenstern, R., W. Pizer, and J.-S. Shih. 2002. Jobs versus the environment: Is there a tradeoff?

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 43(3): 412-436.

National Bureau of Economic Research. n.d. Current Population Survey Data at the NBER.
Internet: www.nber.org/cps/.
Schott, Peter. 2008. The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports. Economic Policy 53: 5-49.
24

Schott, Peter. 2010. U.S. Manufacturing Exports and Imports by SIC or NAICS Category and
Partner Country, 1972 to 2005.
http://faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/files/research/data/sic_naics_trade_20100504.pdf
U.S. Census Bureau. Annual Survey of Manufactures. Various editions.
U.S. Census Bureau. Current Population Survey. Various editions.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2013. Annual energy outlook 2013. DOE/EIA0383(2013). Washington, DC: Department of Energy.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. n.d.a. Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey.
Internet: www.eia.gov/consumption/manufacturing/index.cfm.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. n.d.b. State Energy Data System. Internet:
www.eia.gov/state/seds/.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2009. EPA analysis of the American Clean Energy and
Security Act of 2009, H.R. 2454, 111th Congress. Washington, DC: EPA.
www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/pdfs/HR2454_Analysis.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2010. EPA analysis of the American Power Act in the
111th Congress. Washington, DC: EPA.
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/pdfs/EPA_APA_Analysis_6-14-10.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2014. Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Proposed
Carbon Pollution Guidelines for Existing Power Plants and Emission Standards for
Modified and Reconstructed Power Plants. EPA-452/R-14-002. Research Triangle Park,
NC: OAQPS/USEPA.

25

Tables
Table 1. Summary Statistics of Raw Data (1974-2009)
s.d. ([2-digit
SIC-by-year]
and industry
fixed effects)

Minimum

Maximum

Observations

Industries

Average T

Mean

Standard
deviation

Standard
deviation
(within)

9.665

22.389

8.121

7.322

0.024

738.370

16415

459

35.76

1.476

1.228

0.359

0.290

-3.722

6.604

16415

459

35.76

0.183

1.109

0.816

0.706

-1.731

40.374

13034

448

29.09

Total Energy Price
(2009$/MMBTU)
(logged)

10.717

4.305

2.877

1.655

0.795

181.804

16135

459

35.15

2.286

0.440

0.276

0.081

-0.229

5.203

16135

459

35.15

Electricity Price
(2009$/MMBTU)
(logged)

23.575

6.818

5.918

4.358

1.702

362.365

16183

459

35.26

3.131

0.241

0.189

0.098

0.532

5.893

2.314

3.161

0.923

0.778

0.108

34.139

15964

459

34.78

0.425

0.811

0.257

0.204

-2.227

3.530

15964

459

34.78

Tariff (average rate, %)

1.565

3.310

2.722

1.715

0.000

100.080

13388

448

29.88

Physical capital

0.615

0.121

0.067

0.051

-1.117

0.976

16415

459

35.76

Human capital

0.120

0.050

0.031

0.023

-0.240

0.635

13485

459

29.38

Value of Shipments
($2009 billion)
(logged)
Net Imports (share of
lagged value of
shipments)

Lagged energy intensity
(% of value of
shipments)
(logged)

Notes: Production data from the NBER-CES database are available for 459 industries from 1974-2009. Trade data from Schott (2008, 2010) are
only available for a subset of 403 industries from 1974-2005 and another 43 industries from 1974-1989. The disappearance of these 43 industries
after 1989 arises from a change in the data source and concordance. Human capital data are only available from 1979-2009.

26

Table 2. Production and Net Import models, main parameter estimates (1979-2005)

27

Table 3a. Robustness checks – Production model

28

Table 3b. Robustness checks – Net import model

29

Table 4.

Predicted impacts of a $15/ton CO2 price on various manufacturing sectors
(1)

Industry

Energy
intensity
(%)

Iron and Steel

5.39

Chemicals

10.47

Paper

8.96

Aluminum

23.51

Cement

18.00

Bulk Glass

16.99

Industry average

1.97

(2)

(3)

(4)

Production- Production Net import
energy
effect (%)
elasticity
elasticity

-0.27***
(0.09)
-0.35***
(0.11)
-0.33***
(0.10)
-0.46***
(0.13)
-0.42***
(0.12)
-0.41***
(0.12)
-0.14*
(0.08)

-2.99
(1.03)
-3.95
(1.20)
-3.73
(1.15)
-5.12
(1.46)
-4.74
(1.37)
-4.65
(1.35)
-1.53
(0.88)

-0.01
(0.06)
0.02
(0.06)
0.02
(0.06)
0.07
(0.07)
0.05
(0.07)
0.05
(0.07)
-0.07
(0.06)

(5)

(6)

Net import
effect (%)

ΔNI as a
% of Δ
Production

-0.13
(0.68)
0.28
(0.72)
0.18
(0.71)
0.77
(0.82)
0.61
(0.78)
0.57
(0.77)
-0.75
(0.68)

-0.04
(0.23)
0.07
(0.19)
0.05
(0.19)
0.15
(0.17)
0.13
(0.18)
0.12
(0.18)
-0.49
(0.53)

Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Columns (2) and (4) reflect a linear combination of the estimated logged energy price coefficients from Columns (2) and (5) in
Table 2, based on the energy intensity in Column (1) (measured in 2009 for each industry). These follow directly from Figure 2. Columns (3) and (5) convert elasticities
into changes in production and net imports, expressed as a share of production, based on an estimated carbon dioxide price of $15/ton. The $15/ton effect is translated
into an 11% increase in average industrial energy prices predicted under a carbon pricing policy in U.S. EIA (2013), using a fuel-consumption weighted average. Column
(6) shows the net import effect (5) as a share of the overall supply effect (3) and is taken directly from Figure 3 (see notes for calculation of standard errors). Chemicals
includes industrial inorganic chemicals, SIC codes 2812-2819. Paper includes pulp, paper, and paperboard mills, SIC codes 2611, 2621, and 2631. Iron and steel
includes SIC codes 3312, 3321-3325. Aluminum includes primary production, SIC code 3334. Cement includes hydraulic cement, SIC code 3241. Bulk glass includes
flat glass, SIC code 3211. For multi-industry aggregates, results are weighted by the average value of shipments among constituent 4-digit SIC industries.

30

31

Figures

0.0

0.2

Cumulative distribution
0.4
0.6
0.8

1.0

Figure 1. Distribution of 2009 industry classifications by energy intensity (%)

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity (2009)

20

25

Notes: The vertical lines present the 50th and 90th percentiles of the manufacturing sector
energy intensity distribution.
Source: Constructed by authors from Annual Survey of Manufactures and Bartlesman et
al. (2000).

32

-1. 0

Prod uc tion ela stic ity
w ith res pec t to en ergy pric es
-0. 5
0. 0

0. 5

Figure 2. Estimated energy price elasticities as a function of energy intensity (%)

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity

25

95% confidence interval

-0. 4

Ne t imp ort elas ticity
w ith res pec t to en ergy pric es
-0. 2
0. 0
0. 2

estimated value

20

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity

estimated value

20

25

95% confidence interval

Notes: Based on columns (2) and (5) in Table 2. Note that the linear relationship in the
log of energy intensity becomes non-linear in levels. The vertical lines present the 50th
and 90th percentiles of the manufacturing sector energy intensity distribution in 2009.
The dashed lines present the 95 percent confidence interval.
33

-1. 0

Ne t imp ort eff ect
as a sha re of p roduc tio n effe ct
-0. 5
0. 0
0. 5

Figure 3. Net import effect as a share of production effect, versus energy intensity (%)

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity

estimated value

20

25

95% confidence interval

Notes: Based the ratio of estimates in Figure 2. The vertical lines present the 50th and
90th percentiles of the manufacturing sector energy intensity distribution. The dashed
lines present the 95 percent confidence interval. Standard errors account for correlation
across equations (by estimating the equations together, clustering the standard errors by SIC code
across both equations, and using the delta method to compute the standard error of the ratio).

Estimates for low energy intensity are not reported as the production effect tends to zero.

34

-4

Net import effect (%)
for $15 CO2 price
-2
0

2

Figure 4. Estimated energy price effects on net imports and production for $15 CO2 price
as a function of energy intensity

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity

25

95% confidence interval

-10

Production effect (%)
for $15 CO2 price
-5
0

5

estimated value

20

0

5

10
15
Energy intensity

estimated value

20

25

95% confidence interval

Notes: Based on columns (2) and (5) in Table 2 and an 11% increase in energy prices.
Note that the linear relationship in the log of energy intensity becomes non-linear in
levels. The vertical lines present the 50th and 90th percentiles of the manufacturing sector
energy intensity distribution in 2009. The dashed lines present the 95 percent confidence
interval.
35

Data Appendix
Value of shipments: We use the SIC-87 classification version of the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database. This provides value of shipments data for 459
industries over the 1958-2009 period measured in millions of dollars.
Internet: www.nber.org/data/nberces5809.html.
Net imports: We use Peter Schott’s public database on SIC-87-level trade data. This
provides gross imports and gross exports data for 403 industries over the 1972-2005
period and 446 industries over the 1972-1989 period measured in millions of dollars. We
constructed net imports from the gross imports and gross exports variables and then
scaled this value by the lagged value of shipments measure.
Internet: faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/sub_international.htm and
faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/files/research/data/sic_naics_trade_20100504.pdf.
Energy price: The text describes the construction of the energy price measure. The source
data include: the 4-digit SIC-87 electricity price described below; the U.S. EIA State
Energy Data System, which provides state-by-year industrial energy prices by fuel for
1970-2009; the U.S. Energy Information Administration Manufacturing Energy
Consumption Survey, which provides annual fuel consumption by 2-digit SIC-87
manufacturing industry and fuel for 1974-1990 and 1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, and
2010; the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which provides gross state product with a data
classification scheme very similar to the 2-digit SIC-87 over our sample period.For post1997 data, we merged two BEA categories (motor vehicles and other transport
equipment) into one 2-digit SIC industry, 37. Over this same time period, we employ
non-durables output as a proxy for SIC-87 industry 21 (tobacco products) and industry 31
(leather and leather products), which are not reported separately in the BEA datasets.. We
convert our 4-digit electricity prices to a dollars per million BTU basis (1¢/kWh =
$293.297/MMBTU), to permit comparability with the fuel price data from the EIA State
Energy Data System.
Internet: www.eia.gov/state/seds/, www.eia.gov/consumption/manufacturing/index.cfm,
and www.bea.gov/regional/downloadzip.cfm.
Electricity price: We use the Annual Survey of Manufactures to extract SIC-87 classified
electricity expenditures and quantity of electricity consumed by industry for 1974-2001.
Wayne Gray provided the same data from the Annual Survey of Manufactures for 1978
and 1997-2009. We construct the average electricity price as the ratio of expenditure to
quantity.
Energy intensity: We use the SIC-87 classification version of the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database. This provides the cost of electricity and fuels in
millions of dollars. We construct energy intensity as the ratio of this cost to the value of
shipments and employ the lagged value of this in the empirical models.
Internet: www.nber.org/data/nberces5809.html.

36

Oil price: We use the real ($2005) composite price of crude refiner acquisition costs,
from EIA’s Annual Energy Review 2011, Table 5.21.
Internet: http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/xls/stb0521.xls.
Tariffs: We use Peter Schott’s public database on SIC-87-level trade data. This provides
gross imports and duties charged data measured in millions of dollars. We constructed
tariffs as 100*(duties/gross imports). See Ederington et al. (2005) for further details on
the construction of this variable.
Internet: faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/sub_international.htm and
faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/files/research/data/sic_naics_trade_20100504.pdf.
Physical capital share: We use the SIC-87 classification version of the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database. We employ the total payroll variable, measured in
millions of dollars, and the total value added variable, also measured in millions of
dollars, to construct the physical capital share as: 1 – payroll/value-added. See Ederington
et al. (2005) for further details on the construction of this variable.
Internet: www.nber.org/data/nberces5809.html.
Human capital share: We use the SIC-87 classification version of the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database and the Current Population Survey Multiple Outgoing
Rotation Group data provided by the NBER. We employ the total payroll, total value
added, and total employment (measured in 1000s) variables from the NBER-CES
database. We estimate from the CPS MORG the industry-specific compensation (based
on reported weekly earnings) to unskilled labor (education less than a high school
diploma), which are converted into SIC87 based on NBER concordance files from CPS
Census-based industry classifications to SIC87. We construct human capital share as:
payroll – (unskilled-compensation*employment)/value-added. See Ederington et al.
(2005) for further details on the construction of this variable.
Internet: www.nber.org/data/nberces5809.html and www.nber.org/cps/.
GDP implicit price deflator: We convert the nominal values of value of shipments, net
imports, energy prices, electricity prices, and oil prices into 2009 dollars using the GDP
implicit price deflator published in the 2014 Economic Report of the President (CEA
2014).

37

