                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE FOR-PROFIT POSTSECONDARY SCHOOL SECTOR:
                      NIMBLE CRITTERS OR AGILE PREDATORS?

                                         David J. Deming
                                          Claudia Goldin
                                         Lawrence F. Katz

                                       Working Paper 17710
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17710


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




We gratefully acknowledge the superb research assistance of Tanya Avilova, Jason Poulos, and Bernie
Ziprich. We are grateful to Stephanie Cellini and the Editors of the -RXUQDORI(FRQRPLF3HUVSHFWLYHV
for helpful comments. The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R305C110011 to Teachers College, Columbia University.
The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute, the U.S.
Department of Education, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by David J. Deming, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?
David J. Deming, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 17710
December 2011
JEL No. I2,I23,J24

                                                 ABSTRACT

Private for-profit institutions have been the fastest growing part of the U.S. higher education sector.
For-profit enrollment increased from 0.2 percent to 9.1 percent of total enrollment in degree-granting
schools from 1970 to 2009, and for-profit institutions account for the majority of enrollments in non-degree
granting postsecondary schools. We describe the schools, students, and programs in the for-profit
higher education sector, its phenomenal recent growth, and its relationship to the federal and state
governments. Using the 2004 to 2009 Beginning Postsecondary Students (BPS) longitudinal survey
we assess outcomes of a recent cohort of first-time undergraduates who attended for-profits relative
to comparable students who attended community colleges or other public or private non-profit institutions.
We find that relative to these other institutions, for-profits educate a larger fraction of minority, disadvantaged,
and older students, and they have greater success at retaining students in their first year and getting
them to complete short programs at the certificate and associate degree levels. But we also find that
for-profit students end up with higher unemployment and “idleness” rates and lower earnings six years
after entering programs than do comparable students from other schools, and that they have far greater
student debt burdens and default rates on their student loans.


David J. Deming                                          Lawrence F. Katz
Harvard Graduate School of Education                     Department of Economics
Gutman 411                                               Harvard University
Appian Way                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge MA 02138                                       and NBER
david_deming@gse.harvard.edu                             lkatz@harvard.edu

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
        Private for-profit institutions have become an increasingly visible part of the U.S. higher
education sector. They are today the most diverse by program and size, have been the fastest
growing, have the highest fraction of nontraditional students, and obtain the greatest proportion
of their total revenue from federal student aid (loan and grant) programs. They are, as well, the
subjects of high-profile investigations of late and are facing major regulatory changes.

        Today’s for-profit postsecondary schools were preceded a century ago by a group of
proprietary schools that were also responding to an explosion in demand for technical, vocational
and applied subjects. Business, managerial, and secretarial skills were in great demand in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and a multitude of proprietary institutions emerged
that taught accounting, management, real estate, stenography and typing. The numbers and
enrollments of these institutions were greatly reduced when public high schools expanded and
increased their offerings in the business and vocational areas. But many survived and morphed
into some of the current for-profits, such as Blair College (established 1897; now part of Everest
College), Bryant and Stratton College (1854), Gibbs College (1911), Globe University (1885),
Rasmussen College (1900), and Strayer University (1892).

        Distance learning, known today as on-line education, also has an interesting past in
“correspondence courses” that were offered by many universities beginning in the late nineteenth
century including some of the most prestigious, such as the University of Chicago and the
University of Wisconsin (Watkins, 1991). On-line education is today’s most rapidly growing
part of higher education. Walden University, founded in 1970 and today one the largest for-
profit on-line institutions, pioneered on-line studies to allow working professionals to earn
further degrees.

        In this article, we describe the schools, students, and programs in the for-profit higher
education sector, its phenomenal recent growth, and its relationship to the federal and state
governments. As a starting point, for-profit postsecondary enrollments have grown considerably
during the past several decades, particularly in degree programs and at large national providers
with substantial on-line offerings. Fall enrollment in for-profit degree-granting institutions grew
by more than 100-fold from 18,333 in 1970 to 1.85 million in 2009. During that same time
period, total fall enrollment in all degree-granting institutions increased 2.4 fold from 8.58
million in 1970 to 20.43 million in 2009 (U.S. Department of Education, 2010, Digest, table
197). Thus, for-profit enrollment increased from 0.2 percent to 9.1 percent of total enrollment in
degree-granting schools from 1970 to 2009. For-profit institutions for many decades also have
accounted for the vast majority of enrollments in non-degree granting postsecondary schools
(those offering shorter certificate programs) both overall and among such schools eligible for
federal (Title IV) student financial aid.

        Figure 1 highlights the rise of for-profits in the enrollments of Title IV eligible (degree
and non-degree granting) higher education institutions since 2000, a period when enrollment in
the for-profit sector tripled while enrollment for the rest of higher education increased by just 22
percent. The solid dark line shows that the fraction of fall enrollments accounted for by the for-
profits increased from 4.3 percent in 2000 to 10.7 percent in 2009. For the descriptive data
presented here, we rely extensively on the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) of the U.S. Department of Education, which is an annual survey of all postsecondary
institutions that participate in the federal student financial aid programs.1

        Under the solid dark line in Figure 1, there is a breakdown of growth of the for-profit
sector into “independent” schools, on-line institutions, and for-profit “chains.” We must first
define these terms since these categories are not designated in the official IPEDS data.
“Independent” schools are defined here as those operating in no more than one state and having
no more than five campus branches. A “chain” is a for-profit institution that operates in more
than one state or has more than five campus branches within a single state. A for-profit is
designated as on-line if it has the word “on-line” in its name or, more commonly, if no more than
33 percent of the school’s students are from one U.S. state. All on-line institutions are
considered to be chains since they serve students in multiple geographic markets. Independent
schools showed little increase in their share of overall enrollments in higher-education from 2000
to 2009; chains with largely in-person enrollment showed a doubling over this period; and on-
line institutions, typically part of national publicly-traded companies, increased from almost
nothing to become the largest part of the sector. Indeed, almost 90 percent of the increase in for-
profit enrollments during the last decade occurred because of the expansion of for-profit chains.

         The rapid growth of the for-profits from 2000 to 2009 is illustrated in various ways in
Figure 2. The for-profit share of 12-month (unduplicated headcount) enrollments increased from
5 percent in 2001 to 13 percent in 2009. The 12-month enrollment measure better captures
enrollments in for-profits than the standard fall enrollment measure because it includes students
in less conventional and short programs that they enter throughout the year.

        For-profits have expanded their enrollment share more rapidly for women than for men
and they play an increasingly large role in the higher education of older students. The for-profit
enrollment share of students 25 years and older expanded from around 6 percent in 2001 to 18
percent in 2009. Undergraduate completions from for-profit institutions grew from 13 percent of
the total in 2000 to almost 18 percent in 2008. The fraction of completions is considerably larger
than that for enrollments because more than half of for-profit completions are certificates and
most certificate programs are no more than one year.



   1
    An on-line Appendix available with this paper at <http://e-jep.org> provides the details of our
processing of the micro IPEDS data, linkage of the IPEDS institution-year data to financial aid to data
from the National Student Loan Data System, and construction of an institution-level panel data set for
2000 to 2009.



                                                                                                          -2-
         For-profit enrollments and completions in recent years have been growing most rapidly
in longer degree programs. In the last decade, the for-profits increased their share of completers
in all types of undergraduate programs, but more so for AAs and BAs than for certificates. They
produced about 39 percent of certificates in 2000 and 42 percent in 2008. For-profit AAs were
13 percent of all AAs in 2000 but 18 percent in 2008; BAs were less than 2 percent of all in 2000
but were 5 percent of all BAs in 2008 (U.S. Department of Education, 2010, Digest, table 195).

        The current incarnation of the for-profit sector is big business; its largest providers are
major profitable publicly-traded corporations (Bennett, Lucchesi, and Vedder, 2010). They
appear to be nimble critters that train non-traditional learners for jobs in fast growing areas, such
as health care and information technology. On the other side, most of them depend on U.S.
government student aid for the vast bulk of their revenues. Default rates on the loans taken out
by their students vastly exceed those of other institutions of higher education and audit studies
have shown that some for-profits have engaged in highly aggressive and even borderline
fraudulent recruiting techniques (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2010).

         Are the for-profits nimble critters or agile predators? Using the 2004 to 2009 Beginning
Postsecondary Students (BPS) longitudinal survey we assess outcomes of a recent cohort of first-
time undergraduates who attended for-profits relative to comparable students who attended
community colleges or other public or private non-profit institutions. We find that relative to
community colleges and other public and private non-profits, for-profits educate a larger fraction
of minority, disadvantaged, and older students, and they have greater success at retaining
students in their first year and getting them to complete shorter degree and non-degree programs
at the certificate and AA levels. But we also find that for-profits leave students with far larger
student loan debt burdens. For-profit students end up with higher unemployment and “idleness”
rates and lower earnings from employment six years after entering programs than do comparable
students from other schools. Not surprisingly, for-profit students have trouble paying off their
student loans and have far greater default rates. And for-profit students self-report lower
satisfaction with their courses of study and are less likely to consider their education and loans
worth the price-tag relative to similarly-situated students who went to public and private non-
profit institutions.



What is the For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector?


Apollo and the Lesser For-Profit Deities: A Diverse Sector

        The for-profit postsecondary school sector, at its simplest level, is a group of institutions
that give post-high school degrees or credentials and for which some of the legal “non-
distribution requirements” that potentially constrain private non-profit schools do not bind. For

                                                                                                   -3-
example, for-profit institutions can enter the equity market and have few constraints on the
amounts they can legally pay their top managers. In practice, only the largest players in this
market raise substantial capital in organized equity markets and tend to pay their top executives
mega-salaries that exceed those of presidents at the public and non-profit private universities.
Among the for-profits, Andrew Clark, chief executive officer of Bridgepoint Education, Inc.,
received more than $20 million in 2009, while Charles Edelstein, co-chief executive officer of
the Apollo Group, Inc., earned more than $11 million.2

        For-profit sector institutions are a varied group. For-profit schools offer doctorates but
also non-degree courses, and their programs run the gamut from healthcare, business, and
computers to cosmetology, massage, and dog grooming. The sector contains the largest schools
by enrollment in the United States and also some of the smallest. For example, the University of
Phoenix Online campus enrolled over 532,000 students and Kaplan University enrolled 96,000
during the 2008-09 academic year. Taken together the largest 15 institutions account for almost
60 percent of for-profit enrollments (Bennett, Lucchesi, and Vedder 2010, table 1). But
tabulations from the IPEDS also indicate that the median Title IV eligible for-profit institution
had a Fall 2008 enrollment of 172 students as compared with 3,713 for the median community
college (two-year public institution), 7,145 for the median four-year public university, and 1,149
for the median four-year private not-for-profit school.

         The for-profit sector has become in many people’s minds synonymous with the large for-
profit chains that have rapidly expanded their presence in the BA and graduate education
markets, especially the Apollo Group, which owns the University of Phoenix. But even though
the big players in this sector do account the majority of for-profit enrollments, another important
part of the sector consists of career colleges that focus on a wide range of shorter AA and
certificate programs. Completions in the for-profit sector are still dominated by certificate
programs and 55 percent of the certificates granted by the for-profits are awarded by the 1,700 or
so independent career colleges and institutes. Our tabulations from the IPEDS indicate that
certificates account for 54 percent of the degrees and awards conferred by for-profits in 2008-9.

         There are several important commonalities across this mixed group. The for-profit
sector offers almost no general education and liberal arts programs. For-profit programs


   2
     Non-profits and publics are not that far behind in pay just below the very top of the for-profit scale.
In 2006/07, before the stock market decline, the highest paid university president was Gordon Gee at
Vanderbilt who earned slightly more than $2 million in total compensation. A bit lower down the scale,
the tenth highest paid CEO at a for-profit was Wallace Boston, Jr. CEO of American Public Education
with $961K, while number 10 among the presidents of public institutions on the list was Jack Varsalona
at Wilmington University who earned $974K. After the stock market drop, earnings in 2008/09 for
presidents at public and non-profit private universities were far lower. The data on for-profit CEO pay is
from “CEO Compensation at Publicly Traded Higher-Education Companies” (2010); data on public and
non-profit president’s pay is from Gibson (2009).


                                                                                                          -4-
typically are not meant to prepare students to continue to another form of higher education, as is
the case with most community colleges. Rather, the for-profits almost always offer training for a
vocation or trade. In that sense, they are “career colleges.” In addition, virtually all the for-
profits require that admitted students have a high school diploma or another secondary school
credential such as a GED. Their ability to obtain federal (Title IV) financial aid for their students
is typically contingent on their admitting primarily students who have already completed
secondary school. However, beyond requiring a high school degree, for-profit institutions are
almost always non-selective and open admissions.

         For-profit higher education is more likely to flourish in providing vocational programs
that lead to certification and early job placement and have clear short-run outcomes that can
serve to build institutional reputation in the labor market. But the for-profits are likely to be in a
far less advantageous position where external benefits (and subsidies from donors and
government) are important and the qualities of inputs and outputs are difficult to verify
(Winston, 1999). For-profits also have been successful at designing programs to attract non-
traditional students who may not be well served by public institutions (Breneman, Pusser, and
Turner 2006).



What is Title IV Eligibility?

        The for-profit sector that we analyze here includes almost exclusively those that are
termed “Title IV eligible.” Because for-profits often cater to independent students and those
from low-income families who finance college through Pell grants and federal student loans,
they have an intricate relationship with the federal government to ensure they maintain eligibility
to receive Title IV federal student aid. The for-profits, like public institutions of higher
education, receive an extremely large fraction of their revenues from government sources.

         Title IV eligibility is granted by the U.S. Department of Education and requires that the
institution be accredited by at least one of their approved accrediting agencies, be registered by
one of the states, and meet other standards on a continued basis. Some of these standards
concern the length of programs and some concern students and their federal loan repayment
activity. A Title IV-eligible private for-profit school must either provide training for gainful
employment in a recognized occupation or provide a program leading to a baccalaureate degree
in the liberal arts (U.S. Department of Education 2011a). Our discussion excludes non-Title IV
for-profit schools, about which little has been known because the U.S. Department of Education
does not track them. Virtually all degrees are granted by Title IV eligible institutions, but
programs that are less than two years in length that grant certificates (also diplomas) often are
found at non-Title IV institutions. For an analysis of the importance of the non-Title IV group of
for-profit schools using state registration data, see Cellini and Goldin (2011). Because virtually
all degree granting institutions are Title IV eligible, the undercount from limiting the analysis to

                                                                                                    -5-
Title IV schools impacts only the non-degree (typically certificate) programs in institutions
without any degree program.



For-Profit Programs

        The for-profits loom large in the production of degrees and certificates in certain
programs. For-profits produce 18 percent of all associate’s degrees, but they produce 33 percent
of the AAs granted in business, management and marketing, 51 percent in computer and
information sciences, 23 percent in the health professions and 34 percent in security and
protective services. In the public and non-profit private sectors an AA degree is often the
gateway to a four-year college and, in consequence, 38 percent of these AA programs are in
general studies and liberal arts programs. In the for-profits, a mere 2.4 percent are in general
studies and liberal arts.

        Although 5 percent of all BAs are granted by for-profit institutions, 12 percent of all BAs
in business, management, and marketing are. Other large for-profit BA programs are in
communications (52 percent of all BAs in communications are granted by for-profits), computer
and information sciences (27 percent), and personal and culinary services (42 percent).

        Certain programs are highly concentrated in the for-profit degree categories. Among AA
degrees just two program groups—business, management and marketing and the health
professions— account for 52 percent of all degrees. In the BA group, the business program
produces almost 50 percent of the total. Among certificates granted in the Title IV for-profit
sector, health professions and personal and culinary services account for 78 percent of certificate
completers (U.S. Department of Education, NCES, 2009, tables 37 and 40; authors’ tabulations
from the IPEDS).



Who Are the Students?

        The for-profit sector disproportionately serves older students, women, African-
Americans, Hispanics, and those with low incomes. Table 1 looks at the characteristics of
students in various types of institutions of higher education. African Americans account for 13
percent of all students in higher education, but they are 22 percent of those in the for-profit
sector. Hispanics are 15 percent of those in the for-profit sector, yet 11.5 percent of all students.
Women are 65 percent of those in the for-profit sector. For profit students are older, about 65
percent are 25 years and older, whereas just 31 percent of those at four-year public colleges are
and 40 percent of those at two-year colleges are.

       Using the BPS longitudinal survey data for students entering postsecondary school during
the 2003-04 academic year, we can get a more detailed picture of for-profit students relative to

                                                                                                   -6-
those at other colleges. Because the BPS surveys only first-time undergraduates, the results are
somewhat different from the IPEDS, which surveys institutions about all students. But the
storyline remains the same.

        Compared with those in community colleges (almost entirely two-year public schools),
for-profit students are disproportionately single parents, have much lower family incomes, and
are almost twice as likely to have a General Equivalency Degree (GED). Among for-profit
students in the BPS data, 55 percent are in certificate programs and just 11 percent are enrolled
in a BA program. Similarly, among all for-profit students in the IPEDS, certificates are 54
percent of all completions or degrees conferred and associates are 22.5 percent (U.S. Department
of Education, 2010, Digest, table 195). The BA group is just 13 percent but is the fastest
growing degree group among the for-profits. Post-graduate programs, primarily master’s
degrees, account for the remaining 10.5 percent.3



The Business Model of the For-Profit Sector


        For-profit chains led by on-line institutions experienced phenomenal growth in the past
several decades. The growth has been largely due to an extension of a business model that has
emphasized the special client base of the for-profits combined with the ability to “clone”
successful programs using web technology and the standardization of curriculum for traditional
in-person courses. In this section, we turn to the financial and business aspects of the for-profits.
For more detail on the business strategies of for-profit colleges, the interested reader might start
with Breneman, Pusser and Turner (2006) and Hentschke (2010).

        The expansion of the chains (including on-line institutions) accounts for 87 percent of the
increase in fall enrollment during the past decade. The increase in on-line enrollment alone
accounts for 54 percent of the total. The rise of the chains is responsible, as well, for 80 percent
of the increase in federal loan and grant volumes of the for-profits. For-profit chains and on-line
programs also benefit from economies of scale in advertising and recruitment costs.




   3
     We should note that the comparison between enrollments in the BPS and completions in the IPEDS
is generally not valid when programs vary in length. But because the BPS surveys a cohort, the
comparison has greater validity.


                                                                                                  -7-
Client Base and Recruiting

         The Title IV eligible for-profit sector receives the majority of its revenues from federal
financial aid programs in the form of loans and grants to their students. For-profits appeal to
older individuals who are simultaneously employed and in school or taking care of family
members. Some of the for-profits offer services, such as child care, to deter enrollees from
dropping out, especially during the period when the student can get a refund and to minimize the
institution’s dropout rate to maintain accreditation (for example, Rosenbaum, Deil-Amien and
Person, 2006). The for-profits are attractive to non-traditional students, many of whom are low
income, require financial aid and need help filling out aid forms. For-profits often give generous
transfer credit to students who began their BAs at other institutions.

         For-profit institutions devote substantial resources to sales and marketing. Advertising in
2009, as demonstrated in one study of 13 large national chains, was around 11 percent of
revenue. Sales and marketing (including advertising) for this group was around 24 percent of
revenue. In consequence, the average new student recruit costs one of the large national chains
about $4,000 (Steinerman, Volshteyn and McGarrett, 2011).4 Annual tuition at for-profit
institutions was about $16,000 for a BA program, $15,000 for an AA program, and $13,000 for a
certificate program in 2010-11, as compared to average undergraduate tuition of about $7,000 at
public four-year institutions for in-state students and $16,000 for out-of-state students and
$22,000 for private non-profit schools (Knapp, Kelley-Reid, and Ginder, 2011, Table 3).



Responsiveness to Markets

        For-profits cater to the expanding market of non-traditional students, develop curriculum
and teaching practices to be able to provide identical program at multiple locations and at
convenient times, and offer highly-structured programs to make timely completion feasible
(Hentschke, 2010). For profits are attuned to the marketplace and are quick to open new schools,
hire faculty, and add programs in growing fields and localities. For example, Turner (2006) finds
that change in for-profit college enrollments are more positively correlated with changes in state
college-age populations than are changes in public-sector college enrollments.

        For-profits are less encumbered than public and non-profit schools by physical plant,
alumni, and tenured faculty. Take the expanding health profession fields, for example.
Enrollment in programs involving the health professions doubled from 2000 to 2009. In the for-
profit sector it tripled, whereas in all other postsecondary institutions it increased by 1.4 times.

   4
    The large national chains in the study are American Public Education, Apollo Group, Bridgepoint
Education, Capella Education, Career Education, Corinthian Colleges, DeVry Inc., Education
Management, Grand Canyon Education, ITT Educational Services, Lincoln Education, Strayer Education,
and Universal Technical Institute.


                                                                                                 -8-
In consequence, the fraction of enrollment in the allied health fields in the for-profits increased
from 35 percent to 52 percent, as illustrated in Figure 3. The increase in such enrollments at the
national and regional chains accounts for almost the entire 17 percentage point increase.

        Looking more closely at these programs, the for-profits have rapidly entered the growing
fields of medical assisting, phlebotomy, x-ray and ultrasound technicians, practical nursing, and
even registered nursing. The total number of AA degrees in the health professions doubled
during the past decade but degrees in this area from for-profits quadrupled, with degrees from the
large for-profit chains rising by a multiple of six. A similar pattern arises for certificates in the
health professions, where for-profit national and regional chains more than tripled their awards
from 2000 to 2009 at a time when the public sector only more than doubled theirs.



On-line Education

         On-line education fits many of the features of the for-profit business model. For example,
it attracts older students who need to combine work with schooling and appeals to students who
do not want to learn on the academic calendar. (There is even a popular advertisement: “Earn
your college degree in your pajamas.”) Much of the growth of for-profits during the last decade
has been in schools emphasizing on-line programs, as seen in Figure 1.

        Some of this increase was due to U.S. Department of Education regulatory changes.
Prior to 1998, a Title IV-eligible institution could not have more than half of its enrollment in
distance education. Then in 1998, the Higher Education Act (HEA) authorized the U.S.
Department of Education to grant waivers to promote new advances in distance education. By
the early 2000s many of the larger chains were granted waivers, and the limit on share of
enrollment in distance education was dropped. The regulatory change in 2005 spurred the
growth of dedicated on-line institutions. By 2007-08, 12 percent of undergraduates and 25
percent of graduate students at for-profits took their entire program through distance education as
compared with less than 3 percent for undergraduates and 8 percent for graduate students at
public and private non-profit institutions combined (U.S. Department of Education, NCES, 2011,
tables A-43-1 and A-43-2).



Federal Student Financial Aid

        Federal student financial aid is the lifeblood of for-profit higher education. Federal
grants and loans received under Title IV of the HEA accounted for 73.7 percent of the revenues
of Title IV-eligible private for-profit higher education institutions in 2008-09 (based on data in
U.S. Department of Education, Federal Student Aid Data Center, 2011). Under current
regulations, for-profit schools can derive no more than 90 percent of their revenue from Title IV


                                                                                                  -9-
financial aid sources to maintain Title IV eligibility, and the constraint comes close to binding
for many for-profits. In fact, 30 percent of for-profit institutions, including many of the largest
national chains such as the University of Phoenix and Kaplan University, received more than 80
percent of their revenues from federal Title IV student aid in 2008-09. These Title IV revenue
figures actually understate the importance of federal student aid to for-profit institutions since
they do not include military educational benefits provided to veterans and active service
members, which do not count towards the limit 90 percent federal Title IV student aid revenues.
The for-profits have, in consequence, actively recruited military benefit recipients—veterans,
service members, and their family members—especially under the Post-9/11 GI Bill of 2008.
For-profits accounted for 36.5 percent of the benefits paid under the Post-9/11 GI Bill during the
first year of the program (Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, 2010, p. 4).

         For-profit institutions receive a disproportionate share of federal Title IV student
financial aid both because they have higher tuition and fees than public institutions and because
they attract large numbers of students who are financially independent or come from low-income
families. For-profits accounted for 24 percent of Pell grant disbursements and 26 percent of
federal student loan disbursements in 2008-09 even though they enrolled 12 percent of the
students (authors’ tabulations from the IPEDS and NSLDS). Half of undergraduates at for-profit
schools received Pell grants, as compared with 25 percent at public and private non-profit
institutions combined.

        The sharp increase in the enrollments at for-profit schools has been accompanied by a
rapid rise in their share of federal student financial aid from 2000 to 2010, as shown in Figure 4.
The for-profit share of Pell grants increased over the last decade from 13 to 25 percent and their
share of total federal student loans (both subsidized and unsubsidized loans) increased from 11
percent in 2000 to 26 percent in 2009 before dipping to 23 percent in 2010.5

         Of course, public-sector institutions receive direct taxpayer support largely from state
government appropriations, enabling tuition and fees to be lower than they otherwise would be.
If federal student loans to students at for-profits are repaid, taxpayer costs are actually lower to
finance education in for-profits than in public-sector institutions. But the comparison is not quite
apples-to-apples. The rationale for subsidies to public institutions and private non-profit schools
is that they produce research with potentially large spillover benefits and that they educate
students in the liberal arts and other fields that may improve civil society and generate external
benefits. Also, loans to students attending for-profits often do not get repaid.




   5
    The slight decline in the for-profit share of loans in 2010 may reflect the shift from the Federal
Family Education Loan program with bank lending under federal guarantees to the Direct Loan program
where the federal government makes the loans directly to students.


                                                                                                   -10-
Default Rates

         Students from for-profit institutions have higher default rates on federal student loans
than students in other sectors. And the default rates of for-profits have risen substantially during
the last five years.6

        The two-year “cohort default rate” measures the percentage of borrowers who enter
repayment of federal student loans (by leaving a program through graduation or dropping out)
during a fiscal year and default prior to the end of the next fiscal year. An institution loses Title
IV eligibility if its two-year cohort default rate exceeds 25 percent for three consecutive years or
is 40 percent in any one year. The two-year cohort default rate of for-profit institutions was 11.6
percent for fiscal year 2008 as compared with 6 percent for public institutions and 4 percent for
private non-profits. The U.S. Department of Education is moving to a three-year cohort default
rate standard for maintaining Title IV eligibility in fiscal year 2012. Three-year cohort default
rates for fiscal year 2008 were 24.9 percent for for-profits, 7.6 percent for private non-profits,
and 10.8 percent for public institutions (Steinerman, Volshteyn, and McGarrett, 2011). The
sharp increase in default rates from a two- to a three-year window may, to some extent, reflect
incentives for institutions to minimize defaults within the current two-year regulatory window.
Thus, three-year default rates also are likely to provide a more realistic indicator of long-run loan
repayment rates than the two-year default rates.7

         We examine the role of student demographics, financial aid take-up, and institutional
characteristics (degree types, distance education and remedial course offerings, and student
services) in explaining the higher federal student loan default rates of for-profit institutions.
Figure 5 graphs (regression-adjusted) differences in three-year cohort default rates by type of
institution. The differences are computed from regressions of default rates on institution type
(with public four-year institutions as the base group) including year dummies plus successive
additions of controls for student and institution characteristics, geography, and school selectivity
for pooled institution-year data covering the 2005 to 2008 fiscal years.

       The raw default rates and those regression-adjusted for institutional and student
characteristics are highest for the for-profit schools followed by community colleges and then
four-year public and non-profit institutions. The unadjusted 11 percentage point higher three-

   6
    Current default rates at for-profits, however, remain lower than in the late 1980s and early 1990s
before the 1992 amendments to the HEA that tightened institutional eligibility for Title IV funds and
removed many non-degree proprietary schools with very high default rates from the Title IV financial aid
programs (Bennett, Lucchesi, and Vedder 2010).
   7
     Furthermore, since federal Stafford loans have an initial 6 month grace period and can be up to 360
days delinquent before being considered in default, the two-year default rates typically cover a much
shorter window in which a recorded default is possible.



                                                                                                     -11-
year cohort default rates for for-profits (col. 1) relative to the base group of four-year public
institutions is reduced slightly to 10.5 percentage points with the addition of detailed controls for
student demographics, institutional characteristics, and city fixed effects (cols. 2 and 3) despite
the fact that these controls explain a substantial fraction of the cross-institution variation in
default rates. The addition of the covariates modestly expands the for-profit default rate gap
relative to community colleges.

       The for-profit default rate is 8.7 percentage points higher than that for four-year publics
and non-profits and 5.7 percentage points higher than for community colleges even when the
sample is limited to non-selective (open admission) institutions (col. 4). Higher three-year
cohort default rates are apparent for all segments of the for-profit sector, including independent
schools, regional chains, national chains, and largely on-line institutions (see Appendix Table 1,
available on-line with this paper at http://e-jep.org). National chains have higher default rates
and on-line institutions lower default rates relative to all for-profits.

        For-profit institutions account for a large and rising share of federal financial aid. For-
profit students have much higher default rates and account for 47 percent of defaults today.
Default rates have been rising in recent years particularly for the for-profit chains and beyond
what can be accounted for by basic student characteristics.



Student Outcomes


        The large increase in federal student aid dollars flowing to for-profits has attracted
substantial scrutiny about the quality of their programs and whether they provide students with
sufficient skills to enable them to thrive in the labor market and be able to pay off their student
debts (for example, Baum 2011). Simple comparisons of student outcomes between the for-
profits and other institutions may be misleading: after all, the for-profits disproportionately
attract minority, older, independent, and disadvantaged students. Thus, we assess student
outcomes of the for-profits relative to other higher education institutions after adjusting for
observable differences in students who have attended different types of schools.

        The recent and rapid growth of for-profit colleges means that most of the standard
individual-level longitudinal data sets do not identify those who went to for-profit institutions or
do not have large enough samples of for-profit students for a meaningful analysis. To overcome
these constraints we use the most recent cohort of the Beginning Postsecondary Students
Longitudinal Study, known as BPS:04/09. This sample follows a sample of 2003-04 first-time
beginning postsecondary students in their first, third, and sixth years since entering an
undergraduate institution through 2009. Because it covers a recent cohort, a significant fraction
of the sample initially enrolled in a for-profit institution. The BPS has detailed student
                                                                                                  -12-
background variables, low attrition rates, and an oversample of students at for-profit institutions
yielding approximately 1,950 students starting at for-profits out of a total of about 16,680
students in our main sample.8

        The BPS is representative of first-time postsecondary students (those starting an
undergraduate program with no previous postsecondary schooling). But because a large fraction
of students in for-profit institutions are older, nontraditional students returning to higher-
education, they will not be picked up in this sample. Thus, our analysis estimates the for-profit
school treatment effect (relative to other types of institutions) for first-time postsecondary
students but not for the large group of returning students.

        The outcome variables in the BPS are divided into two major groups. Those concerning
college costs and financial aid are given in Table 2 and those regarding student persistence,
educational attainment, employment, earnings, and satisfaction with the program are in Table 3.
The raw data, given in cols. (1) to (3) of Tables 2 and 3, reveal that beginning postsecondary
students at for-profits accumulate larger student debt burdens, are more likely to default on their
student loans, have poorer employment outcomes five years after entering postsecondary school,
and are less likely to be satisfied with their course of study than students starting at public or
private non-profit schools. The short-run (one-year) dropout rate is slightly lower for starting
for-profit students than those starting in a community college. For-profit students in certificate
and AA programs have higher completion rates than community college students. In contrast,
BA completion rates of for-profit students are much lower than of those starting in four-year
public and non-profit schools.

        Using the BPS, we assess whether the raw mean student outcome differences have been
overstated because for-profit students differ from those in the public and the private non-profit
sectors, as demonstrated in the bottom panel of Table 1. To do this, we adjust the raw outcomes
for differences in baseline observables between for-profit students and others using two methods.

         The first method is a standard ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of student
outcomes on a rich set of covariates of student baseline characteristics at entry into college
(listed in the table notes), and a dummy variable for starting postsecondary schooling in a for-
profit institution. The alternative method is a matching approach, which takes students starting
in for-profits as the treatment group and students starting in public and private non-profit schools


   8
      We use the sampling weights from the BPS in all our analyses to account for the variation in
sampling rates among different student subgroups. The attrition rates from the BPS:04/09 by the final
2009 survey round are relatively balanced by starting institution at 6.4 percent for students from for-
profits, 10.9 percent for community college students, and 10.7 percent for students from four-year public
and non-profit schools. The differences in attrition rate by starting institution type are small and not
statistically significant after conditioning on baseline covariates. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to
the nearest 10.


                                                                                                      -13-
as the control group. We compare the outcomes of the for-profit students to the control group
members who are observably comparable to for-profit students. More specifically, we estimate
the average treatment on treated effect of starting in a for-profit institution using nearest neighbor
(propensity score) matching models with replacement excluding observations outside of common
support.9 For educational attainment outcomes, the estimation samples are separated into the
sub-groups of students initially enrolled in each type of program (certificate, AA, BA).

        The OLS results are shown in col. (4) for the full sample and those for the matching
estimator are in col. (5) of Tables 2 and 3. The OLS and matching approaches produce
qualitatively and quantitatively similar estimates for almost every outcome considered

         Our conclusions with regard to the relative performance of students starting in for-profit
institutions are mixed. For-profit students have a higher probability of staying with a program
through its first year. Early persistence translates into a higher probability of obtaining a degree
or certificate in a one- or two-year program. The OLS estimates indicate that certificate seekers
starting at for-profits are almost 9 percentage points more likely to gain a certificate than
community college students. Although for-profit students seeking an AA are somewhat more
likely than community college students to attain an AA degree, they are less likely to continue to
higher-level college courses and to gain a BA degree. The matching estimates indicate that the
for-profit advantage in completing certificate and AA programs is more modest and less
statistically significant than the OLS estimates.

         Students in for-profit institutions are also much less likely to report taking remedial
courses in their first year in postsecondary school than students in other institutions. The greater
ability of for-profit students to take courses they consider directly relevant and not languish in
remedial courses may play a role in their greater first-year retention rates.10

        For the longer undergraduate programs, such as BA, for-profits do not fare as well as
four-year public and private non-profit institutions. The OLS estimate implies a 12 percentage
point completion deficit and the matching model implies a 19 percentage point deficit for
students starting BA programs at for-profits. The control group of students in the full range of
public and private non-profit four-year schools is probably less comparable in the case of BA
students than for certificate and AA programs. But even when the sample is restricted to
students starting in non-selective schools, a statistically significant deficit of almost 5 percentage

   9
    We implement the nearest-neighbor matching estimator in STATA using the routines developed by
Becker and Ichino (2002).
   10
     See Rosenbaum, Deil-Amien and Person (2006) for rich case study evidence of the roles of clearer
program paths, more relevant courses, and student services in better retention and short program
completion rates for students in for-profit schools relative to community colleges. Rutschow and
Schneider (2011) summarize recent evidence from interventions designed to improve students’ progress
through remedial courses at community colleges.


                                                                                                  -14-
points remains (details in Appendix Table 2, available online with this paper at <http://e-
jep.org>).11

        Also, for-profits leave students with considerably higher debt, even conditional on a rich
set of observables. For-profit students face higher sticker-price tuition and pay higher net tuition
(tuition plus fees minus grants) than comparable students at other institutions. Students who
began at a for-profit school default on their loans at higher rates than other students conditional
on controls for demographics, academic preparation, and pre-enrollment family resources. For-
profit students have substantially higher default rates even when comparing students across
school types with similar cumulative debt burdens. For example, the default rate by 2009 for the
BPS:04/09 students with $5,001 to $10,000 in cumulative federal student loans is 26 percent for
students from for-profits versus 10 percent for those from community colleges and 7 percent for
those from 4-year public and nonprofit schools, and for those with $10,001 to $20,000 in debt
the default rate among for-profit students is 16 percent versus a 3 percent rate for community
college students and 2 percent rate for other 4-year college students.

        Although the vast majority of students from for-profits express satisfaction with their
course of study and programs, they report significantly lower satisfaction than observably similar
students starting in public and non-profit schools. Students who began in for-profit colleges are
also less likely to state that their education was worth the amount they paid and are less apt to
think their student loans were a worthwhile investment. Even though the for-profits have higher
short-run retention of students, their students are more likely to leave their certificate or degree
programs before completion because of dissatisfaction with the program.

        In terms of economic outcomes in the medium-run, for-profit students are more likely to
be idle (that is, not working and no longer enrolled in school) six years after starting college.
Among the BPS students who left school by the 2009 survey wave, those from for-profits are
more likely to be unemployed and to have experienced substantial unemployment (more than
three months) since leaving school. For-profit students no longer enrolled in 2009 have earnings
from work in 2009 that are $1,800 to $2,000 lower (or 8 to 9 percent of their predicted mean
earnings) than had they gone to another type of institution.12 Some of the earnings reduction is
   11
     In addition, Appendix Tables 3 to 5 present comparable analyses for the full range of student
outcomes for the sub-samples of BPS students starting certificate programs, AA programs, and BA
programs respectively.
   12
      In slight contrast, Cellini and Chaudhary (2011) find similar weekly earnings gains of around 6
percent to attending a two-year AA program at a private or public two-year college and of 15 to 17
percent (or 8 percent per year of education) to completing an AA degree at private postsecondary
institutions (largely for-profit schools) and at public institutions (largely community colleges) using an
individual fixed effects strategy of comparing earnings before and after college using workers under 30
years old in the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Cellini and Chaudhary likely understate
the relative economic returns to going to a public two-year college relative to a private for-profit
institution by dropping from their sample the students who continued beyond an AA to get a BA or more.

                                                                                                      -15-
due to lower rates of employment. Once we condition on employment, for-profit students have
modestly lower earnings and slightly lower job satisfaction, but neither difference is statistically
significant.

        For-profit schools, therefore, do better in terms of first-year retention and the completion
of shorter certificate and degree programs. But their first-time postsecondary students wind up
with higher debt burdens, experience greater unemployment after leaving school and, if
anything, have lower earnings six years after starting college than observationally-similar
students from public and non-profit institutions. Not surprisingly, for-profits students end up
with higher student loan default rates and are less satisfied with their college experiences.

         Lower satisfaction with the programs may provide an additional psychological factor
accounting for the high default rates of for-profit students, even for those with modest absolute
student debt levels. In fact, students in this dataset from for-profits with less than $2,500 in
federal student loan debt had a default rate of 20 percent by 2009 as compared with 12 percent
for students from community colleges and 4 percent for those from four-year public and non-
profit institutions. These patterns are troubling since the consequences of federal student loan
default cannot be escaped through bankruptcy and can adversely impact an individual’s credit
rating and future access to credit let alone result in wage garnishment, harassment by private
collection agencies, and tax refund offsets.

        Although we have used the detailed background covariates in the BPS to make
comparisons between individuals who are as similar as can be observed, we do not have quasi-
experimental variation concerning who goes to which type of higher-education institution. Thus,
one needs to be cautious in providing a causal interpretation of the estimated for-profit school
treatment effects in Tables 2 and 3 since the potential problem of selection bias from non-
random sorting on unobservables remains. Furthermore, our comparison of the medium-term
outcomes for beginning postsecondary students starting at for-profits versus comparable students
starting at other higher-education institutions does not directly provide information on whether
attendance at a for-profit college (or, for that matter, attendance at public or private, non-profit
colleges) is a worthwhile (private or social) investment.




Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?


       The U.S. economy has experienced a substantial increase in the pecuniary returns to
postsecondary education since 1980, particularly for BA and higher degrees (Autor, Katz, and
Kearney, 2008; Goldin and Katz, 2008). At the same time, state budgetary difficulties have
constrained the expansion of public-sector higher education; for example, Cellini (2009)
provides compelling evidence from California on how public-sector funding constraints on
                                                                                                 -16-
community colleges increased the rate of entry of for-profit colleges. In the meantime, federal
and state financial aid for students going to for-profit institutions has become more available and
generous (for example, Cellini 2010). Based on these factors, and others discussed in this paper,
the for-profit postsecondary school sector became the fastest growing part of U.S. higher
education from the 1990s through 2010. Increased regulatory scrutiny and adverse publicity
from Congressional hearings, investigative reporting, and GAO audits have led to a substantial
slowdown in the growth of for-profit enrollments in 2011 and actual declines in new students at
many of the larger national chains (Steinerman, Volshteyn, and McGarrett 2011; Fain 2011).

        Evaluating the successes and failures of U.S. for-profit higher education must go beyond
mean outcomes and consider the distribution of labor market effects and financial default rates.
For many, the for-profits have been a success. They have played a critical role in expanding the
supply of skilled workers in an era of tight state budgets and stagnating state appropriations to
public sector schools. They have provided educational services to underserved populations.
Their innovative use of web services has further allowed them to accommodate nontraditional
students. Their disproportionate share of federal student grants and loans has enabled them to
provide skills to disadvantaged populations. Short-run retention is high and the for-profits do an
admirable job of graduating students from shorter certificate programs. The vast majority of
their students are satisfied with their programs.

        But the for-profits also charge higher tuition and fees than public-sector alternatives, and
their students are more likely to end up unemployed and with substantial debts. Students who
attended a for-profit have much higher default and non-repayment rates on federal student loans
than do observationally similar students who attended a public or private non-profit institution.

        The U.S. Department of Education (2011b) has recently sought to address this issue of
the high default rate on loans to students at for-profit institutions by passing “Gainful
Employment” regulations, which will require most for-profit programs and certificate programs
at public and non-profit institutions to pass at least one of three metrics to remain Title IV
eligible: (1) at least 35 percent of former students repaying their loans (reducing their loan by at
least $1 over the course of a year); (2) annual loan payments not exceeding 30 percent of a
typical graduate’s discretionary income; or (3) annual loan payments not exceeding 12 percent of
a typical graduate’s earnings.

        How these rules will work in practice, as students and for-profit institutions adjust to their
presence, remains to be seen. The former students of for-profit institutions have comparable (but
slightly lower) earnings combined with substantially higher loan burdens, relative to other school
leavers, suggesting that some for-profit institutions may face challenges meeting the new Gainful
Employment standards. As one example, consider the rule that the debt burden (annual federal
student loan yearly payments) should not exceed 12 percent of annual earnings for a typical
graduate. In fact, we find (conditional on observables) in Table 3 for the BPS that for-profit
students would have had a 15 to 19 percentage point lower rate of meeting the recently enacted

                                                                                                 -17-
Gainful Employment earnings threshold in 2008 (four to five years after starting) than would
students from other types of institutions.

        In effect, the Gainful Employment rule seeks to hold the for-profits more accountable and
put a greater burden on the schools, rather than only on the students who have difficulties in
repaying their loans. The new regulations will also require institutions to disclose their program
costs, as well as completion, placement, and loan repayment rates. These regulations will
increase transparency but may be insufficient to contain an agile predator. A reality check by a
third party might be needed before a student is allowed to take out a loan.

         The for-profits have taken a large burden of increased enrollment in higher education off
the public sector. The high default rates of their students on federal loans, however, increase
their cost to the taxpayer. Regulating for-profit colleges is tricky business. The challenge is to
rein in the agile predators while not stifling the innovation of these nimble critters.




                                                                                               -18-
                                          References

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S.Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
   Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (May), pp.
   300-23.

Baum, Sandy. 2011. “Drowning in Debt: Financial Outcomes of Students in For-Profit
   Colleges.” Testimony to the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee (June
   7).

Becker, Sascha O. and Andrea Ichino. 2002. “Estimation of Average Treatment Effects based on
   Propensity Scores.” The STATA Journal 2(4), pp. 358-77.

Bennett, Daniel L., Adam R. Lucchesi and Richard K. Vedder. 2010. “For Profit Higher
   Education: Growth, Innovation, and Regulation.” Center for College Affordability and
   Productivity, Policy Paper, (July).

Breneman, David W., Brian Pusser and Sarah E. Turner, eds. 2011. Earnings from Learning:
   The Rise of For-Profit Universities. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2010. “Financial Aid and For-Profit Colleges: Does Aid Encourage
   Entry?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29 (Summer), pp. 526-52.

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2009. “Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out: The Impact of
   Public Subsidies on the Two-Year College Market,” American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy 1 (August), pp. 1-30.

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Latika Chaudhary. 2011. “The Labor Market Returns to a Private
   Two-Year College Education.” George Washington University, working paper (April).

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Claudia Goldin. forthcoming. “Can For-Profit Colleges Survive
   without Federal Student Aid?” NBER working paper.

“CEO Compensation at Publicly Traded Higher-Education Companies.” 2010. Chronicle of
  Higher Education. June. 23. <http://chronicle.com/article/Graphic-CEO-Compensation-
  at/66017/>.

Fain, Paul. 2011. “Enrollments Tumble at For-Profit Colleges.” Inside Higher Ed. November 11.
   <http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2011/11/11/enrollments-tumble-profit-colleges>.



                                                                                              -19-
Gibson, Ellen. 2009. “College Campuses Debate Administrators' Lofty Pay,” Bloomberg
   Business Week, February 16.
   <http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/content/feb2009/db20090216_614557.htm?
   chan=top+news_top+news+index+-+temp_news+%2B+analysis>.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
   Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. U.S. Senate. 2010. Benefiting Whom? For-
   Profit Education Companies and the Growth of Military Educational Benefits. (December 8).

Hentschke, Guilbert C. 2010. “Innovations in Business Models and Organizational Cultures: The
   For-Profit Sector.” USC Rossier School of Education (June).

Knapp, Laura G., Janice Kelley-Rid, and Scott A. Ginder. 2011. Postsecondary Institutions and
   Price of Attendance in the United States: 2010-11, First Look. U.S. Department of
   Education, NCES (September). http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2011/2011250.pdf

Rosenbaum, James E., Regina Deil-Amien and Ann E. Person. 2006. After Admission: From
   College Access to College Success. New York: Russell Sate Foundation Press.

Rutschow, Elizabeth Zachry and Emily Schneider. 2011. Unlocking the Gate: What We Know
   About Improving Developmental Education. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
   Corporation (June).

Steinerman, Andrew, Jeffrey Volshteyn and Molly McGarrett. 2011. Education Services Data
    Book. J.P. Morgan, North American Equity Research, Business and Education Services
    (September).

Turner, Sarah E. 2006. “For-Profit Colleges in the Context of the Market for Higher Education.”
   In D. Breneman, B. Pusser, and S. Turner, eds., Earnings from Learning: The Rise of For-
   Profit Universities. Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 51-68.

U.S. Department of Education. NCES. year. Digest of Education Statistics: [year].
   http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/

U.S. Department of Education, NCES, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
   (IPEDS). 2009. IPEDS Fall 2009 Compendium Tables.
   http://nces.ed.gov/das/library/tables_listings/fall2009.asp



                                                                                           -20-
U.S. Department of Education. NCES. 2011. The Condition of Education 2011.
   http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/

U.S. Department of Education. 2011a. 2011-2 Federal Student Aid Handbook, Volume 2, School
   Eligibility and Operations. http://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1112FSAHbkVo2.html

U.S. Department of Education. 2011b. “Additional Background on the Gainful Employment
   Regulations.” http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/gainful-employment-regulations

U.S. Department of Education, Federal Student Aid Data Center. 2011. Proprietary School 90/10
   Revenue Percentages, 2011 Report.
   http://federalstudentaid.ed.gov/datacenter/proprietary.html

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2010. For-Profit Colleges: Undercover Testing Finds
   Colleges Encouraged Fraud and Engaged in Deceptive and Questionable Marketing
   Practices GAO-10-948T (August 4). http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-948T

Watkins, Barbara L. 1991. “A Quite Radical Idea: The Invention and Elaboration of Collegiate
  Correspondence Study.” In Barbara L. Watkins and Stephen J. Wright, eds., The
  Foundations of American Distance Education: A Century of Collegiate Correspondence
  Study. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.

Winston, Gordon C. 1999. “For-Profit Higher Education: Godzilla or Chicken Little?,” Change
   31 (January/February), pp. 12-19.




                                                                                         -21-
Figure 1: For-Profit Institution Share of Total Title IV Fall Enrollment: Total and by School
Type, 2000 to 2009

 0.12


 0.10

                                                              All for‐profit
 0.08


 0.06


 0.04                                            Chain (not on‐line)
                   Independent

 0.02
                                                       On‐line
 0.00
     1999     2000    2001     2002    2003   2004     2005      2006    2007   2008   2009     2010
              All for‐profit          Independent          Chain (not on‐line)          On‐line




Source: IPEDS.

Notes: A for-profit institution is classified as “on-line” if it has the word on-line in its name or if
not more than 33 percent of the school’s students are from one U.S. state. The “chain (not-on-
line)” category covers all other for-profit institutions that operate in more than one state or have
more than five campus branches within a single state. The “independent” category includes for-
profits that operate in only one state and have fewer than five campus branches. An on-line
Appendix available with this paper at <http://e-jep.org> provides the details of our processing of
the micro IPEDS institution-level data for 2000 to 2009.




                                                                                                   -22-
Figure 2: For-Profit Share of Enrollments and Undergraduate Completions: 2000 to 2009

 0.20
                                                                              25 years and older
 0.18
                                       Undergraduate completions
 0.16
 0.14
                                                                                             Women
 0.12
                                                          12 month
 0.10                                                     enrollment
 0.08
                                                                         All for‐profit
 0.06
 0.04
 0.02
 0.00
     1999    2000    2001     2002     2003   2004   2005    2006      2007     2008      2009    2010
                      All for‐profit                     12 month enrollment
                      Women                              25 years and older
                      Undergraduate completions




Source: IPEDS

Notes: “All for-profit” is fall enrollment, that is enrollment at the beginning of the academic
year; “12 month enrollment” = unduplicated enrollment during the entire year; “25 years and
older” = fall enrollment of those 25 years and older; “women” = female fall enrollment;
“undergraduate completions” = all undergraduate completions (certificates + associate’s degrees
+ bachelor’s degrees). The series for “25 years and older” is for the odd-numbered years and the
even-numbered years are interpolated from those.




                                                                                                 -23-
Figure 3: Enrollment in Allied Health Fields by Institutional Status and Control




 0.7

 0.6
                                                          For‐profit total
 0.5

 0.4                                          2 year (public and non‐profit colleges)


 0.3
                                             Independents
 0.2
                                                        Chain
 0.1
                              4 year (public and non‐profit colleges)
   0
    1998           2000           2002           2004           2006           2008           2010


                  2 yr (public + NP)              For‐profit total            Independents


Source: IPEDS.

Notes: “4 year (public and non-profit colleges)” = public and private non-profit four-year
institutions; “2 year (public and non-profit colleges)” = two year public (community colleges)
and two-year private non-profit colleges; “independents” = for-profit independent (non-chain)
institutions; “chain” = for-profits institutions with “on-line” in the school name or that operate in
more than one state or that have more than five campus branches in a single state.




                                                                                                 -24-
Figure 4: For-Profit Share of Federal Financial Aid (Pell Grants and Student Loans): 2000 to
2010



 0.30


 0.25


 0.20


 0.15


 0.10


 0.05
     1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
                            Student loans             Pell Grants
                            Subsidized loans          Unsubsidized loans




Source: National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS).

Notes: Student loans include subsidized and unsubsidized federal student loans under the Federal
Family Education Loan (FFEL) and Direct Loan Programs




                                                                                               -25-
Figure 5: Differences in Three-Year Cohort Default Rate by Type of Institution: 2005 to 2008

                                  Non‐profit four year         Community college      For‐profit
                          0.12


                          0.10


                          0.08


                          0.06


                          0.04


                          0.02


                          0.00
                                        [1]              [2]              [3]             [4]

                         ‐0.02

Demographic controls                     No               Yes             Yes              Yes
Financial aid controls                   No               Yes             Yes              Yes
Degree types, offerings                  No               Yes             Yes              Yes
Year fixed effects                       Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
City fixed effects                       No                No             Yes              Yes
Limited to open admission                No                No              No              Yes
R-squared                               0.295            0.428           0.642            0.553
Sample size                            14,655            14,655          14,655           9,281


Source: National Student Loan Data System and IPEDS.

Notes: Each bar gives the coefficient on a type of institution from a regression where the
dependent variable is the three-year cohort default rate for an institution-year observation and the
omitted group is four-year public institutions. The sample covers institution-year observations
for the fiscal years 2005 to 2008. Demographic controls are fractions part-time, 25 years and
older, female, African American, and Hispanic. Financial aid controls are the number of
recipients of Pell grants and subsidized and unsubsidized federal loans, total yearly disbursement

                                                                                                  -26-
amounts for each, and total loans and Pell grants per enrollee. Degree types and offerings are
indicators for distance education, remedial course offerings, whether the institution offers
assistance with job placement, whether it offers part-time employment services for enrolled
students, the highest award or degree offered by the institution, and whether it has open
admissions. Standard errors are clustered by institution. Table 1 in an on-line Appendix,
available with this paper at http://e-jep.org, provides the full regression, standard errors, and the
effect of separating the for-profits into the subcategories of independents, regional chains,
national chains, and on-line institutions.




                                                                                                  -27-
Table 1: Student Characteristics from the BPS and IPEDS for For-Profits, Two-Year Public
Colleges, and Four-Year (Non-Profit) Colleges

                                        Student Characteristics by IPEDS Institution Type, 2009/10
                                                        Two-Year        Four-Year         Four-Year
                                       For-Profit        Public           Public         Private Non-
                                      Institutions      Colleges         Colleges       Profit Colleges
Female                                   0.651            0.570            0.552             0.576
African-American                         0.221            0.136            0.109             0.104
Hispanic                                 0.150            0.157            0.105             0.093
Full-time                                0.579            0.410            0.733             0.742
Age 25 years and over                    0.651            0.404            0.306             0.392
Federal loans per student               11,415             759             3,512             5,769
Pell Grant per student                   2,370             773              738               632
Tuition (in-state)                      13,103            2,510            5,096            24,470
Number of institutions                   2,995            1,595             690              1,589
                                                   BPS 2004-2009 Sample Characteristics
                                         For-Profit           Community         Four-Year Public and
                                        Institutions           Colleges          Non-Profit Colleges
Female                                      0.659                0.564                  0.558
African-American                            0.248                0.140                  0.141
Hispanic                                    0.264                0.159                  0.103
Age                                          24.4                 23.8                   19.5
Single parent                               0.288                0.124                  0.030
Delayed enrollment after HS                 0.576                0.481                  0.142
HS Diploma                                  0.754                0.852                  0.947
GED                                         0.172                0.095                  0.022
Mother HS dropout                           0.224                0.137                  0.055
2003 Family income if a dependent          36,854               60,039                 76,509
2003 Family income if independent          17,282               31,742                 78,664
Enrolled full-time                          0.809                0.460                  0.903
Worked while enrolled, 2003-2004            0.635                0.755                  0.499
Enrolled in a certificate program           0.551                0.072                  0.015
Enrolled in an AA program                   0.326                0.774                  0.061
Enrolled in an BA program                   0.106                  0                    0.891
Expects to earn a BA                        0.643                0.799                  0.980

Sample size (unweighted)                   1,950                5,970                   8,760


Sources: BPS:04/09; IPEDS.

Notes: Community colleges include two-year public and private non-profit institutions.
Unweighted sample sizes in the BPS are rounded to the nearest 10. The IPEDS tabulations cover
the (undergraduate and graduate) enrollments of Title IV institutions in Fall 2009. The BPS
tabulations cover beginning postsecondary students entering a Title IV institution in the 2003-04
academic year.


                                                                                                -28-
Table 2: Differences in College Costs and Financial Aid between For-Profit Institutions and
Other Schools for First-Time Undergraduates: 2004/2009 Beginning Postsecondary Students
Longitudinal Study

                                            Beginning Postsecondary Students (BPS, full sample)
Dependent Variables                       Dependent Variable Means              For-Profit Institution
                                                                                        Impact
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
                                     Four-Year    Two-Year        For-         OLS          Matching
                                     Public and   Public and     profits
                                     Non-profits Non-profits

                                                 College Costs and Financial Aid, 2003-2004
Applied for aid                         0.895         0.749         0.986          0.094           0.072
                                                                                 (0.010)          (0.011)
Title IV loan and grant aid             3,837         1,022         6,852          4,439           3,417
                                                                                   (183)           (164)
Tuition                                 9,230         1,269         8,434         5,632            5,108
                                                                                   (173)           (201)
Net tuition minus grants                5,183          734          5,573          4,521           4,418
                                                                                   (157)           (158)
Pell grant                              0.285         0.294         0.790          0.190           0.061
                                                                                 (0.014)          (0.020)
Pell grant amount                        771           633          2,149           557             180
                                                                                    (48)            (68)
                                                         Financial Aid through 2009
Cumulative Pell grant                   2,923         2,399         4,084          -170            -852
                                                                                   (146)           (223)
Cumulative Title IV borrowing           8,702         3,502         7,699          3,960           2,239
                                                                                   (421)           (381)
Title IV loan balance in 2009           8,024         3,306         7460          4,071            2,242
                                                                                   (460)           (401)
Repaid any amount on loan,              0.642         0.640         0.529         -0.093          -0.040
conditional on a student loan                                                    (0.029)          (0.046)
Defaulted on loan,                      0.035         0.056         0.188          0.067           0.082
conditional on a student loan                                                    (0.018)          (0.018)

Sample Size                             8,760          5,970          1,950


Source: BPS:04/09 Restricted-Use Data File.

Notes: The OLS column reports coefficient estimates (robust standard errors) for a for-profit institution
dummy variable in regressions for each dependent variable that include the following covariates: dummy
variables for race, sex, citizenship, born in the US, parents born in the US, English as the native language,
household size, distance of school from home, lives with parents, marital status, single parenthood,
independent student, number of kids, use of child care, maternal and paternal education categories, high
school diploma, GED receipt, delayed enrollment after HS, certificate or degree program, degree
expectations, region, and on or off campus residence; and second order polynomials in age, prior income

                                                                                                        -29-
(own for independent students and family for dependent students), household income percent of the
poverty line, expected family contribution from the FAFSA, individual adjusted gross income from tax
returns and government transfers. Each number in the Matching column represents the average treatment
on the treated estimate (standard error) for going to a for-profit institution using from nearest neighbor
(propensity score) matching with replacement and excluding observations outside of common support.
The same covariates used in the OLS regressions were used for the matching models. The OLS and
Matching model estimates use the BPS sampling weights. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the
nearest 10.




                                                                                                      -30-
Table 3: Differences in Student Outcomes between For-Profit Institutions and Other Schools for
First-Time Undergraduates: 2004/2009 Beginning Postsecondary Students Longitudinal Study

                                           Beginning Postsecondary Students (BPS, full sample)
Dependent Variables                      Dependent Variable Means               For-Profit Institution
                                                                                       Impact
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                    Four-Year    Two-Year         For-         OLS          Matching
                                    Public and   Public and      profits
                                    Non-profits Non-profits
                                                 Persistence and Educational Attainment
Left school in 2003-2004              0.062        0.233          0.212        -0.046         -0.051
                                                                              (0.016)        (0.018)
Attained certificate                    –          0.424          0.537         0.086          0.046
(enrolled in certificate program)                                             (0.036)         (0.034)
Attained AA                                        0.224          0.284         0.041          0.019
(enrolled in AA program)                                                      (0.028)        (0.029)
Attained AA or more                     –          0.283          0.291        -0.006         -0.016
(enrolled in AA program)                                                      (0.028)         (0.030)
Attained BA                           0.658           –           0.262        -0.115         -0.194
(enrolled in BA program)                                                      (0.045)        (0.052)
Idle (not employed, not enrolled)     0.106        0.133          0.236         0.052          0.058
at 2009 survey                                                                (0.017)        (0.017)
Enrolled in 2009                      0.271        0.389          0.216        -0.114         -0.080
                                                                              (0.018)        (0.019)

                                      Employment and Earnings (for those no longer enrolled in 2009)
Any job in 2009                        0.839      0.784          0.706         -0.028         -0.031
                                                                              (0.021)        (0.022)
Earnings from work in 2009            28,613      24,795        19,950         -1,771         -1,936
                                                                                (931)          (950)
Earnings from work in 2009,           34,080      31,622        28,243         -1,355          -243
conditional on employment                                                       (934)          (937)
Unemployed and seeking work            0.121      0.148          0.232          0.048         0.067
                                                                              (0.019)        (0.020)
Unemployed 3 months or more            0.238      0.259          0.404          0.077          0.084
after leaving school                                                           (0.022)       (0.023)
Earnings less than                    0.135       0.046          0.271          0.194         0.147
gainful employment standard                                                    (0.019)       (0.017)

                                              Course Content and Job and School Satisfaction
Remedial coursework in 2003-4         0.181         0.289         0.076        -0.180           -0.187
                                                                              (0.015)          (0.017)
Left school because dissatisfied      0.012         0.024         0.081         0.043           0.048
(2003-2004)                                                                   (0.009)          (0.009)
Left school because dissatisfied      0.032         0.051         0.117        0.052            0.053
(2003-2006)                                                                   (0.013)          (0.011)
Education was worth the cost          0.802         0.821         0.648        -0.204          -0.179
                                                                              (0.019)          (0.017)

                                                                                                    -31-
Loans were a worthwhile           0.836   0.803   0.664    -0.143    -0.121
investment                                                (0.022)   (0.024)
Satisfied with major or program   0.860   0.871   0.789    -0.097    -0.065
                                                          (0.017)   (0.015)
Satisfied with current job,       0.772   0.764   0.752    -0.011    -0.032
(employed, not enrolled)                                  (0.025)   (0.023)

Sample Size                       8,760   5,970   1,950


Source and Notes: See Table 2.




                                                                         -32-
                                             Appendix

IPEDS and student financial aid

        We have constructed a consistent institution-year panel data set using the 2000 to 2009
micro data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) collected and
maintained by the National Center for Education Statistics of the U.S. Department of Education.
We use the IPEDS data on enrollments (fall, 12 month, and full-time equivalent), degrees and
awards, tuition, revenues and expenditures, and other institutional characteristics. The IPEDS
data are available from and documented at http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/.

       We match the IPEDS data to institution-level data on Pell grants, student loans volumes
and cohort default rates from the National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS). For the
financial data, see: http://federalstudentaid.ed.gov/datacenter/index.html.

        Student loan volumes by institution come from the Direct Loan program (where the
federal government gives loans directly to students) and the Federal Family Education Loan
(FFEL) Program, and includes both subsidized (where the government pays interest while
students are still enrolled in school) and unsubsidized loan programs. Under FFELP, private
lenders provided capital for loans that were subsidized and guaranteed against default by the
federal government. The FFEL program was terminated in 2009.

        Institutions in IPEDS are assigned a unique “unitid” that is constant across years. Unitids
are assigned to physical branches of an institution, and a single school will have one unitid for
each branch. However, each school is also assigned an Office of Postsecondary Education ID
(known as “opeid”) that is constant across branches. The NSLDS data are linked to the opeid
and are not broken out separately by branch. For example, IPEDS has enrollment and degree
information separated by campus branch (i.e., by unitid), but information from NSLDS on
student loan and Pell grant volumes is only available for the overall institution (i.e., the opeid).

Match rate between IPEDS and NSLDS

       We are able to match about 94 percent of the unitids in IPEDS to an opeid from NSLDS.
Around 67 percent of the schools are classified in IPEDS as for-profit institutions. The
unmatched 6 percent of schools (722 of 11,889) contain 1.4 percent of total enrollment in 2009
and less in earlier years.

       We were unable to match about 5.6 percent of the opeids in NSLDS to any IPEDS unitid.
About 61 percent (405 of 661) of those institutions were classified by NSLDS as “proprietary”
schools, or for-profits. Schools without unitids are about 1 percent of subsidized and
unsubsidized loan volumes in 2009 and about 2.4 percent of Pell Grants. Among proprietary
schools, those that were not successfully matched to IPEDS represent less than 1 percent of loans
and about 1 percent of Pell grants.


                                                                                                -33-
Appendix Table 1: Regression of Three-Year Cohort Default Rate on Type of Institution: 2005 to 2008

                               (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)      (9)        (10)
Non-profit four year         -0.015     -0.006    0.001     0.002      0.000     -0.015    -0.007      -0.001    0.001     -0.001
                            (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.011)    (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.004)   (0.010)   (0.004)
Community college             0.063      0.049    0.046     0.030      0.046      0.063     0.047       0.045    0.030      0.044
                            (0.003)    (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.009)    (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.009)   (0.005)
For-profit                    0.110      0.105    0.105     0.087      0.105
                            (0.003)    (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.009)    (0.004)
For-profit × 2008                                                      0.005
                                                                      (0.007)
Independents                                                                     0.102     0.096       0.098     0.080      0.098
                                                                                (0.003)   (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.010)   (0.005)
Independents × 2008                                                                                                        -0.013
                                                                                                                          (0.010)
Regional chain                                                                   0.123     0.113       0.111     0.091      0.110
                                                                                (0.006)   (0.007)     (0.007)   (0.011)   (0.007)
Regional chain × 2008                                                                                                       0.011
                                                                                                                          (0.015)
National chain                                                                   0.152     0.131       0.127     0.108      0.124
                                                                                (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.010)   (0.006)
National chain × 2008                                                                                                       0.032
                                                                                                                          (0.008)
On-line                                                                          0.079     0.076       0.089     0.075      0.081
                                                                                (0.016)   (0.014)     (0.017)   (0.019)   (0.017)
On-line × 2008                                                                                                              0.059
                                                                                                                          (0.020)
R-squared                     0.295     0.428     0.642     0.553      0.642     0.305      0.433      0.644    0.555       0.645
Sample Size                  14,655    14,655    14,655     9,281     14,655    14,655     14,655     14,655    9,281     14,655
Demographic controls           No        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
Financial aid controls         No        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
Degree types, offerings        No        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
Year fixed effects             Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
City fixed effects             No        No        Yes       Yes        Yes       No         No         Yes      Yes         Yes
Limit to open admission        No        No        No        Yes        No        No         No         No       Yes         No


                                                                                                                             -34-
Source: National Student Loan Data System and IPEDS.

Notes: The dependent variable is the three-year cohort default rate for an institution-year observation. The sample covers institution-
year observations for the fiscal years 2005 to 2008. “Independents” are for-profit schools that operate in only one state and have no
more than five branches. A “regional chain” is a for-profit institution that operates in more than one state, or has more than five
campus branches within a single state, but operates in no more than two census divisions. A “national chain” is a for-profit institution
that operates in at least three separate census divisions. A for-profit institution is “online” if it either has the word “online” in the
school’s name, or if no more than 33 percent of its students come from any single U.S. state. Demographic controls are fractions part-
time, 25 years and over, female, African American, and Hispanic. Financial aid controls are the number of recipients of Pell grants
and subsidized and unsubsidized federal loans, total yearly disbursement amounts for each, and total loans and Pell grants per enrollee.
Degree types and offerings are indicators for distance education, remedial course offerings, whether the institution offers assistance
with job placement, whether it offers part-time employment services for enrolled students, the highest award or degree offered by the
institution, and whether it has open admissions. Standard errors are clustered by institution and are in parentheses. Omitted category
is four-year public.




                                                                                                                                    -35-
Appendix Table 2: For-Profit Institution Impact on Student Outcomes for First-Time Undergraduates at
Non-Selective Institutions: BPS:04/09

                                       Beginning Postsecondary Students, Non-selective Institutions
                                           Dependent Variable Means                For-Profit Institution
                                                                                         Impact
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)
                                     Four-Year    Two-Year For- profits          OLS          Matching
                                     Public and   Public and
 Dependent Variables                 Non-profits Non-profits
                                                         Financial Aid, 2003-2004
 Applied for Aid                       0.905         0.749         0.986         0.092           0.056
                                                                               (0.010)         (0.011)
 Title IV loan and grant aid           3,989         1,022         6,852         4,628           3,567
                                                                                 (179)           (156)
 Tuition                               6,737         1,269         8,434         5,979           5,243
                                                                                 (160)           (176)
 Net tuition minus grants              3,457          734          5,573         4,660           4,351
                                                                                 (148)           (143)
 Pell grant                            0.407         0.294         0.790         0.190           0.053
                                                                               (0.014)         (0.021)
 Pell grant amount                     1,092          633          2,149          570             195
                                                                                  (49)            (68)
                                                        Financial Aid through 2009
 Cumulative Pell grant                 3,545         2,399         4,084          100            -657
                                                                                 (145)           (212)
 Cumulative Title IV borrowing         8,489         3,502         7,699         4,562           2,781
                                                                                 (417)           (354)
 Title IV loan balance, 2009           8,153         3,306         7,460         4,640           2,759
                                                                                 (449)           (371)
 Repaid any amount on loan,            0.588         0.640         0.529        -0.098          -0.033
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.030)         (0.044)
 Defaulted on loan,                    0.073         0.056         0.188         0.058           0.078
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.018)         (0.019)
                                                 Persistence and Educational Attainment
 Left school in 2003-2004              0.134         0.233         0.212        -0.053          -0.054
                                                                               (0.016)         (0.018)
 Attained certificate                  0.031         0.112         0.316         0.038           0.043
                                                                               (0.014)          (0.19)
 Attained AA                           0.071         0.177         0.112        -0.043          -0.021
                                                                               (0.015)         (0.015)
 Attained BA                           0.532         0.110         0.040        -0.049          -0.044
                                                                               (0.011)         (0.012)
 Still enrolled in 2009                0.336         0.389         0.216        -0.118          -0.098
                                                                               (0.018)         (0.020)
 Idle (not employed, not enrolled)     0.132         0.133         0.236         0.046           0.056
                                                                               (0.017)         (0.017)
 Left survey                           0.113         0.109         0.064        -0.024          -0.020
                                                                               (0.011)         (0.012)


                                                                                                   -36-
                                          Employment and Earnings (conditional on no longer enrolled)
 Any job in 2009                         0.790         0.784         0.706       -0.020        -0.093
                                                                                (0.021)        (0.021)
 Earnings from work in 2009              24,626       24,795        19,950        -1237         -4168
                                                                                  (967)          (970)
 Earnings from work in 2009,             31,188       31,622        28,243         -885           234
 conditional on employment                                                        (969)          (902)
 Unemployed and seeking work             0.164         0.148         0.232        0.041         0.062
                                                                                (0.019)        (0.021)
 Unemployed more than 3 months            0.277        0.259         0.404        0.078          0.085
 since leaving school                                                           (0.022)        (0.024)
 Earnings do not meet the                 0.156        0.046         0.271        0.204          0.152
 Gainful Employment standard                                                    (0.019)        (0.017)
                                                Satisfaction with Program, School, Loans, Job
 Remedial coursework                      0.235        0.289         0.076       -0.196         -0.198
                                                                                 (0.015)       (0.017)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.036         0.024         0.081        0.038         0.039
 2003-2004                                                                      (0.009)        (0.009)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.073         0.051         0.117        0.046         0.048
 2003-2006                                                                      (0.013)        (0.011)
 Education was worth the cost             0.771        0.821         0.648       -0.204         -0.179
                                                                                (0.019)        (0.018)
 Loans were a worthwhile                  0.804        0.803         0.664       -0.142         -0.118
 Investment                                                                     (0.023)        (0.024)
 Satisfied with major                     0.846        0.871         0.789       -0.101         -0.070
 or course of study                                                             (0.017)        (0.015)
 Satisfied with current job               0.772        0.764         0.752       -0.014         -0.011
 (employed, not enrolled)                                                       (0.026)        (0.024)

 Sample size                              1,920          5,930         1,950


Source: BPS:04/09 Restricted-Use Data File.

Notes: The regression samples exclude students who started at selective four-year institutions. The OLS
column reports coefficient estimates (robust standard errors) for a for-profit institution dummy variable in
regressions for each dependent variable that include the same additional covariates as those listed in the
notes to Table 3. Each number in the Matching column represents the average treatment on the treated
estimate (standard error) for going to a for-profit institution using from nearest neighbor (propensity
score) matching with replacement and excluding observations outside of common support. The same
covariates used in the OLS regressions were used for the matching models. The OLS and Matching model
estimates use the BPS sampling weights. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10.




                                                                                                       -37-
Appendix Table 3: For-Profit Institution Impact on Student Outcomes for First-Time Undergraduates in
Certificate Programs: BPS:04/09



                                      Beginning Postsecondary Students, Certificate Program Enrollees
                                           Dependent Variable Means                 For-Profit Institution
                                                                                          Impact
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                     Four-Year    Two-Year For- profits           OLS          Matching
                                     Public and   Public and
 Dependent Variables                 Non-profits Non-profits
                                                         Financial Aid, 2003-2004
 Applied for Aid                       0.883         0.836         0.991          0.069           0.068
                                                                                (0.014)         (0.020)
 Title IV loan and grant aid           3,693         1,362         6,285         3,353            3,005
                                                                                  (252)           (238)
 Tuition                               7,171         1,425         8,129          5243            4979
                                                                                  (176)           (276)
 Net tuition minus grants              4,227          757          5,212          4,023           3,911
                                                                                  (242)           (242)
 Pell grant                            0.465         0.409         0.888          0.191           0.061
                                                                                (0.023)         (0.033)
 Pell grant amount                     1,272          785          2,480           583             264
                                                                                   (78)           (105)
                                                        Financial Aid through 2009
 Cumulative Pell grant                 2,961         2,127         3,780            41            -734
                                                                                  (220)           (265)
 Cumulative Title IV borrowing         5,019         2,033         4,599          1702            1119
                                                                                  (331)           (404)
 Title IV loan balance, 2009           4,471         1,884         3,975          1326             847
                                                                                  (349)           (418)
 Repaid any amount on loan,            0.593         0.622         0.604        -0.019            0.134
 conditional on a student loan                                                  (0.063)         (0.090)
 Defaulted on loan,                    0.073         0.113         0.234         0.084            0.098
 conditional on a student loan                                                  (0.045)         (0.037)
                                                 Persistence and Educational Attainment
 Left school in 2003-2004              0.240         0.355         0.288        -0.020           -0.071
                                                                                (0.032)         (0.032)
 Attained certificate                  0.227         0.424         0.537          0.086           0.046
                                                                                (0.036)         (0.034)
 Attained AA                           0.296         0.076         0.017         -0.085          -0.065
                                                                                (0.017)         (0.019)
 Still enrolled in 2009                0.319         0.261         0.206        -0.035           -0.079
                                                                                (0.031)         (0.029)
 Idle (not employed, not enrolled)     0.178         0.166         0.269         0.064            0.051
                                                                                (0.030)         (0.029)
 Left survey                           0.040         0.067         0.040         -0.022          -0.026
                                                                                (0.014)         (0.015)


                                                                                                    -38-
                                         Employment and Earnings (conditional on no longer enrolled)
 Any job in 2009                        0.711         0.779         0.669       -0.065        -0.100
                                                                               (0.036)        (0.033)
 Earnings from work in 2009             22,652       24,138        17,471       -3,041         -3,584
                                                                                (1490)        (1422)
 Earnings from work in 2009,            31,873       30,967        26,119       -1,576        -2,473
 conditional on employment                                                      (1414)        (1520)
 Unemployed and seeking work            0.250         0.144         0.256        0.055         0.121
                                                                               (0.033)        (0.032)
 Unemployed more than 3 months           0.415        0.271         0.439        0.079          0.086
 since leaving school                                                          (0.039)        (0.038)
 Earnings do not meet the                0.092        0.031         0.229        0.130         0.146
 Gainful Employment standard                                                   (0.025)        (0.023)
                                               Satisfaction with Program, School, Loans, Job
 Remedial coursework                     0.206        0.244         0.049       -0.198         -0.199
                                                                               (0.026)        (0.027)
 Left school because dissatisfied,      0.060         0.033         0.100        0.065         0.064
 2003-2004                                                                     (0.018)        (0.013)
 Left school because dissatisfied,      0.084         0.067         0.122        0.060         0.066
 2003-2006                                                                     (0.023)        (0.015)
 Education was worth the cost            0.798        0.878         0.712       -0.230        -0.221
                                                                               (0.030)        (0.028)
 Loans were a worthwhile                 0.823        0.806         0.680       -0.109        -0.192
 Investment                                                                    (0.038)        (0.040)
 Satisfied with major                    0.870        0.913         0.823       -0.074         -0.063
 or course of study                                                            (0.022)        (0.023)
 Satisfied with current job              0.691        0.816         0.777       -0.013         -0.083
 (employed, not enrolled)                                                      (0.042)        (0.035)

 Sample size                              230            890          1,130


Source: BPS:04/09 Restricted-Use Data File.

Notes: The regression sample only includes BPS students originally enrolled in a certificate program. The
OLS column reports coefficient estimates (robust standard errors) for a for-profit institution dummy
variable in regressions for each dependent variable that include the same additional covariates as those
listed in the notes to Table 3. Each number in the Matching column represents the average treatment on
the treated estimate (standard error) for going to a for-profit institution using from nearest neighbor
(propensity score) matching with replacement and excluding observations outside of common support.
The same covariates used in the OLS regressions were used for the matching models. The OLS and
Matching model estimates use the BPS sampling weights. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the
nearest 10.




                                                                                                     -39-
Appendix Table 4: For-Profit Institution Impact on Student Outcomes for First-Time Undergraduates in
Associate’s Programs: BPS:04/09

                                      Beginning Postsecondary Students, Associate’s Program Enrollees
                                           Dependent Variable Means                For-Profit Institution
                                                                                         Impact
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                     Four-Year     Two-Year For- profits         OLS          Matching
                                     Public and    Public and
 Dependent Variables                 Non-profits Non-profits
                                                         Financial Aid, 2003-2004
 Applied for Aid                       0.911         0.770          0.983        0.108           0.077
                                                                               (0.015)         (0.015)
 Title IV loan and grant aid           4,372         1,031          7,296        5,089           4,423
                                                                                 (247)           (254)
 Tuition                               6,883         1,301          8,500        6,301          5,693
                                                                                 (254)           (281)
 Net tuition minus grants              3,829          745           5,798        4,885           4,795
                                                                                 (234)           (247)
 Pell grant                            0.433         0.311          0.717        0.188           0.072
                                                                               (0.022)         (0.031)
 Pell grant amount                     1,101          664           1,862         494             110
                                                                                  (72)           (103)
                                                        Financial Aid through 2009
 Cumulative Pell grant                 3,440         2,615          4,537         125            -318
                                                                                 (201)           (331)
 Cumulative Title IV borrowing         8,145         3,683         10,657        5,891           5,214
                                                                                 (639)           (558)
 Title IV loan balance, 2009           7,854         3,467         10,888        6,309           5,615
                                                                                 (675)           (612)
 Repaid any amount on loan,            0.547         0.644          0.432       -0.142          -0.080
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.039)         (0.044)
 Defaulted on loan,                    0.074         0.052          0.152        0.073           0.053
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.022)         (0.022)
                                                  Persistence and Educational Attainment
 Left school in 2003-2004              0.138         0.217          0.121       -0.083          -0.095
                                                                               (0.020)         (0.024)
 Attained AA                                         0.224          0.284        0.041           0.019
                                                                               (0.028)         (0.029)
 Attained AA or more                                 0.283          0.291       -0.006          -0.016
                                                                               (0.028)         (0.030)
 Attained BA                           0.238         0.106          0.034       -0.073          -0.068
                                                                               (0.014)         (0.017)
 Still enrolled in 2009                0.238         0.106          0.034       -0.073          -0.068
                                                                               (0.014)         (0.017)
 Idle (not employed, not enrolled)     0.138         0.122          0.199        0.037           0.046
                                                                               (0.025)         (0.025)
 Left survey                           0.351         0.400          0.234       -0.145          -0.110
                                                                               (0.028)         (0.030)


                                                                                                   -40-
                                          Employment and Earnings (conditional on no longer enrolled)
 Any job in 2009                         0.789         0.797         0.749        0.002        -0.043
                                                                                (0.032)        (0.031)
 Earnings from work in 2009              25,867       25,232        21,413       -1,880          -552
                                                                                 (1449)        (1423)
 Earnings from work in 2009,             32,786       31,673        28,593       -2,794          -542
 conditional on employment                                                       (1476)        (1657)
 Unemployed and seeking work             0.162         0.136         0.205        0.035         0.087
                                                                                (0.029)        (0.029)
 Unemployed more than 3 months            0.270        0.260         0.373        0.084          0.045
 since leaving school                                                           (0.035)        (0.036)
 Earnings do not meet the                 0.187        0.050         0.340        0.256         0.176
 Gainful Employment standard                                                    (0.031)        (0.030)
                                                Satisfaction with Program, School, Loans, Job
 Remedial coursework                      0.248        0.307         0.106       -0.178         -0.191
                                                                                (0.022)        (0.026)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.039         0.022         0.058        0.023         0.016
 2003-2004                                                                      (0.012)        (0.013)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.074         0.049         0.108        0.045         0.053
 2003-2006                                                                      (0.019)        (0.017)
 Education was worth the cost             0.789        0.807         0.571       -0.230        -0.221
                                                                                (0.030)        (0.028)
 Loans were a worthwhile                  0.810        0.792         0.641       -0.155        -0.079
 Investment                                                                     (0.031)        (0.031)
 Satisfied with major                     0.849        0.859         0.742       -0.120         -0.088
 or course of study                                                             (0.028)        (0.025)
 Satisfied with current job               0.794        0.751         0.704       -0.033         -0.030
 (employed, not enrolled)                                                       (0.040)        (0.037)

 Sample size                               870           3,720          570


Source: BPS:04/09 Restricted-Use Data File.

Notes: The regression sample only includes BPS students originally enrolled in an associate’s degree
program. The OLS column reports coefficient estimates (robust standard errors) for a for-profit institution
dummy variable in regressions for each dependent variable that include the same additional covariates as
those listed in the notes to Table 3. Each number in the Matching column represents the average
treatment on the treated estimate (standard error) for going to a for-profit institution using from nearest
neighbor (propensity score) matching with replacement and excluding observations outside of common
support. The same covariates used in the OLS regressions were used for the matching models. The OLS
and Matching model estimates use the BPS sampling weights. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to
the nearest 10.




                                                                                                      -41-
Appendix Table 5: For-Profit Institution Impact on Student Outcomes for First-Time Undergraduates in
Bachelor’s Programs: BPS:04/09

                                      Beginning Postsecondary Students, Bachelor’s Program Enrollees
                                           Dependent Variable Means                 For-Profit Institution
                                                                                          Impact
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
                                     Four-Year     Two-Year For- profits         OLS           Matching
                                     Public and    Public and
 Dependent Variables                 Non-profits Non-profits
                                                         Financial Aid, 2003-2004
 Applied for Aid                       0.897         0.754          0.989        0.123            0.111
                                                                               (0.019)          (0.028)
 Title IV loan and grant aid           3,837         1,227          8,518        5,199            3,505
                                                                                 (692)            (641)
 Tuition                               9,680         1,494         10,060        5,084            2,205
                                                                                 (475)            (795)
 Net tuition minus grants              5,415          918           6,741        4,464            3,498
                                                                                 (520)            (600)
 Pell grant                            0.268         0.274          0.564        0.112           -0.028
                                                                               (0.031)          (0.056)
 Pell grant amount                      733           631           1535           319            -173
                                                                                 (111)            (176)
                                                        Financial Aid through 2009
 Cumulative Pell grant                 2,903         2,398          4,257         -358           -1,067
                                                                                 (412)            (608)
 Cumulative Title IV borrowing         8,993         4,483         13,750        4,744            3,222
                                                                                (1262)           (1383)
 Title IV loan balance, 2009           8,273         4,284         13,924        5,240            3,439
                                                                                (1392)           (1503)
 Repaid any amount on loan,            0.652         0.638          0.476       -0.138           -0.189
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.062)          (0.075)
 Defaulted on loan,                    0.029         0.058          0.092        0.020           -0.013
 conditional on a student loan                                                 (0.036)          (0.034)
                                                  Persistence and Educational Attainment
 Left school in 2003-2004              0.043         0.151          0.108       -0.020           -0.028
                                                                               (0.032)          (0.036)
 Attained BA                           0.658         0.203          0.262       -0.115           -0.194
                                                                               (0.045)          (0.052)
 Still enrolled in 2009                0.257         0.409          0.222       -0.142           -0.022
                                                                               (0.041)          (0.050)
 Idle (not employed, not enrolled)     0.099         0.112          0.199        0.088            0.072
                                                                               (0.039)          (0.045)
 Left survey                           0.109         0.146          0.116       -0.016           -0.028
                                                                               (0.034)          (0.038)

                                        Employment and Earnings (conditional on no longer enrolled)
 Any job in 2009                        0.852       0.821         0.749        -0.078        -0.069
                                                                              (0.046)        (0.055)


                                                                                                    -42-
 Earnings from work in 2009              29,434         25,130        28,159       500              -1,065
                                                                                 (2629)            (2723)
 Earnings from work in 2009,             34,528       30,617        37,578        3,471              1,014
 conditional on employment                                                       (2707)            (2685)
 Unemployed and seeking work             0.110         0.142         0.223        0.091             0.136
                                                                                (0.044)            (0.049)
 Unemployed more than 3 months            0.227        0.255         0.353        0.098              0.047
 since leaving school                                                           (0.052)            (0.051)
 Earnings do not meet the                 0.131        0.060         0.298        0.157             0.183
 Gainful Employment standard                                                    (0.051)            (0.055)
                                                Satisfaction with Program, School, Loans, Job
 Remedial coursework                      0.167        0.295         0.122       -0.098             -0.128
                                                                                (0.033)            (0.043)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.007         0.020         0.046        0.025             0.033
 2003-2004                                                                      (0.019)            (0.019)
 Left school because dissatisfied,       0.026         0.038         0.101        0.060             0.072
 2003-2006                                                                      (0.029)            (0.025)
 Education was worth the cost             0.806        0.799         0.581       -0.207            -0.167
                                                                                (0.048)            (0.050)
 Loans were a worthwhile                  0.843        0.819         0.685       -0.133            -0.058
 Investment                                                                     (0.049)            (0.053)
 Satisfied with major                     0.862        0.898         0.776       -0.089             -0.067
 or course of study                                                             (0.045)            (0.039)
 Satisfied with current job               0.776        0.772         0.787        0.057             -0.011
 (employed, not enrolled)                                                       (0.053)            (0.069)

 Sample size                              7,180           650           180


Source: BPS:04/09 Restricted-Use Data File.

Notes: The regression sample only includes BPS students originally enrolled in a bachelor’s degree
program. The OLS column reports coefficient estimates (robust standard errors) for a for-profit institution
dummy variable in regressions for each dependent variable that include the same additional covariates as
those listed in the notes to Table 3. Each number in the Matching column represents the average
treatment on the treated estimate (standard error) for going to a for-profit institution using from nearest
neighbor (propensity score) matching with replacement and excluding observations outside of common
support. The same covariates used in the OLS regressions were used for the matching models. The OLS
and Matching model estimates use the BPS sampling weights. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to
the nearest 10.




                                                                                                      -43-
