                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE WAGE PRICE SPIRAL




                       Olivier J. Blanchard




                      Working Paper No. 1771




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1985




This is a much revised version of "Inflexible Relative Prices and
Price Level Inertia." I thank Andrew Abel, Rudiger Dornbusch,
William Nordhaus, Jeffrey Sachs and Larry Summers for discussions.
Comments by John Sutton and an anonymous referee have lead to
substantial changes. I thank the NSF for financial support. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #1771
                                                           Decerrber 1985



                               The Wage Price Spiral



                                     BSTR1CT




     This paper rehabilitates the old wage   price   spiral. It shows that, after an

increase in aggregate demand, the process of adjustment of nominal prices and nominal

wages results from attempts by workers to maintain or increase their real wage and by

firms to maintain or increase their markups of prices over wages. Under continuous

price and wage setting, the process of adjustment would be instantaneous ; under

staggering of price and wage decisions, the adjustment takes time. The more

inflexible real wages and markups are to shifts in demand, the higher is the degree

of price level inertia, the longer lasting are the effects of aggregate demand on

output.




                                                          Olivier   J. Blanchard
                                                          Departrrent of Economics
                                                          M.I.T.
                                                          Cairbridqe, W 02139
     For a long time, the "wage price spiral" was a central .lement of macroeconomic

dynamics. An increase in aggregate demand, it was argued, would increase output and

employment, leading firms to desire higher prices and workers higher wages; this

would start a wage price spiral, which would end only if and when this "demand pull"

inflation decreased real money balances sufficiently to return the economy to steady

state. Or the spiral could start from a desire from workers to increase their real

wages, or from firms to increase their profit margins, or from the attempts by both

sides to maintain the same wage and price in the face of an adverse supply shock

these would also start a wage price spiral, lead to "cost push" inflation, and

through the effect of inflation on real money balances, lead to a recession1.

     With the advent of rational expectations, the wage price spiral left

centerstage. With rational expectations, workers and firms had to understand that

there could not be a simultaneous increase in all real wages and all markups (of

prices above wages). The effect of an increase in aggregate demand was to increase

nominal wages and prices simultaneously and instantaneously, in order to decrease

real money balances and leave output unchanged. The same reasoning applied to supply

shocks.: workers and firms had to understand that either real wages or profit margins

or both had to decrease; the adjustment was instantaneous. Gone were the wage price

spiral dynamics2.

     The proposition of this paper is that the wage price spiral should make a

comeback, or more precisely that wage price spiral dynamics are likely to be present

in any economy in which not all price and wage decisions are taken simultaneously. To

make this point, the paper builds a model which is based on two main assumptions. The

first is monopolistic competition in the goods and labor markets ; monopolistic

competition gives the simplest acceptable price setting environment to examine such

issues. The second is staggering of price and wage decisions. These two assumptions
                                       2




together generate dynamics very similar to those described above . More precisely, in

this model

     Price level dynamics are indeed the result of attempts by workers to maintain

(or increase or decrease as the case may be) their real wage and by firms to maintain

(or increase or decrease) their markups. Furthermore, there is a direct relation

between the inflexibility of real wages and markups to shifts in demand and the

degree of price level inertia. The smaller the effect of shifts in the demand for

goods on the markup, and the smaller the effect of shifts in the demand for labor on

the real wage, the more slowly will the nominal price level adjust to offset

aggregate demand disturbances.

     As the nominal price level adjusts slowly to its equilibrium value, changes in

nominal money have long lasting effects on real money and aggregate demand. If

movements in aggregate demand are not too large, in a sense to be made precise later,

aggregate demand determines output   suppliers willingly accomodate the increased

demand for goods and labor.

     Finally, if the economy is predominantly affected by aggregate demand shocks,

there is, as a first approximation, no relation between output and real wage

movements. In response for example to an increase in nominal money, output

temporarily increases before returning back to its equilibrium level ; during this

adjustment process, the real wage is neither systematically lower nor higher but

simply oscillates around its equilibrium value.

     The paper is organised as follows. Section I characterises the equilibrium in

the absence of staggering, Section II introduces staggering and characterises the

dynamic effects of changes in nominal money. Section Ill presents conclusions and

suggests extensions.
                                         3




                      I. A Price Setting ModeL



     If we are to introduce later staggering of price decisions, we must have a model

in which price decisions are not taken by an auctioneer but by economic agent;. As we

want to focus on the real wage, we need a model with labor and goods markets. We want

agents to choose prices and wages, but no single agent to choose either the aggregate

price or wage level ; the simplest assumption is to have many goods, all of them

imperfect substitutes, and many types of labor, all of them also imperfect

substitutes. Thus, we choose a model with monopolistic competition in the goods and

the labor markets.



1) The Price and Wage Rules



     I have derived elsewhere the equilibrium of an economy with monopolistic

competition in the labor and the goods markets, starting from utility and profit

maximisation [Blanchard and Kiyotaki, 1985). I shall start here directly from the

demand functions and the equilibrium price and wage rules ; they are sufficiently

simple and intuitive that little is lost by not reporting the details of the

derivation.

     There are m firms, each producing a different good, indexed by i =   1,... ,m
good i has nominal price Pi. There are n unions, each supplying a different type of

labor, indexed by j    1,... ,n 3; labor of type i nas nominal wage W1. The demand

functions for each type of good i and each type of labor J are given by
                                                                 4




                                              -6
(1)            =       K   (M/P) (Pt/P)              ;       0 > 1;                                =    1,...   ,in



                                              -•0•

(2)            = KN (M/P)             (W3/W)         ;                    1; o > 1;            j        1,...

where the price and wage indices P and W are given by

                            m        i—s      i                                   i—      i

(3)      P         (   1    E    P         ) 1—6 ;       W   (       1  E W            ) 1—u
                       m i1                                          n j1



      The demand for good I, y, is a function of real money balances (M/P) and of the

nominal price P relative to the price level P, which is an index of all nominal

prices. The elasticity of demand with respect to the relative price is given by 8.

      The demand for type of labor j, N, is a derived demand by firms. It depends on

the demand for goods and thus on real money balances ; o                                           is   the inverse of the degree

of returns to scale and is thus the elasticity of the overall demand for labor with

respect to real money balances. The demand for a specific type of labor j also

depends on the nominal wage W. relative to the nominal wage level W, which is an

index of all nominal wages. The elasticity of demand with respect to the relative

wage is given by o. The letters K and K11 are constants which depend on the

parameters of technology and utility ; they play no important role in what follows.



      The price and wage rules are given in turn by i


                                                             U-1              1

(4)   (P /P) =         (K       (8/ (6—1)) (W/P> (M/P)                   ) l+O(U—l)           1=1,...

                                                             U(i)                 1

(5)   (W /W)           (K1.. (a! (u—I)) (P/W) (M/P)                        ) 1+u (—1
                                             5




     Consider the price      rule first,   Each firm is a monopolist, facing a demand

+unction given by equation (1). The price rule depends on two parameters,          and 8.


The parameter     is the inverse of the degree of returns to scale to labor ; if firms

acted competitively, (cc—i) would be the elasticity of output supply with respect to

the price. The parameter $ is the elasticity of demand with respect to the relative

price. To guarantee the existence of an interior maximum to profit maximisation, cc         is
assumed greater than or equal to unity and 8 is assumed to be strictly greater than

unity4.

     An increase in the real wage shifts the marginal cost curve upward, leading to

an increase in the relative price. An increase in (M/P) shifts the demand curve out,

leading under decreasing returns, to an increase in the relative price. Under

constant returns however, the firm accomodates the increase at an unchanged relative

price. The constant term has been written as the product of a constant K and a term

(e/($—1)) for reasons which will be clear below. K depends on the various structural

parameters ;    (81(8—i))   is   the ratio of price to marginal cost and reflect! the degree

of monopoly power of each firm in its market.

     Consider now the        g_rule. Each union is also a monopolist, maximising labor

income minus the disutility of work, subject to the demand function for labor given

by equation (2). The wage rule depends on two parameters1 p and . (p—i) is the

elasticity of marginal disutility of work with respect to employment. The parameter

  is the elasticity of demand with respect to the relative wage. To guarantee the

existence of an interior maximum to utility inaximisation, l is assumed equal to or

greater than unity,         is assumed to be strictly greater than unity.

     At a given relative wage W/W, an increase in W/P increases the real wage

received by union j, Wi/P; this increase in the real wage leads the union to want to
                                                          a




supply core labor, thus to decrease its relative wage. Thus an increase in W/P

decreases the relative wage (W/W). An increase in (M/P) increases the derived demand

for labor and leads, under increasing disutility of work, to a higher relative wage

if    is equal to unity however, the union supplies more labor at the same relative

wage. The constant term is again separated in two terms ; the first depends on

structural parameters and the second reflects the degree of monopoly power of each

union in its market.

      We shall later on be interested in fluctuations of aggregate output. Note that,

from equations (1) and (3), aggregate output ii given by



()       V       ( E P Y)/P           =    K (M/P)
                 i =1




where 1< is a constant             aggregate output is proportional to real money balances.



2) The Equilibrium




      In equilibrium, symmetry, both across price setters and wage setters, implies

that all relative prices and all relative wages must be equal to unity. Using P =             P


for all i and W =           W   for all j in equations (4) and (5) gives


                                                  cc- 1

(7)      (P/W)          =   (e/$—1        K,, (M/P)



(8)      (W/P)          =   (/(—1i)       K.. (M/P)




      The first equation, which we shall refer to as the rnarku equation, gives the

equilibrium relation between the markup of prices over wages and real money balances
            [F)ve   ij
log (W/P)                         (fl-I)
                                     real wage locus
                                       (compeli live)

                                           (compeli five)

                                           mark up locus
                              slope (I—a)



                         log(M/P)(c1 logY)
                                          7




from the point of view of firms. Unless firms have constant returns (.cl), an

increase in real money balances increases aggregate demand and requires an increase

in the markup.

     The second equation, which we shall refer to as the real wage equation, gives

the equilibrium relation between real wages and real money balances from the point o4

view of unions. Unless the marginal disutility of work is constant (1), an Increase

in real money balances increases the derived demand for labor and requires an

increase in the real wage.

     The equilibrium is characterised graphically in Figure 1. It is drawn in the

log(W/P) ,   log(M/P) space so that both the markup and the real wage loci are linear.
If p is strictly greater than unity, the real wage locus is upward sloping      if   is

strictly greater then unity, the markup locus is downward sloping. The equilibrium

determines the level of the real wage and the level of real money balances and is

characterised by point A. Given equation (6), it determines output. Given nominal

money, it determines the price level.

     It is useful, for later reference, to compare this equilibrium with the

equilibrium which would prevail if firms and unions had the same technology and

objective functions, but took prices and wages as given, that is, did not exploit

their monopoly power. We shall refer to this equilibrium as the competitive

equilibrium. The competitive equilibrium is very similar to the monopolistically

competitive one. The equations characterising it are identical to equations (7) and

(8) except for the absence of ($/(&—1)) in the first and (a/(—1)) in the second.

Firms do not use their monopoly power, so that their mark up is lower at any level of

output. Unions do not exert their monopoly power either, so that the real wage is

lower at any level of employment. The competitive loci are drawn in Figure 1. The
                                               B




competitive equilibrium is given by point B. Comparing B and A shows the

monopolistically competitive equilibrium to have lower output ; whether it has higher

or lower real wages is ambiguous.



       Our ultimate goal is to better understand the presence and the nature of the

dynamic effects of nominal money on wages, prices and output. What have we gained by

introducing monopolistic competition ? in a way, we appear to have gained very little

  in the monopolistically competitive equilibrium1 just as in the competitive

equilibrium, nominal money is still neutral, leading to an instantaneous proportional

increase in wages and prices, and leaving output unchanged.

       In another way, we are very close to having gained something. To see this, and

as an introduction to the next section, it is useful to rewrite equations (7) and (B)

in logarithmic form and to characterise the equilibrium in the price wage space.

Denoting by lower case letters the logarithms of upper case letters, equations (7)

and (8) become, with some reorganisation


(9)       p =   c   + a   w   +   (1—a)m   ;       a a 1/s,       a E (0,1)

(10)      w = c     + b   p +     (1—b)m   ;       b   a l—(—l)   b   1




where c a (log($I(4—l)) +           log(K))/   and c. a log(oI(—l)) + log(K...)



       The markup equation gives the nominal price as a linear combination of the

nominal wage and nominal money5. The coefficient on the wage, a, is the degree of

returns to scale. Unless firms operate under constant returns, an increase in m will

increase p given w.
    C




a
        LU           E




                 C
                             Cs

                         L

a            E
                                         9




       The real wage equation gives the nominal wage as a linear combination of the

 nominal price and nominal money. The coefficient on the price, b, is less than unity

but is not necessarily positive. An increase in the price level, which decreases real

money balances and the demand for labor, requires a decrease in the real wage. If a

and     are large enough, it may even require a decrease in the nominal wage. If both

a and p are close to unity, a and b are also close to unity. If a and b are close to

unity, shifts in demand have little effect on markups and real wages respectively

we shall in what follows refer to a and b as reflecting the degrees of inflelblllty

of markups and real wages respectively

       The equilibrium is characterised in the p, w space in Figure 2, for a given

value of a. The price rule has slope less than or equal to one ; if b is positive,

the wage rule has slope greater than or equal to one. The equilibrium is given by

point E.

       It is useful for later to give a heuristic description of how this equilibrium

may be reached through a tatonnement process. Suppose that nominal money increases,

so that in Figure 2, the initial equilibrium is at A and the new equilibrium at E i

at   initial values of w and p, aggregate demand increases, increasing output and

employment. Worker; therefore, want a higher real wage. Given p, they want to go to

point B. Firms want a higher markup ; given w, they want to go to point B. These two

claims are obviously inconsistent. Attempts by workers and firm; to increase real

wages and markups only lead to increases in nominal wages and prices. This process

ends when both nominal prices and wages have increased in proportion to nominal money

so that real money balances are back to their previous level ; desired real wages and

desired markups are then again consistent and equilibrium is reached. A possible path

of adjustment in which prices and wages adjust in turn is ABC. .E in Figure 2. In this
                                       10




case, the less flexible real wages and mark ups, the slower the adjustment process.

This is only a tatonnement process ; we shall now see that staggering leads to a

similar process in real time.




             II. Staggering and Demand Fluctuations



     Most nominal prices —and wages— are set for discrete periods of time. For each

such period, price setters prefer the simplicity of a constant nominal price to both

a contingent price path or even a predetermined —but not necessarily constant— price

path. Moreover, nominal price changes do not take place all at the same time but

rather uniformly through time. This may be partly because of strategic timing

considerations on the part of some price setters. More often, it is simply the

unavoidable consequence of the existence of a large number of uncoordinated price and

wage setters. Some€imes predetermined prices or wages are part of explicit contracts;

more often, they are not.

     The implication is that wage or price setters, when they change their wage or

price, experience a change in their relative wage or relative price. The actual

process of adjustment to a nominal shock is a complex one, involving changes in

relative wages, relative prices and real wages. To study it and keep the analysis

manageable, one must focus on one particular aspect of that process. One may for

example, concentrate on the interaction among price decisions, assuming continuous

wage setting ; this was done by Akeriof [1969]. One may instead concentrate on the

interaction among wage decisions, the 'wage wage spiral", assuming continuous price
                                               11




setting, as was done by Taylor (1980]. Siven our focus on the 'wage price spiral', we

focus on the staggering between wage decisions on the one hand and price decisions on

the other.



1) Pr i ce and Wage     Rules Under St aggerj


     This    leads us to formalize the staggering of decisions in the following rather

mechanical but convenient way

     Time is discrete. The economy is described in the same way as before , except

for price and wage setting. All price decisions are taken every two periods, at even

times. Thus, nominal prices are set at time t for periods t and t+1, and so on. Wage

decisions are taken every two periods, at odd times, thus at t—1 for t—1 and t, and

so on. The unit period should be thought as fairly short, say of the order of a

month, so that after two months all price and wage decisions have all been freely

revised. The length of the period during which prices and wages are fixed is taken as

exogenous and so is the staggering structure7.

     Firms and workers are assumed to satisfy demand at the quoted prices and wages

we shall return to this assumption below and characterize the conditions under which

it is indeed optimal for them to do so.

     As all firms take price decisions at the same time, they all choose the same

price. it is given by



(11) pt      (1/2)   C (a Wt—i   + (1—a)m) +(a E(w+1 t) + (1—a)E(m.1   t) >
                                       12




where the constant term is ignored for notational simplicity. E(   t) denotes the

expectation of a variable conditional on information available at time t. p. denotes

the nominal price chosen at time t for t and t+1 ; similarly Wt—i denotes the nominal

wage chosen at time t—1 for t—1 and t and is therefore the nominal wage still

prevailing at time t. Equation (11) is the natural extension of (9); it states that

the nominal price is a weighted average of the optimal price for time t, which

depends or the current nominal wage and current nominal money, and of the expected

value of the optimal price far t+1, which depends on expectations of the nominal wage

and nominal money far time t+1. Equation (11) implies that for each interval during

which the nominal price is fixed, the expected average markup is a non decreasing

function of expected average aggregate demand.

     As all wage setters decide about wages at the same time, all wages are the same.

In a way similar to prices, the nominal wage chosen at time t—1 for example is given

by




(12) wt—i =   (I/2)E(bpt.2+(1—b)m_1) +(bE(pt—1) +(1—b)E(mt—1)J


where the constant term is again ignored, for notational simplicity. The nominal wage

chosen at time t—1 is a weighted average of (1) the optimal wage for time t—1, which

depends on Pt—2, the price level still prevailing at time t—1, and on nominal money

at time t—1, and (2) of the expected optimal wage for t, which depends on the price

level and nominal money expected to prevail at time t, as of time t—1. Equation (12)

Implies that, for each period during which the nominal wage is fixed, the expected

average real wage is a non decreasing function of the expected average aggregate

demand for labor.
                                           13




        The dynamic behavior of the economy is now characterised by equation! (11) and

(12),    and a specification of the money process. I solve the system for a general

process for money in the appendix; in the text, I focus on the effects of an

unanticipated permanent increase in nominal money. it is a counterfactual and

unexciting experiment but one which shows most clearly the dynamics of the system.



2) The Adjustment of The Price Level

        Starting from steady state, nominal money increases at time t0, from zero to dm

(by appropriate normalisation). The increase is both unanticipated and permanent.

What are its effects on prices over time ?

        The answer is easy to derive under static expectations and helps develop the

intuition. Using (11) and (12) gives in this case



           =   (1—a)   dm
(13)
           = ab   t-2 + (1—ab)dm   t= 2,4,...


        At time t=O, after the increase in money, wages have not yet increased : firms

increase their nominal price only to the extent they want to increase their markup to

supply the higher level of output. Under constant returns, there is no increase at

time t0 as a=1. At time t=1, wages increase both because prices are higher and

because, unless b=1, a higher real wage is required to 5upply a higher level of

labor. At time t2, prices adjust again and soon.

        We can think of the coefficient on Pt_2 as the degree of price level inertia

if it is close to one, nominal prices adjust slowly to an increase in nominal money.

Thus, under static expectations there is a direct relation between the degree of

price    level inertia, ab, and the inflexibility of mark ups and real wages, as
                                                    14




measured by a and b. The more inflexible markups and real wages, the higher the

degree of price level inertia.

        Under rational expectations, the price level path is instead given by (see

Appendix)


              =   (1   —   (1/2)a   [1 —   (1/4)ab(1+X))   )dm,      0       1X
                  X Pt— + (1—X)dm           ;        tE2,4,...
(14)
                   where X E        (1—/(1—ab))/(1+I(1—ab)) and X has the following properties

                           ab ; X     0 1+ ab     0, X •   1   if ab •   1




        The initial jump in nominal prices is larger than under static expectations. The

degree of price level inertia is now given by X rather than by ab. X is an increasing

function of ab, but is smaller than ab. That the adjustment should be faster under

rational expectations is obvious                at time t=0 for example, price setters take Into

account not only the increase in demand but the forthcoming increase in nominal wages

at time t1. Along the path, price and wage setters take account of current demand

and current prices and wages, but also of expected increases in prices and wages.

Although the adjustment is faster under rational expectations, there is still a

direct relation between the inflexibility of markups and real wages, measured by a

and b, and the degree of price level inertia, measured by ). The process of

adjustment is well described as a wage price spiral in which the speed of the spiral

depends on the desire of workers and firms to increase or maintain their real wages

and markups in response to the increase in demand.

        A numerical example of a path of adjustment is given in table 1, for a            b

0.99.
                                   Table 1
The Eect of an Increase in Moelative and Nominal Prices.

Time       p       w       w—p         y      average     average
                                             real wage*   mark up**

0         0.133   0.0     —0.133     0.877     —0.076
                                                          0.009
1          .133    .247     .144      .877
                                                 007
2          .346    .247    —.100      .654
                                                            007
3          .346    .432     .085      .654
                                                 005
4          .508    .432    —.076      .492
                                                           006
5          .508    .572     .064      .492
                                                 003
6          .629    .572    —.057      .371
                                                           .004
7          .629    .678     .049      .371
                                                 003
8          .721    .678    —.043      .279
                                                           003
9          .721    .757     .036      .279
                                                 002
10         .790    .757    —.033      .210
                                                           003
11         .790    .817     .027      .210
                                                .001
12         .842    .817    —.025      .158
                                                           002


a =   b    0.99

All   numbers in the table should be multiplied by din

* The     average real wage" is the average value of the real wage for the two
period    interval during which the nominal wage is fixed.
** The    "average mark up" is the average value of the mark up during the two
period    interval during which the nominal price is fixed.
                                       15




3) Real wages during the adjustment process

    We start with a puzzle. After the increase in money, price setters desire a

higher markup, wage setters a higher rQal wage. Under static expectations, both sides

fail to take into account future movements in either prices or wages and are

systematically disappointed. This cannot happen however under rational expectations

in particular, as there is no unanticipated movement in money after t0, the rational

expectation path is, after t=O, a perfect foresight path. Thus, as equations (11) and

(12) hold for actual values of prices and wages, it must be the case that workers

must, for every interval during which nominal wages are fixed, obtain a higher real

wage ; firms on the other hand must also, for every interval during which nominal

prices are fixed, obtain a higher markup. How can these be consistent ?

     Table 1 shows that they can be indeed be consistent (the algebra is given in the

appendix). They can be consistent because the two intervals described above do not

coincide but overlap : there is then a path of increases in nominal prices and wages

such that the average markup and the average real wage are higher in turn. This

paradoxical path is the result of the assumption of rational expectations ; the

relevant result is not the paradox, but the existence of a rational expectation path.

     The other and directly related characteristic of the process of adjustment is

that there is no persistent deviation of the real wage from its equilibrium value

the real wage simply oscillates around this value as output returns to equilibrium°.

It is the very nature of the process of adjustment under staggering of wage and price

decisions which implies that there be no systematic relation between real wages and

output in response to demand shocks.

     The two paths of adjustment, under static and rational expectations are

represented in Figure 3, the static expectation path by the dotted line, the rational
w
                               (1)




           (P0,W,)                   ,W1)




wo                   (P0 , W




                                            P
      P0




     fiuvC 3]
                                         16




expectation path by the thick line. Note that the average nominal wage, denoted by ,

is   always on the w(p) locus, the average nominal price, denoted by i,   is   always on

the p(w) locus.



4) 4ggjate Demand and Output

      Until now we have assumed that firms and workers satisfy demand, so that along

the path of adjustment, output and employment are proportional to real money

balances. This may not be the case    even after a monopolist has set a price, it has

the option of either supplying or rationing demand. To see when aggregate demand

determines the outcome, we must return to Figure 1 which is redrawn for convenience

as Figure 4.

       The labor market equilibrium condition under monopolistic competition, which

gives real wages as an increasing function of real money, is drawn as LL ; the goods

market equilibrium condition, which gives markups as an increasing function of real

money, is drawn as 66. The path of adjustment following an increase in nominal money

is given by ABC.. .E : after an increase of nominal money, price setters increase

prices, increasing markups and decreasing real money balances, so that the economy

goes to point B ; in the following period, wage setters take the economy to point C

and so on,

      Let us now draw the equilibrium loci under perfect competition, i.e if neither

firms nor unions exert their monopoly power . The labor market equilibrium locus is

drawn as LL', implying a lower real wage at any level of output, the goads market

equilibrium is drawn as GG', implying a lower markup at any level of output.

Consider now point F on the 66 locus, which gives the monapolisticaily competitive

mark up at a given level of demand ; we can ask by how much we can decrease the
                     LF's '1


log (w/p)

                                      L


                                               L'
                                           G
            G


            L                              G



                L'


                               log (M/p)
                                        17




markup, and still have firms willing to supply this given level of demand. The answer

is that we can decrease the markup until price equals marginal cost ; this happens

precisely on the competitive equilibrium locus, at point F. If we decrease the

markup further, firms will ration demand. The same reasoning applies to workers      at


any level of employment we can decrease the real wage until it reaches its

competitive equilibrium value. Let us shade the region to the right of either LL or

66, in this shaded region, either firms or workers or both will ration demand

outside of this region, they will both satisfy it.

     Thus, demand will determine output and employment if the path of adjustment lies

entirely in the non shaded region. This is the case for the path drawn in Figure 4.

If there is some monopoly power in both goods and labor markets, we know that the

monopolisticaily competitive equilibrium lies strictly inside that region, so that

small enough increases in money will leave the path of adjustment entirely within the

region ; whether this is the case for larger movements in money will depend in

general on the degree of substitution between goods and between labor types, as this

determines the degree of monopoly power and the size of the region, and on the size

of the change in nominal money and the parameters a and b, as they determine the size

of real wage movements during the process of adjustment   Values of a and b close to

unity imply small oscillations of the real wage and the markup, and thus make it more

likely that the path of adjustment remains outside the shaded region. Small values of

$ and o increase the amount the monopoly power of firms and workers respectively,

increase the size of the non shaded region and thus also make demand determination of

output more likely.

    Note that monopolistic   competition plays an important role here and does more
than provide a convenient price setting environment. To get demand determination of
                                          18




output to both decreases and increases in demand, at least within some bounds, one

needs to start from an equilibrium in which, for whatever reason, price exceeds

marginal cost and the wage exceeds marginal utility of leisure. This is what

monopolistic competition provides here.



     To summarize the results of this section, movements in money create, at the

initial pair of prices and wages, desired changes in relative prices (the real wage

and its inverse, the markup). After an increase in money, both relative prices are

too low   firms desire a higher markup, unions a higher real wage   after a decrease

in money, they are both too high. As workers and firms reestablish in turn their

desired relative prices, nominal prices and wages adjust until aggregate demand

returns to its equilibrium value. If relative prices are relatively inflexible, the

movement of nominal prices is slow. During the process of adjustment, the real wage

oscillates around its equilibrium value. During the process of adjustment, movements

in aggregate demand, if they are not too large, determine output which returns

monotonically to its equilibrium value.
                                            19




                          III. Conclusion



     We have seen that the process of adjustment of nominal prices to a change in

aggregate demand is well described as a wage price spiral. After an increase in

demand, attempts by workers and by firms to maintain or increase real wages and mark

ups lead to a general increase in nominal prices and wages which last until output is

back to its equilibrium value. The smaller the desired increase in relative prices,

the slower the wage price spiral, the higher the degree of price level inertia.

      There are at least two directions in which the model presented in this section

should be extended. The first is relatively straightforward and involves looking at a

richer menu o shocks, monetary policies and staggering structures

     The model generates more interesting wage price dynamics if we allow for

monetary policy to respond to wage and price developments. Suppose for example that,

after the initial increase in nominal money, the monetary authority attempts to

maintain the higher level of output by partially accomodating the increase in nominal

prices. In this case, the higher the degree of accomodation, the stronger and the

longer lasting the wage price spiral. The monetary authority is indeed able to

maintain output at a higher level for a longer period of time but at the cost of a

higher initial increase in prices and a longer period of inflation. What the model

does not easily generate however is an accelerating wage price spiral. In the example

sketched above ,   the rate of inflation is largest at the beginning, when output and

employment are highest and desired increases in real wages and mark ups are largest,

and then decreases over time as output returns to normal. As the degree of

accomodation goes to unity, that is as the monetary authority accomodates one for one

nominal price increases, the result is not high inflation but an infinite value of
                                          20




the price level at the time of the initial increase in money. Learning by agents over

time of the goals of the monetary authority is needed to generate accelerating

inflation.

     We have focused only on demand shocks. The model can be used to look at the

effects of supply shocks instead, be they technological shocks   ,   a union cost push or

other shocks to labor supply. An adverse technological shock requires a decrease in

the real wage and a decrease in output. At the initial level of output, real wages

and mark ups are inconsistent. This starts a wage price spiral which stops when real

money balances and output have decreased to the new equilibrium level. Here again,

efforts by the monetary authority to slow the decrease in output lead to more

inflation along the path of adjustment.

     Finally, one would want to study the effects of more realistic staggering

structures, and in particular to relax the assumption of simultaneous price decisions

and simultaneous wage decision;. This can be done by extending the continuous

staggering structure suggested by Calvo E1982], Staggering of price decisions implies

that the elasticity of demand with respect to relative prices will now affect the

speed of adiustment of the price level. Staggering of wage decisions implies that the

elasticity of demand with respect to relative wages will also affect the speed of

adjustment of the price level1.



     The second set of extensions is more difficult and more important.

    For the model presented here to generate large and prolonged effects of

aggregate demand, both   and p must be close to unity   firms must be willing to

supply more output at a slightly higher markup, and unions must be willing to supply

more labor at a slightly higher real wage. This seems indeed to be true
                                       21




microeconomic evidence on markups suggest that they respond weakly to shifts in the

demand for goods and evidence on real wages suggest that real wages respond weakly

and slowly to shifts in demand for labor. But there are serious issues in reconciling

this observed behavior with what we know about technology and tastes i

     In our model, a constant desired markup (a        is indeed justified if marginal

cost is constant (1). But there is much evidence that short run marginal cast is

not constant : inventory behavior points to substantial costs of changing production

(Blanchard 1983], overtime payments, incurred because of costs of changing the number

of workers employed, point to increasing short run marginal cost (Bus 198].

     In our model, a constant desired real wage (b1) is justified if the marginal

disutility of employment is constant (f3l) .   If   fluctuations in employment are

equally shared among workers, and if unions maximize the utility of their

representative members, then p—i corresponds to the inverse of the individual labor

supply elasticity with respect to the real wage. There is substantial microeconomic

evidence however that this elasticity is small, that the individual (p—i) is large.

This suggests two directions of research, both aimed at explaining why b may be close

to unity. The first, which has a long tradition, is to explain why the unions' p may

be smaller than individual p's. The second, which is now the subject of active

research, is to study the role of contracts in labor markets, and to see whether

contracts can explain why real wages seem to respond little to movements in

employment. If contracts take for example the form of free determination by the firm

of the level of employment subject to an agreed upon real wage employment schedule,

and if this real wage employment schedule is relatively flat, the qualitative results

of th paper are likely to go through2.
                                                         22




                                            Appendix



1)The Behavior of the Price Level



       The behavior of prices is first derived for a general process for money, and

then for the specific process described in the text.

       Using equation (12) for both t1 and t+1, taking E(w+11t)       using   iterated

expectations and replacing in (10) gives


                   =    (1/4) ab [Pt—2 + E(pt—1) + pt + E(p+2t)] + (1/4)z
where Zt is given by

          Zt            a(1—b)Lm_1 + E(mt—1) + E(m+Jt) + E(m..2it)]
(Al)
                        +2(1—a)(m +E(m+Jt)]

       Equation (Al) must be solved in two steps. The first is to solve for E(plt—1),

the second for pt. Denote by a star the expectation of a variable conditional on

information available at time t—l. Then taking expectations of both sides conditional

on information available at time t—1 and rearranging gives



(A2)     ab p*t..2 + (2ab—4) p*t + ab P*t+2                   Z*t




Let X be the smallest root of abX2 + (2ab—4) + ab = 0, so that



               =       (1 —   /(1—ab))/(1   + I(1—ab))
                                                         23




       This root is an increasing function of ab, equal to 0 for abO and to 1 for

abl. Solving (A2) by factorization, subject to the constraint that pt does not

explode, gives



(A3)      p*t = X           p*— + (X/ab)    E X    Z*t+2i
                                           i0
so that

          E(pt—1)              X Pt2   + (/ab)     E X E(z..-2 t—l)
                                                  i so




       The second step is to solve for pt. Deriving E(p+2lt) from (A3) and replacing

E(p+2t) and E(ptt—1) in (Al) gives pt



(4—ab(1+))p                 ab(l+X)p—2 + Zt + X E        X    [E(z+2)t—l)+E(z+2+2t)]


       I now consider the specific path of money described in the text. in             increases   at

time t=O from 0 to dm              the increase in unanticipated and permanent.

       To solve 'for         the price path, note that for t>0, there is no uncertainty and thus
(A3) holds 'for actual values of p and z rather than for their expectations. Note also

that, for t>0


                        I

       (X/ab) E     X       Zt÷2   (l—)dm, so that
             i =0


       Pt*2 = X pt + (1—X)dm               for t ' 0


       This gives in particular, for t0, 2 as a function of po. Equation (Al) in turn

provides, for t0, another relation between po and P2. Noting that E(po)—1)0 and

E(p2)0)p2, we have
                                                                   24




        (1—(1/4)ab) Po                 (1/4)abp2+            E1—a+(1/2)a(1—b)]dm



     Solving the two equations in pa and P2 gives the following characterization of

the price level path



            • (1 —       (1/2)a        El —     (1/4)ab(1+X)]           )dni


     Pt          ) Pt—a + (1—X)dm                    for t=2,4,...


2)T he    Behavior        of t he R ealWag



    Let      Xt be the real wage at time t ; from equation (12) at time t—1 and t+1, and

from the above characterization of prices,


    Xo                            pa           — po <    0

                              —
                                  pt    = [(1/2)b(l+X)—1](p                    —    din)

                 a,b      1        (1/2)b(1+X) —         1   < 0                    > 0

                                  Pt+2 =       E(1/2)b(1+(1/X))           —
                                                                               l)(pt*2       —    din)

From the definition of X, we have

         1+ (1 /X ) ) =       1   + (1 + / (1 —'ab) ) / (1 —       /( 1—ab ) ) =           2/(1    —     v'( 1—ab   )




sothat (1/2)b(1+(1/X))                         b/(1—/(1—ab))

    a        1         (1/2)b(1+(1/X))                ab/(1 —   /(1'ab))
    ab           (1 —   /(1—ab))/(1            + /(1—ab))

     (1/2)b(1+(1/X)) — I                   a    <1   + /(1—ab)) —1                 /(1—ab) a 0             Xt+2 < 0


    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                            25




                           Ref erences




Akerlof,    George, "Relative Wages and the Rate of Inflation," Quarterly Journal of

            Economics,LXXXIII (1969),353—74.

                    ,and   Janet Yel len, "A Near     Rational   Model of the Buines Cycle, with
            Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming LXXXIII
            (1985).

Bus,   Mark,    "Essays on the Cyclical Behavior of Cost and Price", Ph.D.                Thesis, MIT,

            August 1985.

Blanchard,     Olivier,    "The   Production and Inventory Behavior of the American Automobile

            Industry,"     Journal    of Political Economy, 91—3, 365—400.

                       ,   "Price    Asynchronization and Price Level Inertia," in Indexation,

           Contractiçand_Debt man__Inflation World, Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario

           Simonsen, eds (Cambridge          MIT Press) pp.3—24.

                       ,
                           and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand

           Externalities, and Real Effects of Nominal Money," mimeo MIT, November 1985.

Bronfenbrenner, Martin, and Franklyn Holtzman, "A Survey of Inflation Theory," in

            Surveys of Economic Theory Vol I (American Economic Association MacMillan,

            1968)   pp.4—lO7.
Calvo, Guillermo, "On the Microfoundations of Staggered Nominal                  Contracts :   a First

           Approximation,"        mimeo, Columbia University,      January 1982.

Feliner, William, "Demand Inflation, Cost Inflation and Collective Bargaining," in
           The Public Stake in Union Power,           F. Bradley ed. , (Charlottesviile 1959)pp,
                                  26




         225—54.

Fethke, Gary and Andrew Policano, "Wage Contingencies, the Pattern of Negotiation and

         Aggregate Implications of Alternative Contract Structures," Journal of

         Monetary Economics, XIV (1984), 151—71.

Taylor, John, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of Political

         Econom, LXXXVIII (1980), 1—24,

Tobin, James, "The Wage Price Mechanism: Overview of the Conference," jr The

        Econometrics of Price Determination, 0. Eckstein, ed., (Washington: Board of

        Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1970).
                                           27




                                            Footnotes




See for example "A Survey of   Inflation   Theory," by Fl. Brofenbrenner and F. Holtzman,

written in 1965.

2
     This point was in fact made many years before the rational expectation
"revolution" by W. Feliner (1959, pp 235—236).

     The model is agnostic as to whether unions are maximising the utility of their

representative member, or maximising some other objective function. This however

affects the interpretation and the likely value of the parameter       below, raising an

issue to which we shall return later.

     As we take the number of firms as given, we do not need to introduce explicitly

the fixed cost faced by each firm. The analysis in the text is consistent with the

presence o4 such a fixed cost, Thus while we rule out decreasing marginal cost, we do

not rule out decreasing average cost.

     Whenever we refer to the nominal price, the reader is to understand, whenever

relevant, the logarithm of the nominal price. The same applies to the nominal wage

and nominal money.

       In the absence of staggered price and wage setting, the equilibrium, each

period, is the equilibrium described in Section I. Thus, dynamics arise in this model

only from the presence of staggered price and wage setting. Eliminating all other

sources of dynamics allows to focus more simply on the dynamic effects of price and

wage staggering.

    The staggering structure we consider is particularly vulnerable to the criticism

that it would not survive endogenization of staggering decisions. It is clearly in

the interest of firms to coordinate price changes with wage changes. Feplacing the
                                                28




decisions would be more attractive in this respect.             It would however complicate the

algebra substantially. For further discussion and work on endogenous staggering, see

Fethke and Policano (1984)

       Equation (11) is not    the rule which comes out of expected profit maximisation by

firms over periods t and t+1, subject to the constraint that the nominal price be the

same in both periods, and the equilibrium condition that all relative prices be equal

to one. It may be useful to compare the two rules in the simple case of constant

returns to scale.

Under constant returns, (11) reduces to



   =   (1/2)   (Wt—i +   E(w+1t))


whereas the price obtained from explicit profit maximisation is, assuming the

discount factor on second period profit to be equal to              (letters now denote levels,

not logarithms):



   =
       K   E(Mt/(Mt+BE(M+(t))(4 +



Comparing the two expressions shows three main differences. The first is the presence

of the discount rate. The second is the presence of the covariance of Ni and W at t+1.

The third is that P is an arithmetic rather than a geometric average of W at time t

and t+1. An other way of stating the differences between the two rules is that, under

the correct rule, the price is an average of current and expected wages, with weights

which depend on current money and the joint disribution of            future   money and future

nominal wages.

If the unit    period is short, so   that (3   is    close to one and E(M.1 It) is close to N1,

then (11) is a qood approximation      to   the correct price rule. Our reason for using
                                        29




that the approximation is not the source of the results we focus on.

     This suggests that explaining the behavior of relative prices, quite apart from

nominal rigidities should be high on the research agenda. This appears indeed to have

been the approach followed in the 1960's (as summarized by Tobin U970] for example).

Research was focused on documenting and explaining the slow and small reaction of

wages to unemployment, the slope of the short run Phillips curve, or the

inflexibility of mark ups. Nominal price and wage inertia were then obtained not from

staggering but from assumptions about expectations.

10    The oscillations are partly the result of the simple staggering structure we

use. For more complex structures, such as continuous uniform staggering of price and

wage decisions, the aggregate real wage may not oscillate at all.

11    One can also allow for an n—step (rather than one—step as in the text)

production process and allow for staggering of price decisiosn along the production

process. This has two relevant implications. It increases the degree of price level

inertia and may generate systematic movements in the structure of relative prices in

response to changes in nominal money. See Blanchard [19831.

'     Akerlof   and Yelleri E19GJ have recently constructed a macroeconomic model along

these lines ; they formalize the labor market as characterized by efficiency wages.
