                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     RURAL DEMOGRAPHY, PUBLIC SERVICES AND LAND RIGHTS IN AFRICA:
              A VILLAGE-LEVEL ANALYSIS IN BURKINA FASO

                                        Margaret S. McMillan
                                         William A. Masters
                                         Harounan Kazianga

                                        Working Paper 17718
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17718


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2011




We are grateful to the NBER African Successes Project for financial support, and thank Moussa Kabore
and colleagues in the Direction de la Prospective et des Statistiques Agricoles et Alimentaires (DPSAA)
of Burkina Faso for survey implementation, Jose Castillo for research assistance, and Jun Folledo
of IFPRI for GIS calculations. The paper was much improved by valuable suggestions from Will Dow
and other participants at the Zanzibar Conference of the NBER African Successes Project, August
3-5, 2011, as well as comments from Rohini Pande and Remi Jedwab. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Margaret S. McMillan, William A. Masters, and Harounan Kazianga. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rural Demography, Public Services and Land Rights in Africa: ¸˛A Village-Level Analysis
in Burkina Faso
Margaret S. McMillan, William A. Masters, and Harounan Kazianga
NBER Working Paper No. 17718
December 2011
JEL No. F20,H41,I18,J11,O12,O20

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper uses historical census data from Burkina Faso to characterize local demographic pressures
associated with internal migration into river valleys after Onchocerciasis eradication, combined with
a new survey of village elders to document change over time and differences across villages in local
public goods provision, market institutions and land use rights. We hypothesize that higher local population
densities are associated with more public goods and a transition from open-access to regulated land
use. Controlling for province or village fixed effects, we find that villages’ variance in population
associated with proximity to rivers is closely correlated with higher levels of infrastructure, markets
and individual land rights, as opposed to familial or communal rights. Responding to population growth
with both improved public services and private property rights is consistent with both scale effects
in public good provision, and changes in the scarcity of land.


Margaret S. McMillan                             Harounan Kazianga
Tufts University                                 Oklahoma State University
Department of Economics                          harounan.kazianga@okstate.edu
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

William A. Masters
Tufts University
william.masters@tufts.edu
               Rural Demography, Public Services and Land Rights in Africa:
                        A Village-Level Analysis in Burkina Faso



Introduction and Motivation
       An unusual factor in Africa’s 20th-century agricultural development was a relatively low
initial level of average population density coupled with unusually high rates of rural population
growth over the last 30 years. As shown in Figure 1, Africa’s year-to-year rate of rural
population growth rose above that of Asia around 1975, peaked in 1990, and only recently has
fallen below the highest levels ever seen in other regions. All regions have seen a rise and then
fall in their annual rates of rural population growth, but in the post-1975 period Africa’s growth
rate rose more recently and reached a higher level for a longer time than that of other regions.
       This paper investigates the link between rural population and the local institutions and
infrastructure needed for market development in agriculture. We use spatial differences in
settlement patterns and migration exposure to test how rural public goods and land-use rights
have responded to demographic change. Our central hypothesis is that recent increases in rural
population densities are associated with a wider spread of rural infrastructure, public services and
local marketplaces; and a transition from open-access to regulated land use, including stronger
individual property rights and more reliance on the rule of law to adjudicate disputes.
       Our data come from Burkina Faso, a landlocked West African country of about 13
million people. As shown in Figure 1, from 1950 to 2005 Burkina Faso’s rural population
growth rate rose even more dramatically than that of Africa as a whole, to a peak above 2.5% per
year. Burkina’s rural population growth rate is projected to decline rapidly in the coming
decades, but will remain well above zero until the absolute size of the urban population becomes
large enough for the annual growth of towns and cities to absorb each year’s increase in the
country’s entire population. Figure 1 shows that rapid growth in Burkina Faso’s rural population
was not uniform in time, with a temporary reversal in the 1980s that may have been associated
with migration to Cote d’Ivoire or other factors, followed by a burst of catch-up growth and
downward projections until urbanization is sufficient to achieve zero rural population growth
around 2050.


                                                                                                     2
       Historically, Burkina Faso has had large movements of rural people to its own cities and
a large migration to coastal Cote d’Ivoire after colonization. A large number of those migrants
later returned, including many who were forcibly repatriated following civil unrest in Cote
d’Ivoire starting in the late 1990s. In addition, the donor-funded Onchocerciasis Control
Program quickly eradicated river blindness starting in the 1970s, leading to large population
movements into river valleys. These demographic shocks affected villages across Burkina Faso
in different ways depending on their location, creating unusual variance in subsequent rural
population density with which to study the impact of rural demography on local institutions and
infrastructural investments.
       We hypothesize that changes in rural population growth change the payoffs from
collective action, making it relatively more urgent to develop market infrastructure and
institutions. This hypothesis follows Boserup (1965), who argued that rising rural population
densities create incentives not only for farm-level adoption of more input-intensive techniques
and “induced invention” of new technologies in response to factor scarcity as suggested by Hicks
(1932), but also induced institutional changes to allocate newly-scarce natural resources more
efficiently. A link between rural population density and rural public goods could also be due to
political pressures or indivisibilities and scale effects in the provision of infrastructure and
institutions. Both relative-price and scale effects could be subject to time lags, leading rural
population growth to have a Malthusian effect in the short run, even as it facilitates the
institutional and technological innovations needed for later agricultural productivity growth.
       Modern analyses of how population density and factor scarcity affect agricultural
development were pioneered by Hayami and Ruttan (1971) for the U.S. and Japan, and tested in
a large subsequent literature such as Olmstead and Rhode (1993). Only a few of these papers
(e.g. Lin 1995) focus on the emergence and adoption of institutions; most ask how institutions
affect technology adoption, such as Kazianga and Masters (2002, 2006). Focusing on rural
demography also expands on our other previous work regarding the role of environmental factors
in economic growth (Masters and McMillan 2001) and African policy choices (McMillan 2001,
McMillan and Masters 2003). Here, we use within-country variation in village size and access to
public services, infrastructure and property rights, to test how the public sector has responded to
rural demographic change.

                                                                                                      3
          Our focus on the specific challenge of rural population growth for agricultural
development follows Johnston and Kilby (1975) among others. Most of the development
economics literature concerned with demography has focused either on demographic transition
in the population as a whole (including the demographic “drag” or “dividend” from age structure
emphasized by Bloom and Williamson, 1998), or the structural transformation from farm to
nonfarm employment in terms of output and employment shares (including the “growth bonus”
associated with shifting from a low productivity to a high productivity sector as in Temple,
2005). Focusing on demographic conditions within rural areas addresses a distinctive aspect of
Africa’s post-independence economic decline, and grounds for optimism about the future as rural
infrastructure and institutions adapt to higher levels of population density and the speed of
further demographic change slows down.
          The motivation for our approach begins with an economic view of rural demography.
Simple accounting ensures that each locality’s rural population growth is its natural increase
(births minus deaths, which in turn are determined by age structure as well as age-specific
mortality and fertility), plus or minus each year’s net migration to urban or other rural areas.
From an economic point of view, however, both fertility and migration are choice variables, and
mortality may also be influenced by investment in health. Given this endogeneity, identification
of a potentially causal effect of demography requires an exogenous shock to rural population size
that occurs with sufficient speed and magnitude to induce a measurable societal response.
          Our study design takes advantage of Burkina Faso’s unusual demographic history, which
includes two large waves of exogenous migration into specific rural areas from the 1970s. One
wave flowed southwest out of the Central Plateau towards rivers in the Volta Valley, where it
converged with another wave returning from Cote d’Ivoire. We use three rounds of census data
in 1985, 1996 and 2006 to capture the resulting variation in village population, and compare that
to variance in institutions and infrastructure as recalled by focus group interviews of village
elders.
          Our work contributes to an important gap in the literature on institutions and economic
development identified by Pande and Udry (2006) who argue that “the research agenda identified
by the institutions and growth literature is best furthered by the analysis of much more micro-
data than has typically been the norm in this literature.” Specifically, we study both spatial and

                                                                                                     4
temporal variation in rural public services and property rights, focusing on diversity across
villages in a setting with wide variation in exposure to clearly exogenous demographic shocks.
The closest antecedent is probably Grimm and Klasen (2008), who test for endogenous adoption
of land titles at the village level on Sulawesi in Indonesia. Our surveys include land rights and
also consider a very wide range of other institutions, public services, and infrastructure used for
market exchange. Methodologically, our use of focus groups to obtain village-level recall data
on the location and availability of public services and land rights follows Chattopadhyay and
Duflo (2004), building on a long tradition of participatory surveys in rural areas (e.g. Chambers
1994). This approach allows us to ask about many different types of public services as seen from
the villagers’ point of view.
       This paper aims only to demonstrate the value of villagers’ recall data in establishing
stylized facts about how rural public services and land rights vary across space and time. In
future work, this type of data could also be used to analyze causal effects of public services and
institutions on economic outcomes. For example, Besley (1995) and others have found evidence
that institutions significantly affect investment outcomes in rural Africa; Pande and Udry (2006)
provide a summary of these studies. In Burkina Faso, Kazianga and Masters (2002) found that
stronger cropland tenure was associated with more intensive soil and water conservation. Our
approach to changes in village-level infrastructure and institutions is also relevant to the
mechanisms by which large-scale public health interventions influence economic development,
as in Acemoglu and Johnson (2007), Bleakley (2007) and Cutler et al. (2010).
       In the next section, we describe the major exogenous population shifts that might permit
identification of how changes in rural demography affect public goods provision. We then turn to
our empirical strategy and a description of our data. In section four we present and discuss our
results. Section five concludes.


Historical Background
       Since independence in 1960, Burkina Faso has experienced two major policy-induced
changes in settlement patterns. The first began in 1974 when the Onchocerciasis Control
Program (OCP) was launched by the World Bank to control river blindness in seven West
African countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, Niger, and Togo. The

                                                                                                      5
second occurred from the late 1990s until 2002 when up to one million Burkinabe returned from
Cote d’Ivoire to escape violence and a suspension of immigrants’ rights in that country. Since
our ability to draw a causal link between population growth and institutional change hinges on
these two events, we describe them in more detail below.
       The OCP is widely considered to be among the most successful public health programs
ever launched in Sub-Saharan Africa. Onchocerciasis, or “river blindness”, is primarily a rural
disease that affects Sub-Saharan Africa more than anywhere else in the world. The disease is
spread through bites from black flies of the genus Simulium, which transmit the larvae of a
filarial worm, Onchocerca volvulus. The worms multiply only in the human body, where they
cause debilitating symptoms that include blindness, and are transmitted only by the black fly,
which lives in proximity to fast-moving rivers. The OCP was a multilateral effort that initially
covered eleven countries, including Burkina Faso. The program involved weekly aerial treatment
and ground-level treatment of black fly breeding grounds. Annual drug treatments offered
immediate relief from the symptoms and elimination of nearly all offspring of the adult worm.
       Figure 2 provides a map of Onchocerciasis prevalence in and around Burkina Faso prior
to the OCP, and afterwards. Prevalence rates were recorded at above 60% of surveyed people
living in the lower Volta River valley before the OCP, which almost completely eradicated the
disease in target countries but left prevalence rates unchanged in Sierra Leone. Eradication was
incomplete in Guinea, Togo and Benin. Today, the disease is no longer considered a threat in the
original control zone, which has consequently attracted in-migration from other rural areas.
       Anticipating in-migration to newly attractive river valleys, the government of Burkina
Faso created a special national agency—the Volta Valley Authority (AVV)—and gave the
agency control of 75% of the targeted river basins. Figure 3 shows these locations, and the
“planned” villages to which it provided financial and institutional support. However, the pace of
spontaneous settlement soon outgrew the ability of the AVV to finance and create sufficient
numbers of sponsored settlements. As a result, there were sizable intra- and interregional
migration flows as documented by McMillan et al. (1992), typically from the drier northeast and
central plateau to lower altitude river valleys, leading to the actual pattern of inter-regional
migration illustrated in Figure 4, from McMillan et al. (1993).



                                                                                                    6
       Figure 4 documents the pattern of human migration that occurred in the late 1970s and
1980s. The arrows in the figure originate in the area of out-migration and the direction of
movement. Dashed arrows indicate net human migration, while solid arrows indicate the path of
transhumant (seasonal) livestock movements which formed travel corridors for migrants. The
shading in the figure indicates how heavy the degree of net settlement was by province. This
pattern of rural-to-rural migration reflected the economic opportunities opened up by river
blindness control in the lower parts of the Volta River valleys, relative to the extreme poverty
experienced in high density, higher-altitude areas with less disease pressure prior to the OCP.
Figure 5 illustrates how, during colonial times, population had accumulated upstream in the
Central Plateau, leaving the downstream segments of the three Volta River valleys with
extremely low population densities. Some of population movement towards these downstream
river valleys was planned as part of the OCP, but by 1983 more than 80 percent of the increase in
cultivated land in Burkina’s river basins could be attributed to spontaneous settlers (McMillan et
al, 1993).
       Also notable and of particular importance for our study is the fact that the lower parts of
the Volta River valleys that attracted heavy in-migration are relatively accessible from Cote
d’Ivoire. The domestic migration triggered by the OCP was therefore compounded by
repatriation of migrants from Cote d’Ivoire, who converged on the same newly habitable
provinces in southern Burkina Faso. Some of this return migration from Cote d’Ivoire could have
happened as early as the mid-1980s due to changes in cocoa prices that made migration to Cote
d’Ivoire less profitable than it once had been. Repatriation then accelerated sharply in the 1990s
due to political changes in Cote d’Ivoire. After the death of the autocratic ruler Felix Houphet-
Boigny in 1993, his successor Henri Konan Bedie introduced the concept of “Ivorian-ness” in
1995, allegedly to deny Ivorian citizenship to his main political rival, Alassane Ouattara, thereby
excluding him from office. Bedie insisted that Ouattara, a Muslim from the north of the country,
was Burkinabe. Subsequently, attacks on people of foreign descent became increasingly
widespread (Human Rights Watch 2001). By that time, more than one quarter of Cote d’Ivoire’s
population consisted of immigrants who had arrived since independence, of whom the
overwhelming majority had come from Burkina Faso. As shown in Figure 6, the Cote d’Ivoire
census of 1998 identified about 2.25 million Burkinabe living in Cote d’Ivoire, which was close

                                                                                                     7
to 20% of Burkina’s total population at that time. Four decades of peace and stability in Cote
d’Ivoire came to an abrupt end on December 24, 1999, when the military, under the leadership of
General Robert Guei, overthrew the elected government of Konan Bedie in the country’s first
coup d’état. Although the coup was ostensibly prompted by soldiers’ unhappiness over pay and
conditions, it soon became apparent that, like Bedie, General Guei was also ready to incite ethnic
and religious rivalries in order to remove political opposition. Continuing the theme of “Ivorian-
ness”, Guei introduced even stricter eligibility requirements for the 2000 presidential elections,
once again excluding Alassane Ouattara on the basis of his alleged links with Burkina Faso.
       Though exact numbers are difficult to come by, it is estimated that between 1999 and
2002 hundreds of thousands of Burkinabe were repatriated as a result of political unrest and
worsening economic conditions in Cote d’Ivoire. They returned by rail, road, and on footpaths.
Because of a lack of data, it is impossible to determine exactly where all of these emigrants
decided to settle. But it is unlikely that many of them went back to the same impoverished
Central Plateau they had originally fled. Much more likely is that these emigrants settled in the
OCP river basins closer to Cote d’Ivoire, as suggested by McMillan et al. (1993).


Empirical Strategy, Data, and Descriptive Statistics
       Our evidence on village-level access to public services, infrastructure and institutions
comes from a novel survey conducted for this project by the Burkina Faso Office of Agricultural
Statistics in January through June 2010. This survey asked groups of village elders to discuss
and describe the history of the facilities around them, recording the date of any changes in the
distance to each kind of facility and any changes in property-rights arrangements. From those
underlying observations, we construct a time-varying index of the village’s proximity to public
services, public infrastructure, religious services, and markets, as well as time-varying indicators
of property rights over land. We combine these indexes with population estimates for each
village from the Burkina Faso national censuses of 1986, 1996, and 2006 to test whether cross-
sectional and time-series variance in population size can help explain variance in the provision of
public services, infrastructure, market institutions and property rights. To help identify a causal
effect of demographic change on our outcome variables, we use the exogenous pressures on
population described in the previous section.

                                                                                                      8
       The survey instrument is provided in the appendix. It was administered by experienced
enumerators employed for Burkina’s annual agricultural survey, the structure of which is
designed to accommodate new survey modules. The enumerators began by assembling a focus
group of village elders and officials who were asked a series of detailed questions regarding
various types of public services, infrastructure, and institutions available to them. For each type
of public-sector amenity, we asked how far villagers had to travel to reach the nearest point of
service, at present and in previous years, along with the date of any change. The section on
property rights did the same for institutions, for example by posing the following question: Can
land be sold in your village? If the group agrees that the answer to this question is yes, the
interviewer then asks: since when could land be sold in your village? Questions posed in this
way allow us to construct time varying indexes over multiple amenities from the point of view of
the villagers themselves. Our results focus on two kinds of variables: travel distances to public
services or infrastructure, and categorical indicators of land use rights, both as reported for each
census year.
       The travel distances to collective amenities are grouped into four categories: (1) Public
Services and Utilities, defined as the administrative office used to register births, any savings and
loan facility, any fixed-line telephone, or any mobile phone reception; (2) Public Infrastructure,
defined as a road that is accessible by truck all year, a road accessible by truck seasonally, a bus
stop, a primary school, a secondary school, or a health center; (3) Religious Services, defined as
any church, mosque, or temple; and (4) Markets, defined as any market with storage facilities,
any livestock market, or a private shop. These are all the distances for which our group-
interview technique elicited unambiguous agreement in at least 700 of the 730 villages. Other
questions, such as distance to water wells, bridges and electricity supplies, elicit agreement less
often, perhaps because those amenities are less salient to villagers’ lives or their use is more
varied among the respondents. The distances to collective amenities were then aggregated in
each of three ways. First, we consider the distance one must travel to have access to all the
services in a given category, i.e. the distance associated with the farthest one. Second, we
consider the average distance to all of the services in the group, i.e. the arithmetic mean of each
distance. Finally, we consider the distance to any of the listed services, i.e. the minimum
distance among them.

                                                                                                       9
       Categorical indicators of land rights address three kinds of land use. First, we ask
whether use rights over crop land are undefined or held by individuals, families, or the
community. Then we ask whether cropland had ever been rented or sold, which we take to
indicate the presence of a land market. Finally, we ask whether villagers recognize a formal
authority that regulates access to pasture land, forests and potentially cropped land.
       Our sample of villages consists of 747 sites that had previously been selected by the
Office of Agricultural Statistics for their nationally representative agricultural survey conducted
annually since the early 1990s. In this context, villages are very small, averaging about 1,500
people. Their boundaries can change somewhat from decade to decade, as some households enter
or split off to form new settlements associated with the village. Our final dataset consists of 730
villages whose recorded names are the same across the three censuses and our new survey, at a
correctly recorded GIS location. We use year and region fixed effects for each of Burkina’s 45
provinces in order to focus on spatial variation across villages within relatively small
administrative units, as well as village fixed effects to control for time-invariant village
characteristics not included in our dataset.
       Table 1 presents the proportion of all observations with each category of property right,
as reconstructed for the census years of 1985, 1996 and 2006. For example, rights over cropland
are not defined in 14.4 percent of village-year observations, implying a complete absence of rule
of law over this resource. Ten percent of observations involved cropland rights controlled by
communal authorities, almost 60 percent had cropland rights held by families, and almost 16
percent reported cropland rights held by individuals. Descriptive statistics on all variables as
used in the regressions are provided in Table 2, separately for each year to reveal the time trends.
Public services become more closely available and property rights are more tightly regulated in
more recent years. Also, note that the average population of all surveyed villages grows from
1985 to 1996, but then falls in 2006. There is likely to have been systematic undercounting of
the rural population in 2006, which is why the Burkina government is planning a new census
several years ahead of its decennial schedule.
       To overcome endogeneity between a village’s amenities and its population size, we
instrument the village’s population by its straight-line distance to any river from which
Onchocerciasis could have been eradicated. We expect distance to the river to be inversely

                                                                                                   10
correlated with population size in all survey years (1985, 1996 and 2006), as households moved
into the river valleys after 1974. To account for time-varying migration and population growth
as well as differences in enumeration and the quality of each census, we interact distance to river
with period dummies to allow for differential effects over time. The advantage of using this
instrument to proxy for demographic factors associated with river blindness control is that it is
“clean”, and not influenced in any way by administrative boundaries or ex-post classifications
that might drive correlations with infrastructure, public services or land use. This strategy does
have some disadvantages, of course: distance to rivers may turn out to be a weak instrument for
population size, and it may not be valid to exclude distance to river from our main regression if
infrastructure, public services and land rights are correlated with distance to rivers independently
of its influence on population size. As a result, we may not be able to interpret our estimated
coefficients on instrumented population as a causal effect of population change alone. The
coefficients and significance levels, even in our IV regressions, remain correlations that could
confound the effects of population size with other features of proximity to rivers that might repel
or attract people and also influence infrastructure, public services and land rights.
       One way to test the degree to which exogenous OCP treatment made river valleys newly
attractive to people, and whether the resulting demographic change was associated with any
political response in terms of infrastructure, public services and land rights, is to split the sample
into treatment and placebo regions. Inside treatment regions, the OCP made village locations
nearer river valleys newly attractive after 1974. In the placebo regions, the relative attractiveness
of proximity to rivers did not change. To demarcate the OCP-treated regions shown in Figures 2,
3 and 4, we use the province boundaries shown in Figure 4 around the shaded, migrant-receiving
areas. These provinces contained land that became newly attractive over time, presumably
because the black flies that transmit Onchocerciasis were eliminated after 1974.
       The empirical strategy we use results in a set of two-stage least squares (2SLS)
regressions, asking whether demographic changes associated with the attractiveness of a
village’s proximity to rivers are correlated with the spread of rural public services, infrastructure,
and market institutions serving that village. Our paper does not identify the mechanism by
which more populated villages might obtain more rural public services, infrastructure, or market
institutions: instead, our goal is to test whether our new type of data can reveal an informative

                                                                                                     11
relationship, exploiting an unusual natural experiment in the relative attractiveness of village
locations across Burkina Faso.


Estimating Equations and Results
Our estimation begins with a set of descriptive OLS regressions showing the correlations
between village-level population and public infrastructure or institutions, controlling for year and
province fixed effects, using the following specification:

                                 t   Pj t X j  t  j
                             Ij k                             kt       (1)


where I is our measure of infrastructure or institution of type k serving village j at time t from the
survey data, and P is our measure of the total population in village j at year t from the census
data, and  are time dummies. X controls for province fixed effects, and in robustness tests also
controls for the ethnic composition of village population. Our hypothesis is that that β>0, as
larger populations facilitate the provision of public goods and market institutions, due either to
relative scarcities as in Boserup (1965) or to indivisibilities at the relevant scale of population
size.
        Estimates of regression (1) are shown in table 3, where X controls only for province fixed
effects. Columns 1-12 all concern the presence of public services. In columns 1-4 the dependent
variable is the maximum distance one must travel to have access to all amenities in each
category. In columns 5-8, the dependent variable is the average distance one must travel to
access any amenity in each category, and in columns 9-12 the dependent variable is the
minimum distance one must travel to access at least one of them. Both the distances and village
population are expressed in natural logs, so that the coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities.
We find that larger villages have closer amenities in 11 of the 12 regressions; the one exception
is column (2), where only the time trend is significant.
        Columns 13-19 refer to land rights. The dependent variable takes the value of 1 if our
respondents report that this type of land-use rights is used in the village, and 0 otherwise.
Because our model contains province or village fixed effects, we estimate the relationship
between population and land rights using a linear probability model. Coefficients can be
interpreted as the change in the probability that a certain type of land right exists when the

                                                                                                      12
natural log of population increases by 1. In a larger village, land ownership is less likely to be
familial (as opposed to individual or communal), but the more important correlation is with the
presence of land market transactions: having a larger village population by 1 log point is
associated with a 1.9% higher probability of having had land transactions.
       Table 4 repeats the diagnostic OLS regression with additional controls for the number of
land chiefs who participated in the group interview, as well as the number of ethnic groups and
number of clans reported to be present in the village, as a crude approximation of the village’s
social fragmentation which might influence political cooperation and collective action for public
goods provision (e.g. Alesina and La Ferrara 2005). The correlation between population size and
access to public goods is usually but not always robust to these controls. Estimated coefficients
on population size are somewhat smaller when controlling for ethnic diversity and number of
land chiefs, but contrary to some hypotheses the more diverse villages actually have more public
infrastructure than the less diverse ones. In the absence of any clear identification strategy
regarding fragmentation, however, for this paper we focus on the main relationship concerning
total population size.
       Finding significant coefficients in these OLS regressions is not surprising, as people
could choose to locate in villages with closer access to public institutions and services, or both
could be caused by something else. To overcome endogeneity, we use instrumental variables for
population, so that the only variation in village population used in our second stage regression
will be associated with distance to rivers and changes over time.
       The first stage regression of our 2SLS system is specified as follows:


                                                                                   ( )


where R is the log of geographic distance to the nearest river in village j, T are year dummies for
1996 and 2006, and M is controls imposed through province or village fixed effects. When using
the resulting predicted village populations, the coefficient estimate from equation (1) could be
interpreted as a causal effect of population size only if a village’s distance to rivers had no other
channel of influence on the provision of public services and land rights. Our goal in this paper is
simply to test whether such a link exists; if so, the mechanism could be addressed in future work.

                                                                                                     13
         Any correlation between a village’s population and its distance to rivers might vary over
time, so the first stage regression includes time dummies and interaction terms. The OCP started
in 1974 and our observations are in 1985, 1996 and 2006, so we expect that distance to rivers
might be most important for population in the earlier years. We also expect that distance to rivers
might matter more in the regions where OCP had been active, so we divide the sample between
villages in the treatment provinces and villages in placebo regions where this shock did not
occur.
         First stage results are shown in Table 5. Columns 1-3 use province fixed effects, for the
country as a whole and then for the placebo and treatment regions only. Columns 4-6 do the
same using village fixed effects. The point estimates in row one indicate that villages further
from rivers are significantly smaller: a one percent increase in travel time to a river reduces
village population size by 0.247 percent. The magnitude of this effect is roughly twice as large
for villages in the Volta Valley region as it is for villages outside this region. The interaction
terms in rows 4 and 5 indicate that the influence of distance to river on population size did not
diminish significantly between 1985 and 1996 and thus the difference between treatment and
control group persists. In 2006, however, the coefficient on the interaction term is positive and
significant for the entire sample and is driven by the treatment group. Taken together, the point
estimates on distance to river of -0.312 and distance to river interacted with the year dummy for
2006 of +0.27 imply that in 2006, a one percent increase in the distance to a river reduces the
population size by 0.047 percent in the treatment villages. This result is consistent with our
expectation that the size of the effect would diminish over time. Beneath each column, we
provide an F-statistic on the joint significance of all instruments. The null hypothesis that the
instruments are jointly irrelevant in the regression can be rejected at the one-percent level for all
cases. Additionally, the F-statistics meet the rule of thumb cut-off suggested by Stock and Yogo
(2005) in five of six cases (all but the last column), which is an indication of the explanatory
power of our instruments.
         Tables 6.1-6.6 report our instrumental variable (IV) estimates, using the same sequence
of regressions as shown in Table 3 using OLS. Below each column of Table 6, we report the
2SLS regression’s Hansen J statistic and the associated p-value. The p-values are generally well



                                                                                                     14
above 0.10 indicating that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that our excluded instruments are
uncorrelated with the error term in most instances.
       It is notable that the IV coefficients on village population are generally larger and more
significant than the OLS estimates in Table 3. A potential explanation is that the OLS estimates
reflect the average population effect on the outcomes variables (e.g Card 1995, 2001). On the
other hand, the IV estimates reflect the effect of population in villages where the instruments
induced population changes (Imbens and Angrist 1994).
       Table 6.1 shows our basic result with province fixed effects, for the entire country.
Variation in a village’s population associated with proximity to rivers is positively associated
with having more public services, infrastructure, religious facilities, and markets, as well as more
individual land rights (as opposed to familial or communal), more land rental or sale
transactions, and regulated access to forest land. The only unexpected coefficient is in column
19, showing less regulated access to crop land, but that is only weakly significant and arises in
the context of column 13 indicating rights are more likely to be vested in individuals than in
families or communal authorities.
       Table 6.2 shows the same regression with village fixed effects. Coefficients for public
services, religious facilities, and land regulations are no longer significant, but the coefficients on
infrastructure, markets, individual land rights and land markets remain large and significant.
These amenities show the strongest link to village population changes over this 20-year time
period, controlling for common national time trends and any time-invariant characteristics of the
villages other than their population.
       Tables 6.3 and 6.4 show the corresponding pair of results for the Volta Valley region
only, first with province and then with village fixed effects. Here coefficients are generally
larger, but significance levels are sometimes smaller perhaps due to the smaller sample size.
With village fixed effects, two of the three infrastructure variables and also individual land
ownership rights and land markets remain significantly linked to instrumented population size.
       Tables 6.5 and 6.6 show the relevant results for the villages outside our treatment region.
This is a type of placebo regression, although in this case we do not expect the link between
population and public services to disappear entirely. Indeed in these non-treatment villages, the
coefficients on instrumented population remain significant for religious facilities and a few other

                                                                                                    15
amenities when using province fixed effects, although even these become insignificant when
village fixed effects are used.
       So far, we have shown that variance in village population is robustly correlated with the
provision of local public services, private markets and individual property rights. The link is
particularly clear when instrumenting population by proximity to rivers, especially within the
Volta Valley where the OCP shock occurred. This correlation between village population and
public amenities could be driven by various possible mechanisms to be investigated in future
work, including scale economies in the public sector and the relative scarcity of natural
resources.
       Whatever mechanisms are involved, the magnitude by which larger villages obtain more
public services and also have more access to private markets and individual land rights is
economically significant. The order of magnitude can be described by comparison to the time
trends sweeping Burkina Faso as a whole, driven by national policy and other changes. The
point estimates of elasticities reported in Table 6.1 give us the effect of a 1% increase in village
population, which we can compare to the effect of time associated with our dummy variables for
1996 and 2006. For example, using column 2 for proximity to every item of public infrastructure
(including the farthest), villages that are one percent larger in terms of population size have
infrastructure that is 0.32 percent closer. In contrast, the time trend for new infrastructure
projects improved their proximity by 16 percent and 74 percent from 1985 to 1996 and 2006
respectively. Over a 10 year period, village population is likely to increase by much more than
one percent. For example, using the average rural population growth rate of 2 percent, village
population would increase by 25 percent. The implied reduction in travel distance to public
infrastructure is 0.32*25 or 8 percent. Alternatively, a doubling of village size is roughly
equivalent to a decade or two of time trend for most of the variables we consider.


Conclusion
This paper uses variance in rural demography associated with proximity to rivers in Burkina
Faso to test whether villages with larger populations obtain closer provision of public services,
public infrastructure, religious facilities and markets, and have more market-oriented property
rights over land use. Our data on infrastructure and institutions come from a new survey of

                                                                                                    16
village elders, which was designed to document change over time and differences across
villages. We find strong links between larger rural population, more local public goods provision
and individual property rights, controlling for either province or village fixed effects and time
trends.
          One feature of our study is to demonstrate the use of village elders’ recall data in
constructing time-varying indexes of local infrastructure and institutions. This involves asking
about villagers’ access to specific amenities, and then aggregating those responses into indexes
that capture variation in public amenities from their point of view. The correlations we find
demonstrate the potential significance of this approach as a way to overcome the limited
availability of other ways to measure variation in public services, infrastructure, and institutions
over time and space.
          In the particular setting of rural Burkina Faso, we find that variance in village population
size is significantly correlated with village-level access to infrastructure, markets and individual
land rights. These public amenities are clearly of great importance for rural development.
Future work using our data or similar new surveys elsewhere could document further how village
infrastructure and institutions are responding to Africa’s extraordinary demographic changes,
and explore the economic mechanisms behind these important political changes.




                                                                                                    17
References Cited
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, 2007. “Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
        Expectancy on Economic Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 925-985.
Besley, Timothy, 1995. “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from
        Ghana.” The Journal of Political Economy, 103(5): 903-937.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
        American South." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73-117.
Bloom, David E. and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1998. “Demographic Transitions and Economic
        Miracles in Emerging Asia.” World Bank Economic Review 12(3): 419-455.
Boserup, Ester, 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change under
        Population Pressure. London, G. Allen and Unwin, 1965.
Card, David. 1995. “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited.” In Research in Labor Economics,
        volume 14, Editor Solomon Polachek, Greenwich Connecticut: JAI Press, 23-48.

Card, David. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
        Problems.” Econometrica, 69(5): 1127-1160.
Chambers, Robert, 1994. “The origins and practice of participatory rural appraisal.” World
        Development, 22(7): 953-969.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo, 2004. "Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a
        Randomized Policy Experiment in India," Econometrica, 72(5): 1409-1443.
Comite International de Cooperation dans les Recherches Nationals en Demographie, 1999.
        “Dynamique de Peuplement Des Zones Rurales Liberees de l”Onchocercose en Afrique de
        l’Ouest, Synthese de Monographs Nationals, Coordination, Andre Quesnad.
Cutler, David, Winnie Fung, Michael Kremer, Monica Singhal, and Tom Vogl. 2010. "Early-Life
        Malaria Exposure and Adult Outcomes: Evidence from Malaria Eradication in India."
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 72–94.
Dovring, Folke, 1959. "The Share of Agriculture in a Growing Population," FAO Monthly Bulletin of
        Statistics 8(8).
Grimm, Michael and Klasen, Stephan, 2008. "Geography vs. Institutions at the Village Level". IZA
        Discussion Paper No. 3391. Bonn: IZA, 29 pages.
Hayami, Yuhiro & Vernon W. Ruttan, 1971. “Agricuitural development: an international
        perspective.” Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Human Rights Watch, 2001. “The New Racism: Political Manipulation of Ethnicity in Cote
        d'Ivoire.” New York: HRW (August, 2001), online at
        www.hrw.org/en/reports/2001/08/28/new-racism.
Imbens, Guido and Joshua Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
        Treatment Effects.” Econometrica, 62(2): 467-475.
IRIN News, “In-depth: Cote d’Ivoire crisis” (November, 2002). Online at
        www.irinnews.org/IndepthMain.aspx?indepthid=38.
Jedwab, Remi and Alexander Moradi, 2011. “Transportation Infrastructure and Development in
        Ghana.” Paris School of Economics Working Paper No. 2011-24. Paris: PSE, 47 pages..
Johnston, Bruce and Peter Kilby, 1975. Agriculture and Structural Transformation. New York: Oxford
        University Press.
Kazianga, Harounan and William A. Masters, 2002. “Investing in soils: field bunds and
        microcatchments in Burkina Faso.” Environment and Development Economics, 7: 571-591


                                                                                                      18
Kazianga, Harounan and William A. Masters, 2006. “Property rights, production technology, and
        deforestation: cocoa in Cameroon.” Agricultural Economics 35 (1): 19–26.
Lin, Justin Yu, 1995. “Endowments, Technology, and Factor Markets: A Natural Experiment of
        Induced Institutional Innovation from China's Rural Reform.” American Journal of Agricultural
        Economics 77(2): 231-242.
Masters, William A. and Margaret S. McMillan, 2001. "Climate and Scale in Economic Growth,"
        Journal of Economic Growth, 6(3): 167-186.
McMillan, Della E., Jean-Baptiste Nana and Kimseyinga Savadogo, 1992. “Adaptation of RAP to
        Monitoring Settlement Trends in Areas Covered by Successful Disease Control
        Programmes: Onchocerciasis”, in N.S. Scrimshaw and G.R. Gleason, eds. Rapid Assessment
        Procedures: Qualitative Methodologies for Planning and Evaluation of Health Related Programmes.
        Boston, MA: International Nutrition Foundation.
McMillan, Della E., Jean-Baptiste Nana and Kimseyinga Savadogo, “Settlement and Development in
        the River Blindness Control Zone.” World Bank Technical Paper No. 200, Series on River
        Blindness Control in West Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993.
McMillan, Margaret, 2001. “Why Kill the Golden Goose? A Political-Economy Model of Export
        Taxation.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83 (1): 170-184.
McMillan, Margaret and William A. Masters, 2003. "An African Growth Trap." Review of Development
        Economics 7(2): 179-191.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul Rhode, 1993. “Induced Innovation in American Agiculture: A
        Reconsideration.” Journal of Political Economy, 101 (1): 100-118.
Pande, Rohini and Chris Udry, 2006. “Institutions and Development: A View from Below,” in
        Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of the Econometric Society, edited by R. Blundell, W.Newey
        and T.Persson, Cambridge University Press.
Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo. 2005. Asymptotic Distributions of Instrumental Variables Statistics with
        Many Instruments in Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of
        Thomas Rothenberg, ed. D.W.K. Andrews and J.H. Stock. Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press.
Temple, Jonathan R. W. (2005). “Dual economy models.” The Manchester School, 73(4), 435-478.




                                                                                                     19
Figure 1. Past and projected rural population growth, by region and country (1950-2050)
Panel A: Regional aggregates




                                                                           Zero rural
                                                                           pop. growth




Panel B: Burkina Faso




                                                                          Zero rural
                                                                          pop. growth



Source: Calculated from UN Population Projections (esa.un.org/unpp).

                                                                                          20
       Figure 2. Estimated Onchocerciasis Prevalence in West Africa

          Panel (a): Prior to control (1974)                                           Panel (b): After control (2002)




Source: WHO, Onchocerciasis Control Programme (www.who.int/apoc/onchocerciasis/ocp).




                                                                                                                         21
Figure 3. Location of Planned Settlements Associated with Onchocerciasis Control, 1973-1984




Source: Della E. McMillan, Jean-Baptiste Nana and Kimseyinga Savadogo, “Settlement and Development
in the River Blindness Control Zone.” World Bank Technical Paper No. 200, Series on River Blindness Control in West Africa.
Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993.
                                                                                                                              22
Figure 4. Patterns of Agricultural Migration in Burkina Faso




Source: Della E. McMillan, Jean-Baptiste Nana and Kimseyinga Savadogo, “Settlement and
Development in the River Blindness Control Zone.” World Bank Technical Paper No. 200, Series
on River Blindness Control in West Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993.




                                                                                               23
Figure 5. Population Density in Burkina Faso, 1960-61




Source: University of Texas at Austin, Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection, from U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency Map No. 58207, 1968. Available online at
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/burkina_faso.html.




                                                                                                   24
Figure 6: Foreign Population in Cote d’Ivoire by Nationality, 1998 Census




Source: IRIN News, “In-depth: Cote d’Ivoire crisis” (November, 2002). Online at
http://www.irinnews.org/IndepthMain.aspx?indepthid=38.




                                                                                  25
Figure 7: Location of Surveyed Villages and Rivers Used for IV Estimation




Source: Authors’ calculations. Village locations are drawn from authors’ survey data; river locations and paths from villages to rivers are
calculated from IFPRI file data. Roads and travel paths are shown for illustration purposes only; data used for hypothesis tests are straight-
line distances from the village to the closest river, and travel distance to nearest point in Cote d’Ivoire (at the lower-left of the map shown).
                                                                                                                                              26
Table 1: Property rights and land use across sample villages in Burkina Faso (n=2,076)
                                                                       Percentage
                                                                            of
                                                                      observations
 Land Rights                                                            in sample
 Rights over crop land
     Not defined                                                           14.4
     Communal                                                              10.0
     Familial                                                              59.9
     Individual                                                            15.7
 Existence of sales or rental of crop land
     None                                                                  92.4
     At least one sale or rental has occurred                               7.7
 Role of traditional authorities in solving crop land conflict
     None                                                                  63.8
     Some                                                                  36.2
 Role of elected authorities involved in solving crop land conflict
     None                                                                  81.9
     Some                                                                  18.1
 Demarcation and regulation of pasture land
     No delimited pasture land                                             71.7
     Pasture land delimited, access not regulated                          22.9
     Pasture land delimited, access regulated by tax or quota               5.4
 Demarcation and regulation of forest land
     No delimited forest land                                              70.1
     Forest land delimited, access not regulated                           15.9
     Forest land delimited, access regulated by tax or quota               14.0

Source for all tables: Authors’ calculations.
Notes: Results shown are from village elders’ response to questions asked in local languages,
translated by local enumerators from the French questionnaire reproduced in the appendix to this
paper. Items shown are from questionnaire sections VIII (for crop land), IX (for pasture land) and
X (for forest land).




                                                                                                 27
Table 2: Mean and standard deviations for all variables
         Proximity of farthest source (km)                 Proximity to all sources (km)                     Proximity to closest source (km)
       (Distance to farthest site in each set)           (Average distance to all services)                (Distance to closest site in each set)
      Public    Public Religious                      Public    Public Religious                          Public     Public Religious
Year Services Infrast. Services Markets              Services Infrast. Services Markets                  Services Infrast. Services Markets
1985 35.348 35.458            9.274     12.832        26.915 14.662            6.321      8.585             18.351     3.566       3.536      4.855
      [1.206] [1.239]       [0.518] [0.790]           [0.779] [0.482]        [0.360]    [0.432]            [0.607] [0.308]       [0.299] [0.269]
1996 35.635 28.053            7.465     12.735        25.055 11.532            4.726      7.811             15.115     1.817       2.328      3.788
      [1.137] [0.977]       [0.409] [0.741]           [0.708] [0.374]        [0.267]    [0.384]            [0.533] [0.209]       [0.230] [0.251]
2006 32.151 20.955            5.218     11.455        19.681     8.099         3.036       6.11              8.596     0.501        1.16      1.975
      [1.005] [0.771]       [0.331] [0.611]           [0.543] [0.278]        [0.194]    [0.276]            [0.415] [0.083]       [0.138] [0.176]
                                                                                                                 Distance (km) to:
                  Land ownership rights          Land      Regulated access to land for:          Population        Nearest
 Year      Individual    Familial Communal       markets     Pasture Forest Crop                  ‘(1000s)            river
 1985           0.41      0.665         0.1        0.056      0.152    1.353     2.75                   1.6           65.986
             [0.018]    [0.018]     [0.011]      [0.009]    [0.013] [0.024] [0.033]                 [0.058]          [1.782]
 1996          0.423      0.671       0.099        0.064      0.186     1.44 2.751                    1.682           66.876
             [0.019]    [0.018]     [0.011]      [0.009]    [0.015] [0.027] [0.034]                 [0.059]          [1.818]
 2006          0.453      0.669       0.104        0.107       0.24    1.516 2.786                    1.396           66.336
             [0.018]    [0.017]     [0.011]      [0.011]    [0.016] [0.029] [0.033]                 [0.091]          [1.777]

Notes: Standard deviations in brackets. Proximity measures refer to travel distances from the village to reach the closest site offering one
or more of each set of collective resources: Public Services and Utilities (defined as the administrative office used to register births, any
savings and loan facility, any fixed-line telephone, any mobile phone reception); Public Infrastructure (defined as a road that is accessible
by truck all year, a road accessible by truck seasonally, a bus stop, a primary school, a secondary school, and a health center), Religious
Services (any church, mosque or temple), and Markets (any open-air food market, livestock market, or private shop). Specific wording of
each question is reproduced in the appendix; from the questionnaire as a whole, we retained only those proximity questions which more
than 700 of the 730 villages were unable to answer unambiguously. Population is computed from the Burkina Faso national censuses for
1985, 1996 and 2006. Distances to nearest river are straight lines calculated from latitude and longitude geocodes.


                                                                                                                                                      28
 Table 3: OLS regression results for public infrastructure and institutions on village-level population
                          Proximity of farthest source (km)                        Proximity to all sources (km)                         Proximity to closest source (km)
                 Services       Infrastr.     Religion     Markets     Services        Infrastr.      Religion     Markets      Services       Infrastr.     Religion     Markets
                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)            (10)         (11)         (12)
  Population     0.064***         0.013      0.226***     0.211***     0.067***       0.070***       0.217***      0.234***     0.128***      0.154***      0.187***    0.316***
                  [0.024]        [0.025]      [0.031]       [0.032]     [0.021]         [0.021]       [0.026]       [0.028]      [0.031]        [0.020]      [0.023]      [0.024]
  Y=1996           -0.064      0.175***       0.125*         -0.015      0.016        0.187***       0.161***        0.043      0.177***      0.290***      0.210***    0.185***
                  [0.054]        [0.055]      [0.069]       [0.072]     [0.048]         [0.046]       [0.060]       [0.062]      [0.058]        [0.052]      [0.055]      [0.058]
  Y=2006            0.040      0.487***      0.509***         0.085    0.261***       0.539***       0.526***      0.238***     1.093*** 0..595***          0.486***    0.640***
                  [0.051]        [0.055]      [0.068]       [0.071]     [0.046]         [0.041]       [0.058]       [0.061]      [0.065]        [0.046]      [0.052]      [0.055]
                                                                                                                                                                              -
  Constant       -3.643***    -3.261***    -3.175***     -3.275***     -3.477***      -2.907***    -2.878***       -3.248***   -3.428*** -1.793*** -2.066*** 3.283***
                   [0.164]      [0.174]      [0.219]       [0.225]       [0.144]        [0.142]      [0.189]         [0.194]     [0.208]        [0.147]      [0.175]      [0.175]

  Observ.         2,040         2,068         1,960        2,043         2,040          2,068        1,960          2,043        2,040        2,068         1,960        2,043
  R-squared       0.005         0.039         0.051        0.022         0.022          0.069        0.069          0.041        0.146        0.096         0.070        0.121

                           Land ownership rights             Land              Regulated access
                  Individual      Family     Communal     markets      Pasture     Forest    Crop Land
                      (13)           (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)       (18)          (19)
  lnpopulation       0.114      -0.043***       0.008     0.019***      0.019       0.033       -0.030
                    (0.062)       (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.011)    (0.027)      (0.021)
  year==1996         0.012          0.010      -0.003       0.007       0.030     0.089**       -0.003
                    (0.027)       (0.025)     (0.016)      (0.013)     (0.020)    (0.037)      (0.047)
  year==2006         0.037         -0.004       0.006     0.056***    0.085*** 0.152***          0.031
                    (0.027)       (0.025)     (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.021)    (0.038)      (0.047)
  Constant        0.511***      0.973***        0.043      -0.077*      0.088    1.584*** 2.765***
                    (0.083)       (0.078)     (0.053)      (0.039)     (0.062)    (0.119)      (0.150)


  Observations      2,076        2,076         2,076       2,076       2,076         2,076        2,076
  R-squared         0.002        0.007         0.001       0.012       0.008         0.010        0.000

Notes: Population and distance measures are in logs, with proximity defined as its additive inverse (-log[distance]), so that coefficients
can be read as elasticities and a positive coefficient implies closer facilities. The regression also controls for 45 province dummies (not
                                                                                                                                                                 29
shown). Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 4: OLS regression results for public infrastructure and institutions on village-level population and diversity
                            Proximity of farthest source (km)                   Proximity to all sources (km)                 Proximity to closest source (km)
                      Services      Infrastr.     Religion Markets     Services      Infrastr.      Religion Markets    Services     Infrastr.    Religion Markets
                        (1)            (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)           (7)      (8)        (9)          (10)         (11)       (12)
                        0.057**      0.022     0.177***    0.183***     0.057**     0.065***    0.176***    0.208***    0.097***    0.143***    0.169***    0.297***
 Population
                        (0.026)     (0.027)     (0.032)     (0.035)      (0.023)     (0.022)     (0.028)     (0.029)     (0.032)     (0.021)     (0.025)     (0.025)
                        -0.004      -0.018**    0.016*     0.046***      -0.004       0.002     0.016**     0.043***     0.018      0.018***    0.020***    0.027***
 # of land chiefs
                        (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.017)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)
                        0.024**      0.015     0.048***     0.010       0.029***    0.029***    0.043***     0.020*     0.055***    0.026***    0.035***    0.040***
 # of ethnic groups
                        (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.012)      (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.008)
                         0.001       -0.004    0.016***    0.018***      0.002       -0.001     0.013***    0.016***    0.008**     0.007***    0.005***    0.013***
 # of clans
                        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
                        -0.072     0.184***     0.139*      -0.008       0.012      0.198***    0.171***     0.048      0.188***    0.285***    0.208***    0.189***
 year== 1996
                        (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.073)     (0.077)      (0.051)     (0.048)     (0.063)     (0.066)     (0.060)     (0.055)     (0.059)     (0.061)
                         0.027     0.516***    0.527***     0.070       0.250***    0.560***    0.536***    0.230***    1.061***    0.592***    0.477***    0.663***
 year== 2006
                        (0.053)     (0.057)     (0.071)     (0.076)      (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.061)     (0.064)     (0.068)     (0.048)     (0.055)     (0.057)
                       -3.705***   -3.344***   -3.193***   -3.372***   -3.552***    -3.009***   -2.902***   -3.372***   -3.551***   -1.901***   -2.156***   -3.472***
 Constant
                        (0.174)     (0.185)     (0.228)     (0.236)      (0.152)     (0.150)     (0.197)     (0.202)     (0.217)     (0.153)     (0.185)     (0.179)
 Observations            1,810       1,835      1,728       1,813        1,810        1,835      1,728       1,813       1,810        1,835      1,728       1,813
 R-squared               0.013       0.048      0.094       0.048        0.036        0.087      0.109       0.075       0.170        0.120      0.092       0.170


Notes: Population and distance measures are in logs, with proximity defined as its additive inverse (-log[distance]), so that coefficients can
be read as elasticities and a positive coefficient implies closer facilities. The regression also controls for 45 province dummies (not shown).
Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                                              30
Table 4 (continued)
                                         Land ownership rights           Land                       Regulated access
                                 Individual      Family      Communal   Markets          Pasture             Forest      Crop Land
                                    (13)          (14)         (15)      (16)             (17)                 (18)         (19)

Population                          0.020     -0.051***        0.003    0.020***           0.013            -0.046**       -0.033
                                   (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.008)      (0.006)         (0.009)            (0.018)      (0.023)
# of land chiefs                 0.011***     0.011***       -0.003*     -0.006**          0.004           -0.022***        0.001
                                   (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.003)         (0.005)            (0.006)      (0.006)
# of ethnic groups                  0.004     -0.011***      0.005*     0.013***        -0.008***            0.014**       -0.005
                                   (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.003)            (0.006)      (0.007)
# of clans                       -0.007***    0.006***      0.003***    -0.004***         -0.001            0.006***       -0.001
                                   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.002)      (0.002)
year== 1996                         0.018         0.011       -0.003       0.006           0.030             0.091**        0.002
                                   (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.018)      (0.014)         (0.022)            (0.039)      (0.049)
year== 2006                         0.042        -0.009        0.005    0.052***         0.086***           0.153***        0.033
                                   (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.018)      (0.015)         (0.023)            (0.041)      (0.049)
Constant                         0.527***     1.001***         0.040      -0.077*          0.103            1.593***     2.823***
                                   (0.088)      (0.082)      (0.058)      (0.041)         (0.066)            (0.127)      (0.158)
Observations                        1,843         1,843        1,843       1,843           1,843              1,843         1,843
R-squared                           0.022         0.026        0.019       0.039           0.013              0.026         0.001

Notes: The regression also controls for 45 province dummies (not shown). Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate
significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                      31
Table 5: First stage regression results for IV estimation
                             (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                 (6)
                             All             Non-Volta        Volta Valley           All             Non-Volta         Volta Valley
 VARIABLES                provinces           regions           regions           provinces           regions            regions

 log distance to
 river                    -0.247***           -0.183***        -0.312***
                           [0.041]             [0.057]          [0.059]
 year==1996                -0.111               -0.324           0.030             -0.165              -0.297             -0.089
                           [0.244]             [0.368]          [0.330]            [0.231]             [0.373]            [0.293]
 year==2006               -0.896***            -0.687*         -1.107***          -0.916***           -0.733*            -1.109***
                           [0.242]             [0.369]          [0.324]            [0.255]             [0.411]            [0.324]
 distanceX1996              0.053                0.082           0.038              0.066               0.077              0.067
                           [0.060]             [0.088]          [0.084]            [0.057]             [0.089]            [0.075]
 distanceX2006            0.174***               0.079         0.265***           0.179***              0.090            0.267***
                           [0.060]             [0.089]          [0.082]            [0.063]             [0.099]            [0.082]
 Constant                 7.942***            7.885***         8.023***           6.975***            7.160***           6.815***
                           [0.164]             [0.236]          [0.230]            [0.029]             [0.038]            [0.043]

 Observations               2,076                959             1,117              2,076               959               1,117
 R-squared                  0.189               0.143            0.217              0.489              0.452              0.513
 F-Stat Inst                19.20               10.82            11.79              12.44              10.67              6.602
Notes: Dependent variable for all columns is log of village population size; columns 1-3 control for 45 province dummies (not shown), and
columns 4-6 control for village fixed effects (so distance to river is dropped). Distance measures are in logs. Distance to nearest river is
straight-line distance, to capture flight time needed by the black flies that carry Onchocerciasis from the river to peoples’ homes. Robust
standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                         32
 Table 6.1: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on predicted village population, with province fixed effects
                             Proximity of farthest source (km)                    Proximity to all sources (km)                   Proximity to closest source (km)
                      Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets   Services       Infrastr.     Religion     Markets    Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets
                         (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)
  lnpopulation        0.273*       0.320*      1.026*** 0.665***      0.390**       0.696*** 0.912***          0.735***   0.973*** 0.697*** 0.594*** 0.959***
                      [0.163]      [0.172]      [0.194]     [0.223]    [0.152]       [0.160]       [0.167]      [0.197]    [0.219]      [0.160]      [0.143]     [0.182]
  year==1996          -0.082      0.150***       0.059      -0.065     -0.013        0.135**       0.108*       -0.008      0.101      0.247*** 0.190***         0.128**
                      [0.056]      [0.056]      [0.072]     [0.070]    [0.051]       [0.053]       [0.062]      [0.062]    [0.070]      [0.054]      [0.055]     [0.062]
  year==2006           0.083      0.556*** 0.715***         0.184**   0.332***      0.681*** 0.712***          0.350***   1.281*** 0.719*** 0.614*** 0.789***
                      [0.058]      [0.064]      [0.092]     [0.085]    [0.055]       [0.062]       [0.079]      [0.076]    [0.085]      [0.065]      [0.066]     [0.077]


  Observations         2,040     2,068        1,960       2,043          2,040       2,068        1,960       2,043       2,040        2,068        1,960       2,043
  Number of prov         45        45           45          45             45          45           45          45          45           45           45          45
  Hansen J stat.       2.067     8.224        5.624       0.0629         3.947       8.279        4.655       0.0820      7.047        2.193        1.064       1.062
  Prob HJS             0.356     0.0164       0.0601      0.969          0.139       0.0159       0.0975      0.960       0.0295       0.334        0.587       0.588
                              Land ownership rights               Land                      Regulated access
                      Individual      Family    Communal       markets            Pasture        Forest      Crop Land
                         (13)          (14)         (15)          (16)              (17)          (18)           (19)
  lnpopulation         0.119**      -0.150**       0.074       0.081**           0.224***        0.113        -0.078*
                       [0.051]       [0.064]      [0.046]       [0.032]           [0.071]       [0.106]       [0.341]
  year==1996            0.006         0.019       -0.007         0.002             0.013       0.073**         0.028
                       [0.023]       [0.023]      [0.016]       [0.011]           [0.022]       [0.035]       [0.043]
  year==2006           0.066**       -0.028        0.020       0.069***          0.133***      0.185***        -0.031
                       [0.027]       [0.026]      [0.018]       [0.014]           [0.025]       [0.041]       [0.048]
  Observations          2,076        2,076        2,076          2,076            2,076         2,076         2,076
  Number of prov          45           45           45             45               45            45            45
  Hansen J stat.        0.456        1.503        1.204          2.274            3.042         1.008         0.965
  Prob HJS              0.796        0.472        0.548          0.321            0.218         0.604         0.617

Notes: First stage results are shown in Column 3 of Table 5. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All regressions control for 45
province dummies (not shown). Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                                                                          33
Table 6.2: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on predicted village population, with village fixed effects
                              Proximity of farthest source (km)                                             Proximity to all sources (km)
                      Services     Infrastr.    Religion   Markets     Services    Infrastr.     Religion      Markets        Services       Infrastr.    Religion   Markets
                         (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)         (11)        (12)
 lnpopulation          0.106       0.777**        0.103    0.701**       0.300       0.387         0.025       0.564**         0.491        0.980**        0.191     0.556***
                      [0.292]      [0.398]       [0.267]   [0.337]      [0.247]     [0.252]       [0.218]       [0.272]       [0.378]        [0.402]      [0.207]     [0.201]
 year==1996           -0.035      0.273***      0.144***   -0.070       0.069*     0.252***      0.182***        0.005       0.264***       0.237***     0.240***    0.159***
                      [0.045]      [0.063]       [0.044]   [0.053]      [0.039]     [0.039]       [0.036]       [0.043]       [0.057]        [0.061]      [0.035]     [0.046]
 year==2006           -0.001      0.317***      0.411***   0.196**     0.189***    0.446***      0.479***      0.316***      0.984***       0.794***     0.525***    0.712***
                      [0.061]      [0.094]       [0.079]   [0.084]      [0.055]     [0.057]       [0.065]       [0.067]       [0.089]        [0.107]      [0.066]     [0.080]

 Observations         2,027        2,066        1,936       2,033       2,027       2,066         1,936         2,033        2,027           2,066       1,936       2,033
 Number of vfe         692          704           670        694         692          704           670           694          692            704          670         694
 Hansen J stat.       1.524       0.00170       0.0243     0.00699      0.920       0.0217        0.0223        0.0152       0.0416          0.766       0.0732      0.0348
 Prob HJS             0.217        0.967        0.876       0.933       0.337       0.883         0.881         0.902        0.838           0.382       0.787       0.852
                           Land ownership rights                  Land                         Regulated access
                      Individual      Family         Communal       markets        Pasture         Forest       Crop Land
                          (13)         (14)             (15)          (16)           (17)           (18)           (19)
 lnpopulation          0.053**        0.005           -0.023*       0.044**        -0.034         -0.125         -0.034
                        [0.025]      [0.020]          [0.014]       [0.022]        [0.067]        [0.130]        [0.072]
 year==1996            0.015**        0.004            0.003         0.012        0.033***       0.101***         0.013
                        [0.007]      [0.003]          [0.003]       [0.008]        [0.010]        [0.020]        [0.012]
 year==2006            0.052***       0.007            0.001       0.041***       0.075***       0.136***         0.023
                        [0.015]      [0.005]          [0.002]       [0.013]        [0.017]        [0.031]        [0.016]
 Observations           2,076          2,076           2,076         2,076         2,076          2,076           2,076
 Number of vfe           705             705            705            705          705            705             705
 Hansen J stat.         1.793          0.0201          0.210         0.0298        0.596         0.00628          0.786
 Prob HJS               0.181          0.887           0.647         0.863         0.440          0.937           0.375
  Notes: First stage results are shown in Column 1 of Table 5. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All regressions control for village
  fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                                                                                               34
 Table 6.3: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on village population, with province fixed effects, in Volta Valley only
                               Proximity of farthest source (km)                                                   Proximity to all sources (km)
                       Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets     Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets       Services     Infrastr.    Religion   Markets
                         (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)
  lnpopulation        0.406**      0.396**      0.653***     0.667***    0.478***     0.704***     0.633***    0.759***     0.979***     0.816***     0.532***    1.167***
                      [0.181]       [0.196]      [0.193]      [0.247]     [0.166]      [0.171]      [0.169]     [0.220]      [0.229]      [0.160]      [0.161]     [0.209]
  year==1996          -0.143*       0.165*        0.058       -0.113      -0.071        0.109        0.123      -0.054        0.029      0.158**      0.234***      0.054
                      [0.083]       [0.086]      [0.098]      [0.104]     [0.077]      [0.079]      [0.086]     [0.094]      [0.104]      [0.078]      [0.081]     [0.100]
  year==2006           0.073       0.574***     0.613***       0.137     0.303***     0.619***     0.656***    0.305***     1.172***     0.560***     0.634***    0.737***
                      [0.074]       [0.082]      [0.102]      [0.097]     [0.069]      [0.078]      [0.089]     [0.089]      [0.106]      [0.077]      [0.077]     [0.101]

  Observations         1,103        1,114        1,044        1,107       1,103        1,114        1,044       1,107        1,103        1,114       1,044        1,107
  Number of prov         23           23           23           23          23          ,23           23          23           23           23          23           23
  Hansen J stat.       2.734        9.640        10.30        1.568       5.298        10.49        10.03       2.028        5.429        1.923       4.974        1.330
  Prob HJS             0.255       0.00807      0.00579       0.457       0.0707      0.00527      0.00665      0.363        0.0662       0.382       0.0832       0.514
                                Land ownership rights                   Land                    Regulated access
                      Individual      Family     Communal          markets           Pasture         Forest     Crop Land
                          (13)         (14)          (15)             (16)             (17)           (18)         (19)
  lnpopulation         0.226***      -0.044         0.053          0.026***         0.233***         0.073       -0.080
                        [0.080]      [0.064]       [0.053]          [0.012]          [0.069]        [0.121]      [0.104]
  year==1996            -0.016        0.014        -0.014            0.005            0.005         0.092*        0.035
                        [0.035]      [0.031]       [0.025]          [0.013]          [0.032]        [0.052]      [0.055]
  year==2006           0.076**        0.003         0.007          0.053***         0.119***       0.192***       0.060
                        [0.034]      [0.029]       [0.023]          [0.014]          [0.030]        [0.050]      [0.053]
  Observations          1,117          1,117         1,117            1,117          1,117          1,117       1,117
  Number of prov          23             23            23               23             23             23          23
  Hansen J stat.        2.158          0.307         0.906            1.542          4.172          0.825       0.0377
  Prob HJS              0.340          0.858         0.636            0.463          0.124          0.662       0.981

Notes: First stage results are shown in Column 2 of Table 5. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All regressions control for 45
province dummies (not shown). Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                                                                                             35
Table 6.4: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on village population, with village fixed effects, in Volta Valley only
                             Proximity of farthest source (km)                     Proximity to all sources (km)                   Proximity to closest source (km)
                      Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets   Services        Infrastr.     Religion     Markets    Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets
                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)
 lnpopulation         -0.171      0.629**       -0.337        0.197    -0.292          -0.294       -0.174        0.268      0.004      0.741***       0.055      0.753**
                      [0.267]      [0.312]      [0.278]     [0.208]    [0.217]        [0.198]       [0.225]      [0.187]    [0.278]      [0.272]      [0.203]     [0.302]
 year==1996           -0.048      0.352***     0.181**       -0.037     0.060        0.289*** 0.226***            0.024    0.206*** 0.181*** 0.308***             0.127*
                      [0.067]      [0.087]      [0.073]     [0.057]    [0.055]        [0.054]       [0.059]      [0.051]    [0.069]      [0.069]      [0.055]     [0.076]
 year==2006            0.019      0.490*** 0.433***         0.094**   0.238***       0.537*** 0.516***          0.262***   1.098*** 0.553*** 0.569*** 0.711***
                      [0.052]      [0.068]      [0.077]     [0.045]    [0.047]        [0.040]       [0.064]      [0.040]    [0.065]      [0.073]      [0.060]     [0.076]

 Observations         1,096       1,113        1,032         1,102       1,096        1,113       1,032         1,102       1,096       1,113        1,032       1,102
 Number of vfe         374         380          358           376         374          380          358          376         374         380          358         376
 Hansen J stat.       0.753       0.508      0.000555        1.304       0.258        1.105       0.0108        1.473       0.706       1.515        0.303       0.123
 Prob HJS             0.386       0.476        0.981         0.253       0.612        0.293       0.917         0.225       0.401       0.218        0.582       0.725
                               Land ownership rights               Land                     Regulated access
                      Individual      Family     Communal       markets           Pasture        Forest      Crop Land
                          (13)         (14)          (15)          (16)             (17)          (18)          (19)
 lnpopulation          0.048**        0.005        -0.013       0.043***           0.012        -0.097        -0.058
                        [0.026]      [0.021]       [0.009]       [0.018]          [0.059]       [0.120]       [0.084]
 year==1996              0.018        0.007         0.002         0.012          0.040***      0.122***        0.031
                        [0.013]      [0.005]       [0.003]       [0.011]          [0.015]       [0.031]       [0.022]
 year==2006            0.062***      0.008*         0.004       0.046***         0.100***      0.180***      0.060***
                        [0.013]      [0.005]       [0.003]       [0.010]          [0.015]       [0.027]       [0.020]
 Observations          1,116        1,116         1,116          1,116            1,116         1,116         1,116
 Number of vfe          380           380          380            380              380            380          380
 Hansen J stat.        1.209        0.0574        0.333          0.220            2.118         0.0483        0.648
 Prob HJS              0.271        0.811         0.564          0.639            0.146         0.826         0.421
Notes: First stage results for this regression are not shown. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All results control for
village fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                                                                                          36
Table 6.5: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on village population, with province fixed effects, outside Volta Valley
(Placebo regression)
                            Proximity of farthest source (km)                   Proximity to all sources (km)                  Proximity to closest source (km)
                      Services    Infrastr.    Religion    Markets   Services      Infrastr.     Religion     Markets   Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets
                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)            (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)          (10)         (11)        (12)
 lnpopulation        -0.085       0.136 1.600***          0.317       0.123        0.609* 1.312***           0.413      0.996**    0.313  0.576**    0.413
                     [0.307]     [0.316]  [0.474]        [0.430]     [0.281]       [0.317]  [0.389]         [0.366]      [0.473]  [0.336]  [0.265]  [0.322]
 year==1996          -0.039       0.114    0.119         -0.015       0.038       0.162**    0.135           0.037      0.186** 0.323*** 0.149** 0.165**
                     [0.073]     [0.071]  [0.116]        [0.092]     [0.065]       [0.065]  [0.095]         [0.079]      [0.094]  [0.073]  [0.072]  [0.076]
 year==2006          -0.025     0.472*** 0.984***         0.098      0.275**      0.720*** 0.879***          0.273      1.421*** 0.770*** 0.574*** 0.652***
                     [0.129]     [0.141]  [0.224]        [0.199]     [0.118]       [0.139]  [0.186]         [0.169]      [0.199]  [0.149]  [0.131]  [0.148]

 Observations          937        954          916         936        937           954          916          936         937        954          916         936
 Number of prov        22         22           22          22         22            22           22           22          22         22           22          22
 Hansen J stat.       1.285      1.696        0.379       2.857      1.093         0.882        0.444        1.538       2.559      1.703        0.810       1.014
 Prob HJS             0.526      0.428        0.827       0.240      0.579         0.643        0.801        0.463       0.278      0.427        0.667       0.602


Notes: First stage results for this regression are not shown. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All regressions control
for 45 province dummies (not shown). Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, **




                                                                                                                                                       37
Table 6.6: IV regression results for infrastructure and institutions on village population, with village fixed effects, outside Volta Valley
(Placebo regression)
                            Proximity of farthest source (km)                    Proximity to all sources (km)                  Proximity to closest source (km)
                      Services    Infrastr.    Religion    Markets   Services       Infrastr.     Religion     Markets   Services     Infrastr.    Religion    Markets
                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)          (10)         (11)        (12)
 lnpopulation         0.443      -0.405       0.739         1.341     0.007         -0.146    0.753           0.779      -2.033       1.375    0.695   -0.298
                     [1.059]     [0.963]     [1.018]       [1.281]   [0.741]        [0.670]  [0.931]         [0.806]     [2.518]     [1.522]  [0.867]  [0.661]
 year==1996          -0.014     0.152***     0.135**       -0.017    0.073*        0.192*** 0.160***          0.037      0.254*     0.350*** 0.183*** 0.169***
                     [0.055]     [0.057]     [0.066]       [0.089]   [0.039]        [0.038]  [0.058]         [0.056]     [0.137]     [0.091]  [0.057]  [0.046]
 year==2006           0.173       0.272      0.669*         0.520     0.244         0.442*   0.684*           0.437       0.323     1.211**   0.646*    0.397
                     [0.379]     [0.364]     [0.388]       [0.494]   [0.264]        [0.253]  [0.353]         [0.311]     [0.897]     [0.587]  [0.330]  [0.261]

 Observations          931        953          904          931        931           953          904          931        931         953          904         931
 Number of vfe         318        324          312          318        318           324          312          318        318         324          312         318
 Hansen J stat.       0.231      1.142        0.375        1.551      0.698         1.144        0.366        1.814      0.319      0.00481       0.148      0.0415
 Prob HJS             0.631      0.285        0.540        0.213      0.403         0.285        0.545        0.178      0.572       0.945        0.701       0.839

                              Land ownership rights              Land                     Regulated access
                      Individual    Family      Communal        markets         Pasture       Forest       Crop Land
                         (13)        (14)           (15)         (16)            (17)           (18)          (19)
 lnpopulation          0.098        0.002        -0.047         -0.063        -0.187          -0.108         0.087
                      [0.136]      [0.003]       [0.055]        [0.123]       [0.247]         [0.308]       [0.104]
 year==1996            0.012       -0.000         0.002          0.011         0.017         0.072***       -0.004
                      [0.008]      [0.002]       [0.004]        [0.009]       [0.015]         [0.020]       [0.006]
 year==2006            0.056        0.004        -0.011          0.029        -0.009           0.093         0.024
                      [0.053]      [0.004]       [0.019]        [0.047]       [0.091]         [0.115]       [0.036]
 Observations           959          959           959            959           959            959            959
 Number of vfe          325          325           325            325           325            325            325
 Hansen J stat.        0.189        0.414         0.237         0.0314        0.0564         0.0991          0.192
 Prob HJS              0.664        0.520         0.626          0.859         0.812          0.753          0.661

    Notes: First stage results for this regression are not shown. Population and proximity measures are in logs. All results control for
    village fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets, and asterisks indicate significance levels at *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                                                                                                        38
                                        BURKINA FASO
         Ministère de l’Agriculture de l’Hydraulique et des Ressources Halieutiques

            DIRECTION GENERALE DE LA PROMOTION DE L’ECONOMIE RURALE

                     Direction de la Prospective et des Statistiques Agricoles et Alimentaires


                            ENQUETE COMMUNAUTAIRE

Nº     Eléments d’identification                   Nom                              Code

1      Région                                                                     |____|____|

2      Province                                                                   |____|____|

3      Commune                                                                    |____|____|

       Type de localité
4      1 = urbain                                                                   |____|
       2 = rural

5      Village / secteur                                                       |____|____|____|

6      Latitude                                                        |____|____|____|____|____|____|

7      Longitude                                                       |____|____|____|____|____|____|



     Nom du contrôleur : ___________________________________________________|__C__|____|____|

     Date de l’interview : |____|____| |____|____| |____|____|
                            Jour       mois       année

     Nom et visa du superviseur :___________________________________

     Date de contrôle : |____|____| |____|____| |____|____|
                          Jour       mois         année
     Résultat du contrôle :………………………………………………………..…|____|
                     (1= aucun problème ; 2= questionnaire corrigé ; 3= questionnaire repris)
     Nom et prénom(s) de l’agent de saisie A :________________________________|____|____|____|

     Nom et prénom(s) de l’agent de saisie B :_________________________________|____|____|____|

     A combien d’années remonte l’établissement du village :….. |____|____|____|____|

     Le Village est-il un village de colonie : (1=Oui ; 0=Non) :……………………. |____|

                                                                                                  39
   I.    IDENTITE DES REPONDANTS

N°      Catégorie                                   Nombre pour chaque           TOTAL*
                                                    catégorie
                                                    Homme        Femme
I.1     Autorités
        gouvernementales/Représentants de            |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
        l’administration
I.2     Chefs de village                             |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
I.3     Délégués CVD                                 |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
I.4     Chefs de terre                               |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
I.5     Chefs religieux (Imam, Pasteur, Prêtre….)    |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
I.6     Responsables de
                                                     |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
        Groupements/Associations
I.7     TOTAL*                                       |____|____|   |____|____|    |____|____|
* A compléter après l’interview avec le groupe


  II. COMPOSITION ACTUELLE DES COMMUNAUTES DU VILLAGE

N°       Questions                                                   Réponse

II.1     Nombre approximatif d’autochtones revenus de la Côte
                                                                        |____|____|____|____|
         d’Ivoire à cause de la crise ivoirienne
II.2
         Nombre approximatif d’immigrants venant d’ailleurs             |____|____|____|____|
II.3     Nombre de groupes ethniques dans la communauté du
                                                                             |____|____|
         village
II.4
         Nombre de clans dans le village                                     |____|____|




                                                                                                40
 III. POPULATION DU VILLAGE

NB : Pour cette partie, l’enquêteur devra se rendre à la préfecture ou à la mairie de la localité

N°       Questions                                                   Réponse

III.1    Existence des documents du recensement de 2006
                                                                                   |____|
                            (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
III.2    Population totale en 2006
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
III.3                                    Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
          Population de plus de 15
III.4               ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|

III.5                                    Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
         Population de moins de 15
III.6               ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|

III.7    Existence des documents du recensement de 1996
                                                                                   |____|
                            (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
III.8    Population totale en 1996
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
III.9                                    Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
          Population de plus de 15
III.10              ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|

III.11                                   Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
         Population de moins de 15
III.12              ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|

III.13   Existence des documents du recensement de 1985
                                                                                   |____|
                            (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
III.14   Population totale en 1985
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
III.15                                   Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
          Population de plus de 15
III.16              ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|

III.17                                   Homme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|
         Population de moins de 15
III.18              ans                  Femme
                                                                     |____|____|____|____|____|____|




                                                                                                    41
IV.VISITE D’UN OFFICIEL DE LA VULGARISATION AGRICOLE

N°     Questions                                                          Réponse

IV.1      Quand a été la première visite d’un vulgarisateur à votre
        communauté ?                          (Inscrire l’année ou xxxx   |____|____|____|____|
                                  si jamais)
IV.2   Quand est-ce que la vulgarisation de proximité (ancienne
       formule) a cessé ?              (Inscrire l’année ou xxxx si       |____|____|____|____|
       jamais)
IV.3       Quand est-ce que la vulgarisation nouvelle formule a
              commencé? (Inscrire l’année ou xxxx si jamais)              |____|____|____|____|

IV.4      Quand a été la dernière visite d’un vulgarisateur à votre
             communauté ? (Inscrire l’année ou xxxx si jamais)            |____|____|____|____|

IV.5   Combien de visites avez vous reçus au cours des 12 derniers
                mois ? (Inscrire l’année ou xxxx si jamais)               |____|____|____|____|




                                                                                              42
 V.      INFRASTRUCTURES CENTRALES : DISTANCES ET CHANGEMENTS


N°        Questions                          Réponse
                                             Distance (en km)         Année
                                                                      d’établissement
V.1       Distance entre le village et l’administration centrale (pour les registres des
          naissances)
 V.1.1
          La situation actuelle                 |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.1.2
          La situation précédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.1.3
          La situation antécédente              |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.2       Distance entre le village et la route praticable par car ou camion toute l’année

 V.2.1
          La situation actuelle                 |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.2.2
          La situation précédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.2.3
          La situation antécédente              |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.3       Distance entre le village et la route praticable par car ou camion seulement une
          partie de l’année

 V.3.1
          La situation actuelle                 |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.3.2
          La situation précédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.3.3
          La situation antécédente              |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.4       Distance entre le village et l’arrêt d’autocar/taxi brousse rural

 V.4.1
          La situation actuelle                 |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.4.2
          La situation précédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.4.3
          La situation antécédente              |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.5       Distance entre le village et le bureau des caisses populaires

 V.5.1
          La situation actuelle                 |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.5.2
          La situation précédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.5.3
          La situation antécédente              |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|



                                                                                             43
V.6      Distance entre le village et la localité avec distribution d’électricité

 V.6.1
         La situation actuelle                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.6.2
         La situation précédente                |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.6.3
         La situation antécédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.7      Distance entre le village et la localité avec le téléphone fixe

 V.7.1
         La situation actuelle                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.7.2
         La situation précédente                |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.7.3
         La situation antécédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
V.8      Distance entre le village et la localité avec la téléphonie mobile

 V.8.1
         La situation actuelle                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.8.2
         La situation précédente                |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
 V.8.3
         La situation antécédente               |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|




                                                                                          44
VI.MARCHES VILLAGEOIS

N°       Questions         Réponse

VI.1     FREQUENCE DU MARCHE GENERAL

                           Distance (en   Fréquence               Année
                           km)            1= chaque jour          d’établissement
                                          2 = tous les 3 jours
                                          3 = tous les 4 jours
                                          4 = chaque semaine
                                          5 = occasionnel
         La situation
                      |____|____|____|     |____|      |____|____|____|____|
VI.1.1   actuelle
         La situation
                      |____|____|____|     |____|      |____|____|____|____|
VI.1.2   précédente
         La situation
                      |____|____|____|     |____|      |____|____|____|____|
VI.1.3   antécédente
         TYPE DE SOURCE POUR ACCES A L’EAU DANS LE MARCHE GENERAL
VI.2
                                          Type de source          Année
                                          d’eau                   d’établissement
                                          1= robinet
                                          2 = borne fontaine
                                          3 = forage
                                          4 = puits
                                          5 = aucune


VI.2.1   La situation actuelle             |____|-|____|-|____|   |____|____|____|____|

VI.2.2   La situation précédente           |____|-|____|-|____|   |____|____|____|____|

VI.2.3   La situation antécédente          |____|-|____|-|____|   |____|____|____|____|
         HANGARS DANS LE MARCHE GENERAL
VI.3
                                          Type de hangar          Année
                                          1= individuel           d’établissement
                                          2 = collectif
                                          3 = aucun


VI.3.1   La situation actuelle                  |____|-|____|     |____|____|____|____|

VI.3.2   La situation précédente                |____|-|____|     |____|____|____|____|

VI.3.3   La situation antécédente               |____|-|____|     |____|____|____|____|




                                                                                    45
         ACCES A L’ELECTRICITE DANS LE MARCHE GENERAL
VI.4
                                                Disponibilité                  Année
                                                1= permanente                  d’établissement
                                                2 = une partie de la journée
                                                3 = aucune


VI.4.1   La situation actuelle                             |____|              |____|____|____|____|

VI.4.2   La situation précédente                           |____|              |____|____|____|____|

VI.4.3   La situation antécédente                          |____|              |____|____|____|____|
         FRAIS (NIVEAU DES TAXES DE MARCHE GENERAL)
VI.5
                           Période              Montant par période            Année
                           1= chaque jour                                      d’établissement
                           2 = chaque semaine
                           3 = chaque mois
                           4 = chaque année
                           5 = chaque marché
         La situation
                         |____|    |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
VI.5.1   actuelle
         La situation
VI.5.2                   |____|    |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
         précédente
         La situation
                         |____|    |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
VI.5.3   antécédente
         FREQUENCE DU MARCHE A BETAIL
VI.6
                           Distance (en         Fréquence                      Année
                           km)                  1= chaque jour                 d’établissement
                                                2 = tous les 3 jours
                                                3 = tous les 4 jours
                                                4 = chaque semaine
                                                5 = occasionnel
         La situation
VI.6.1                      |____|____|____|               |____|              |____|____|____|____|
         actuelle
         La situation
VI.6.2                      |____|____|____|               |____|              |____|____|____|____|
         précédente
         La situation
VI.6.3                      |____|____|____|               |____|              |____|____|____|____|
         antécédente




                                                                                                 46
          TYPE DE SOURCE POUR ACCES A L’EAU DANS LE MARCHE A BETAIL
VI.7
                                                 Type de source                 Année
                                                 d’eau                          d’établissement
                                                 1= robinet
                                                 2 = borne fontaine
                                                 3 = forage
                                                 4 = puits
                                                 5 = aucune

          La situation actuelle                    |____|-|____|-|____|         |____|____|____|____|
VI.7.1
          La situation précédente                  |____|-|____|-|____|         |____|____|____|____|
VI.7.2
          La situation antécédente                 |____|-|____|-|____|         |____|____|____|____|
VI.7.3
VI.8      HANGARS DANS LE MARCHE A BETAIL
                                     Type de hangar                             Année
                                                 1= individuel                  d’établissement
                                                 2 = collectif
                                                 3 = aucun

VI.8.1    La situation actuelle                        |____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|

VI.8.2    La situation précédente                      |____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|

VI.8.3    La situation antécédente                     |____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|
VI.9      ACCES A L’ELECTRICITE DANS LE MARCHE A BETAIL
                                       Disponibilité                            Année
                                                 1= permanente                  d’établissement
                                                 2 = une partie de la journée
                                                 3 = aucune

VI.9.1    La situation actuelle                             |____|              |____|____|____|____|

VI.9.2    La situation précédente                           |____|              |____|____|____|____|

VI.9.3    La situation antécédente                          |____|              |____|____|____|____|
VI.10     FRAIS (NIVEAU DES TAXES DE MARCHE) A BETAIL
                        Période        Montant par période                      Année
                            1= chaque jour                                      d’établissement
                            2 = chaque semaine
                            3 = chaque mois
                            4 = chaque année
                            5 = chaque marché
          La situation
VI.10.1                             |____|       |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
          actuelle
          La situation
VI.10.2                             |____|       |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
          précédente
          La situation
VI.10.3                             |____|       |____|____|____|____| |____|____|____|____|
          antécédente




                                                                                                  47
VII.INFRASTRUCTURE DU VILLAGE

N°        Questions               Réponse

                                  Distance           Nombre           Année
                                                                      d’établissement
VII.1     Distance entre le village et les boutiques pour achat des provisions divers (sel,
          thé, sucre, etc.)
          La situation actuelle      |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.1.1
          La situation
                                     |____|____|         |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.1.2   précédente
          La situation
                                     |____|____|         |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.1.3   antécédente
VII.2     Distance entre le village et les puits collectifs pour l’eau potable


          La situation actuelle      |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.2.1
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|    |____|____|____|____|
VII.2.2   précédente
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|    |____|____|____|____|
VII.2.3   antécédente
VII.3     Distance entre le village et le puits à grand diamètre


          La situation actuelle      |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.3.1
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
VII.3.2   précédente
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
VII.3.3   antécédente
VII.4     Distance entre le village et le forage collectif pour l’eau potable


          La situation actuelle      |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.4.1
          La situation
                                     |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.4.2   précédente
          La situation
                                     |____|____|       |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.4.3   antécédente




                                                                                           48
VII.5     Distance entre le village et le Barrage collectif


          La situation actuelle      |____|____|        |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.5.1
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.5.2   précédente
          La situation
                                     |____|____|        |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.5.3   antécédente
VII.6     Pont routier construit par le village


          La situation actuelle                         |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.6.1
          La situation
                                                      |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.6.2   précédente
          La situation
                                                      |____|____|     |____|____|____|____|
VII.6.3   antécédente
VII.7     Passage piétonnier construit par le village

          La situation actuelle                         |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.7.1
          La situation
                                                     |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.7.2   précédente
          La situation
                                                     |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.7.3   antécédente
VII.8     Magasin (utilisable) de coopérative agricole, d’ONG ou de Groupement
          Villageois

          La situation actuelle                         |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.8.1
          La situation
                                                        |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.8.2   précédente
          La situation
                                                        |____|____|   |____|____|____|____|
VII.8.3   antécédente




                                                                                        49
VIII. DROITS FONCIERS SUR LES TERRES DE CULTURE

N°           Questions                                             Réponse

VIII.1       Type de droit appliquée pour les terres de culture
             (si la réponse est non, mettre des croix à année de début d’application)
                                                                   Type de droit                     Année de début
                                                                   appliquée                         d’application
                                                                   (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
             Propriété individuelle
  VIII.1.1                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Propriété collective-familiale
  VIII.1.2                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Propriété collective-communautaire
  VIII.1.3                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
VIII.2       Location, vente et prêts de terres de culture
             (si la réponse est non, mettre des croix à année de début d’application)
                                                                   Possibilité de                    Année de début
                                                                   transaction                       d’application
                                                                   (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
             Est-ce que la terre peut-être louée ?
  VIII.2.1                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Est-ce que la terre peut-être vendue ?
  VIII.2.2                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Est-ce que la terre peut-être prêtée ?
  VIII.2.3                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
VIII.3       Est-ce qu’il y a des terres de culture qui ont étés louées ?
             (si non à la question VIII.2.1, mettre des croix dans les bacs et passer à la question suivante)
                                                                   Location de terre                 Année de début
                                                                   (1=Oui ; 0=Non)                   d’application
             Louées à une personne autochtone
  VIII.3.1                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Louées à une personne étrangère
  VIII.3.2                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
VIII.4       A qui devrait-on demander permission pour louer ses terres?
             (cette question devra être toujours posée quelque soit la réponse de la question précédente)
                                                                   Personnes ressources              Année de début
                                                                   1= chef de famille                d’application
                                                                   2= chef de terre
                                                                   3 = conseil élu par la
                                                                   communauté
                                                                   4 = conseil élu par le
                                                                   gouvernement
                                                                   5 = aucune permission

  VIII.4.1 La situation actuelle                                      |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.4.2 La situation précédente                                    |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.4.3 La situation antécédente                                   |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|
VIII.5       Est-ce qu’il y a des terres de culture qui ont étés vendues ?
             (si non à la question VIII.2.2, mettre des croix dans les bacs et passer à la question suivante)

                                                                                                                 50
                                                                   Ventes de terre                   Année de début
                                                                   (1=Oui ; 0=Non)                   d’application
           Vendues       à une personne
  VIII.5.1                                               |____|                                        |____|____|____|____|
           autochtone ?
           Vendues       à une personne
  VIII.5.2                                               |____|                                        |____|____|____|____|
           étrangère?
VIII.6     A qui devrait-on demander permission pour vendre ses terres?
             (cette question devra être toujours posée quelque soit la réponse de la question précédente)
                                                                   Personnes ressources              Année de début
                                                                   1= chef de famille                d’application
                                                                   2= chef de terre
                                                                   3 = conseil élu par la
                                                                   communauté
                                                                   4 = conseil élu par le
                                                                   gouvernement
                                                                   5 = aucune permission

  VIII.6.1 La situation actuelle                                      |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.6.2 La situation précédente                                    |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.6.3 La situation antécédente                                   |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|
VIII.7       Est-ce qu’il y a des terres de culture qui ont étés prêtées ?
             (si non à la question VIII.2.3, mettre des croix dans les bacs et passer à la question suivante)
                                                                   Prêts de terre                    Année de début
                                                                   (1=Oui ; 0=Non)                   d’application
             Prêtées à une personne autochtone
  VIII.7.1                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
             Prêtées à une personne étrangère
  VIII.7.2                                                                     |____|                  |____|____|____|____|
VIII.8       A qui devrait-on demander permission pour prêter ses terres?
             (cette question devra être toujours posée quelque soit la réponse de la question précédente)
                                                                   Personnes ressources              Année de début
                                                                   1= chef de famille                d’application
                                                                   2= chef de terre
                                                                   3 = conseil élu par la
                                                                   communauté
                                                                   4 = conseil élu par le
                                                                   gouvernement
                                                                   5 = aucune permission

  VIII.8.1 La situation actuelle                                      |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.8.2 La situation précédente                                    |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.8.3 La situation antécédente                                   |____|-|____|-|____|             |____|____|____|____|




                                                                                                                 51
VIII.9      A qui devrait-on s’adresser pour résoudre un conflit foncier pour l’usage des terres de
            culture?
                                                   Personnes ressources Année de début
                                                   1= chef de terre           d’application
                                                                   2 = chef ou conseil élu par la
                                                                   communauté
                                                                   3 = chef ou conseil nommé par le
                                                                   gouvernement
                                                                   4 = autre type d’autorité
                                                                   5 = aucune autorité

  VIII.9.1 La situation actuelle                                      |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.9.2 La situation précédente                                    |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|

  VIII.9.3 La situation antécédente                                   |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|
VIII.10     Quelles sont les modes de propriété des terres de pâturages dans cette communauté
            (s’il n’existe pas de terre de pâturage, mettre des croix dans les bacs et passer à la question suivante)
                                                                   Personnes ressources                 Année de début
                                                                   1= propriété individuelle            d’application
                                                                   2 = propriété collective-familiale
                                                                   3 = propriété collective-lignagère
                                                                   4 = propriété collective-
                                                                   communautaire
                                                                   5 = autre

            La situation actuelle                                     |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|
VIII.10.1
            La situation précédente                                   |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|
VIII.10.2
            La situation antécédente                                  |____|-|____|-|____|              |____|____|____|____|
VIII.10.3
VIII.11     Combien de pistes à bétail y a-t-il dans le village
            (s’il n’existe pas de pistes à bétail, mettre des croix dans les bacs et passer à la question suivante)
                                                                   Nombre                               Année de début
                                                                                                        d’application
VIII.11.1   La situation actuelle                                           |____|____|                 |____|____|____|____|

VIII.11.2 La situation précédente                                           |____|____|                 |____|____|____|____|

VIII.11.3 La situation antécédente                                          |____|____|                 |____|____|____|____|




                                                                                                                      52
IX.DROITS FONCIERS POUR LES TERRES DE PATURAGE

N°              Questions                     Réponse

IX.1            Existe-t-il des terres réservées pour le pâturage ?
                (si la réponse est non pour une situation donnée, mettre des croix à année
                d’établissement)
                                              Existence de                   Année
                                              pâturage                       d’établissement
                                              (1=Oui ; 0=Non)
 IX.1.1         La situation actuelle                    |____|               |____|____|____|____|
                La situation
 IX.1.2                                       |____|         |____|____|____|____|
                précédente
                La situation
 IX.1.3                                       |____|         |____|____|____|____|
                antécédente
IX.2            Quelles sont les voies d’accès aux pâturages ?
                     (si la réponse est 2 (tout autre piste), mettre des croix à année d’établissement)
                                              Voies d’accès                  Année
 IX.2.1
                                              1= pistes à bétail             d’établissement
                                              2 = tout autre piste


 IX.2.2         La situation actuelle                    |____|               |____|____|____|____|
                La situation
 IX.2.3                                                  |____|               |____|____|____|____|
                précédente
                La situation
                                                         |____|               |____|____|____|____|
                antécédente




                                                                                                          53
IX.3      Quels moyens existent pour limiter l’accès aux terres de
          pâturages ?
          (si la réponse est non pour une situation donnée à la question IX.1, mettre des croix dans
          la situation correspondante à cette question ci)
                                        Moyens de                        Année
                                        paiement                         d’établissement
                                        1= paiement d’une taxe par
                                        animal
                                        2 = paiement d’un autre type
                                        de taxe
                                         3 = contrôle du nombre
                                        d’animaux
                                        4 = accès illimité pour
                                        autochtones
                                        5= accès illimité pour
                                        résidents
                                        6= aucune restriction

 IX.3.1   La situation actuelle          |____|-|____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|
          La situation
 IX.3.2                         |____|-|____|-|____|    |____|____|____|____|
          précédente
          La situation
 IX.3.3                         |____|-|____|-|____|    |____|____|____|____|
          antécédente
IX.4      Qui est responsable pour gérer l’accès aux terres de pâturages ?

                                        Personnes                        Année
                                        ressources                       d’établissement
                                        1= chef de terre
                                        2 = chef ou conseil élu par la
                                        communauté
                                        3 = chef ou conseil nommé
                                        par le gouvernement
                                        4 = autre type d’autorité
                                        5 = aucune autorité

 IX.4.1   La situation actuelle          |____|-|____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|
          La situation
 IX.4.2                                  |____|-|____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|
          précédente
          La situation
 IX.4.3                                  |____|-|____|-|____|            |____|____|____|____|
          antécédente




                                                                                                 54
 X.DROITS D’UTILISATION DES FORETS (POUR LE BOIS, LES FRUITS, LA CHASSE ETC.)

N°                 Questions                    Réponse

X.1                Existe-t-il des forêts dans votre communauté ?
                   (si la réponse est non pour une situation donnée, mettre des croix à année
                   d’établissement)
                                                Existence de forêts              Année
                                                (1=Oui ; 0=Non)                  d’établissement
 X.1.1             La situation actuelle                   |____|                |____|____|____|____|
                   La situation
 X.1.2                                           |____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   précédente
                   La situation
 X.1.3                                           |____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   antécédente
X.2                Est-ce qu’il existe des moyens pour limiter l’accès aux forets ?
                   (si la réponse est non pour une situation donnée à la question X.1, mettre des croix dans
                   la situation correspondante à cette question ci)
                                                Moyens de                        Année
                                                paiement                         d’établissement
                                                1= paiement d’une taxe par
                                                unité de bois
                                                2 = paiement d’une taxe par
                                                autre moyen
                                                 3 = contrôle direct des
                                                entrées et sorties
                                                4 = accès illimité pour
                                                autochtones
                                                5= accès illimité pour
                                                résidents
                                                6= aucune restriction

 X.2.1             La situation actuelle          |____|-|____|-|____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   La situation
 X.2.2                                    |____|-|____|-|____|   |____|____|____|____|
                   précédente
                   La situation
 X.2.3                                    |____|-|____|-|____|   |____|____|____|____|
                   antécédente
X.3                Qui est responsable de la gestion de l’accès aux forets ?

                                                Personnes                        Année
                                                ressources                       d’établissement
                                                1= chef de terre
                                                2 = chef ou conseil élu par la
                                                communauté
                                                3 = chef ou conseil nommé
                                                par le gouvernement
                                                4 = autre type d’autorité
                                                5 = aucune autorité

 X.3.1             La situation actuelle          |____|-|____|-|____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   La situation
 X.3.2                                            |____|-|____|-|____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   précédente
                   La situation
 X.3.3                                            |____|-|____|-|____|           |____|____|____|____|
                   antécédente

                                                                                                          55
XI.INFRASTRUCTURE D’EDUCATION ET DE SANTE

N°             Questions               Réponse

                                       Distance                 Année
                                                                d’établissement
XI.1           Distance entre le village et l’école primaire la plus fréquentée par les
               enfants du village
 XI.1.1        La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               La situation
 XI.1.2                                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               précédente
               La situation
 XI.1.3                                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               antécédente
XI.2           Distance entre le village et l’école secondaire la plus fréquentée par
               les enfants du village
 XI.2.1        La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               La situation
 XI.2.2                                  |____|____|____|        |____|____|____|____|
               précédente
               La situation
 XI.2.3                                  |____|____|____|        |____|____|____|____|
               antécédente
XI.3           Distance entre le village et le centre de santé le plus fréquenté par la
               population du village
 XI.3.1        La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               La situation
 XI.3.2                                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               précédente
               La situation
 XI.3.3                                  |____|____|____|       |____|____|____|____|
               antécédente




                                                                                     56
XII.INFRASTRUCTURE RELIGIEUSES

N°
                     Questions                            Réponse
                                        Distance                 Année
                                                                 d’établissement
XII.1           Distance entre le village et l’église la plus fréquentée par la
                population du village

  XII.1.1       La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                La situation
  XII.1.2                                 |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                précédente
                La situation
  XII.1.3                                 |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                antécédente
XII.2           Distance entre le village et la mosquée la plus fréquentée par la
                population du village
  XII.2.1       La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                La situation
  XII.2.2                                 |____|____|____|        |____|____|____|____|
                précédente
                La situation
 XII.2.3                                  |____|____|____|        |____|____|____|____|
                antécédente
XII.3           Distance entre le village et le temple le plus fréquenté par la
                population du village
  XII.3.1       La situation actuelle     |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                La situation
  XII.3.2                                 |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                précédente
                La situation
 XII.3.3                                  |____|____|____|      |____|____|____|____|
                antécédente




                                                                                     57
