NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE REAL EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS
Philip Bond
Alex Edmans
Itay Goldstein
Working Paper 17719
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17719
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Philip Bond, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Financial Markets
Philip Bond, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17719
December 2011
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,G34
ABSTRACT
A large amount of activity in the financial sector occurs in secondary financial markets, where securities
are traded among investors without capital flowing to firms. The stock market is the archetypal example,
which in most developed economies captures a lot of attention and resources. Is the stock market
just a side show or does it affect real economic activity? In this article, we discuss the potential real
effects of financial markets that stem from the informational role of market prices. We review the
theoretical literature and show that accounting for the feedback effect from market prices to the real
economy significantly changes our understanding of the price formation process, the informativeness
of the price, and speculators’ trading behavior. We make two main points. First, we argue that a new
definition of price efficiency is needed to account for the extent to which prices reflect information
useful for the efficiency of real decisions (rather than the extent to which they forecast future cash
flows). Second, incorporating the feedback effect into models of financial markets can explain various
market phenomena that otherwise seem puzzling. Finally, we review empirical evidence on the real
effects of secondary financial markets.
Philip Bond
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Ave S
Minneapolis, MN 55410
apbond@umn.edu
Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Itay Goldstein
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu

I.

Introduction

One of the most important topics in financial economics is whether financial markets have an effect on
the real economy. This question has become particularly relevant in the light of the recent financial crisis.
An important line of research, exemplified by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), studies how adverse selection or moral hazard problems affect primary financial markets by
limiting the ability of entrepreneurs and firms to raise external capital. This in turn constrains real
investment, and so frictions in primary financial markets end up reducing real economic activity.
However, there is an important feature of real-world financial markets that is missing in this line of
research, namely that a large fraction of activity occurs in secondary financial markets, in which
securities are traded among investors, without any capital flowing to firms. The archetypal example of a
secondary market is the stock market, in which capital flows to a firm only when it issues shares, but most
of the time, trading is conducted between investors and does not involve the firm at all. In this sense,
derivative markets are almost always secondary, and there is large amount of activity in secondary bond
markets as well. In most developed economies, substantial resources are devoted to secondary markets
such as the stock market. However, in the line of research mentioned above, the operation of secondary
financial markets has either no or very little effect on the real economy.1
How can one explain the attention devoted to secondary financial markets? Why do managers constantly
track the performance of their firms’ stocks? Why does the press so frequently report the developments in
the stock market? Can this be rationalized in a world where secondary market prices are passive (i.e.,
epiphenomenal), in that they merely reflect expectations about future cash flows and do not affect them,
as in many economic models, including most of those used in the asset-pricing literature? Related, is it
plausible that secondary-market prices are purely passive, and have no effect on real decisions, given that
a vast empirical literature documents how much information prices contain about future cash flows?
1

The ex-post liquidity of secondary markets affects the prices firms obtain ex-ante in primary markets.

2

In our view, treating secondary market prices as a side show is a mistake. Instead, we will argue that one
should take seriously the idea that secondary market prices have an effect on real economic activity.
Since secondary financial markets do not lead to any direct transfer of resources to the firm, prices in
these markets have real consequences only if they affect the actions of decision makers in the real side of
the economy (henceforth, ‘real decision makers’). We can think of three reasons for which this may
occur. We argue that all of them originate from the informational role of prices.
First, real decision makers learn new information from secondary market prices, and use this information
to guide their real decisions. The idea is very natural, going back to Hayek (1945), who argued that prices
are a useful source of information. A financial market is a place where many speculators with different
pieces of information meet to trade, attempting to profit from their information. Prices aggregate these
diverse pieces of information and ultimately reflect an accurate assessment of firm value. Real decision
makers (such as managers, capital providers, directors, customers, regulators, employees, etc.) will learn
from this information and use it to guide their decisions, in turn affecting firm cash flows and values
(Baumol (1965)).

Ultimately, the financial market has a real effect due to the transmission of

information.
Some readers may wonder if it is plausible that real decision makers learn from prices. They are closer to
the firm than market traders, and so one might expect them to have better information. However, this
logic is incomplete.

The assumption needed for financial markets to have a real effect via the

transmission of information is not that real decision makers are less informed than traders, but only that
they do not have perfect information about every decision-relevant factor, and so outsiders may possess
some incremental information that is useful to them. Thus, real decision makers may be the most
informed agents in the economy about the firm, but there are still aspects about which they can learn from
outsiders. This is for two reasons. First, while an individual speculator may be less informed than the
manager, the market aggregates the information of many speculators who collectively may be more
informed (Grossman (1976), Hellwig (1980)). Second, optimal real decisions depend not only on internal
3

information to the firm (about which the manager may be more informed), but also on external
information, such as the state of the economy, the position of competitors, the demand by consumers, etc.
Consider, for example, a firm manager, who is arguably the individual most informed about the firm’s
fundamentals. The manager announces an acquisition bid for another firm. This decision is often made
after undertaking substantial internal analysis and seeking the external counsel of investment banks, to
assess whether the value of the target to the acquirer exceeds the offer price. As is well known, this
assessment is based on assumptions with a high degree of uncertainty. In particular, the desirability of the
deal depends on many factors other than the acquirer’s fundamentals and about which the acquirer may be
less than fully informed – such as the standalone value of the target, the likely synergies between the
acquirer and the target, and the future prospects of the industry (which affects whether it is optimal for the
acquirer to expand via acquisition). Hence, it is entirely plausible that, among the many speculators who
trade in the stock market, some have insights into the proposed deal that were missed by the manager and
his advisors. If participants trade on this information, their insights will be reflected in the price. Hence,
when a manager announces an acquisition and the market responds negatively, he may learn from this
response and cancel the deal. Empirical evidence on this channel was presented by Luo (2005).2

More generally, managers may learn from prices when making other decisions, such as investment, as
shown by Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) and Bakke and Whited (2010). Moreover, decision makers
other than managers are further removed from the firm and also lack decision-relevant information. Thus,
they are even more likely to use the information contained in market prices to guide their actions, which
affect the firm’s cash flows and values. Credit-rating agencies are known to be influenced by stock
prices, and their decisions have a large effect on the availability of credit to the firm. Regulators, who
take actions that affect firm cash flows (most prominently, in the case of banks), follow market prices
very closely (e.g., Feldman and Schmidt (2003) and Burton and Seale (2005)), and recent proposals in the
2

As an analogy, assume that there exist stock prices on individual researchers, which reflect the views of the general
profession. If a researcher’s stock price fell upon starting a new project, many such researchers would choose to
abandon the project.

4

light of the crisis advocate increasing the reliance on market prices even further (e.g., Flannery (2009),
McDonald (2010), and Hart and Zingales (2011)). Similarly, employees and customers may base their
decisions on whether to work for the firm or buy its products on information they glean from the market.
Second, even if decision makers do not learn from market prices, they care about market prices because
they are party to contracts that are contingent on market prices. This is most relevant for firm managers,
whose compensation is tied to the firm’s share price. Then, the manager’s incentives to take real actions
will depend on the extent to which they will be reflected in the stock price. If the stock price is not
closely tied to firm value but instead driven by noise, the manager has weak incentives to exert costly
effort to improve the firm’s fundamental value.
Importantly, even though this second channel does not involve active learning from the price, it is
ultimately similar to the first channel, in that market prices end up having a real effect due to their
informational role. The reason that contracts are conditioned on prices to begin with is most likely due to
their informational role. Shareholders choose to solve agency problems with the firm’s manager by tying
his compensation to the stock price, because they believe that the stock price contains information about
firm value. If prices were uninformative, shareholders would not tie managerial compensation to stock
prices, and so managers would not care about stock prices.
Third, another possibility, favored by proponents of behavioral finance, is that secondary-market prices
have a real effect on economic activity because real decision makers irrationally follow the price and use
it as an anchor. While we do not deny that irrationality exists, the ultimate source of the effect is likely to
be the informational role of prices. Presumably, the reason that real decision makers look at the price,
rather than other public signals, is that the price often contains information. There may be over-reaction
due to bounded rationality, but the informational content is key for some reliance on the price to arise.
Note that even fully rational learning from the price can lead to inefficient decisions since price changes

5

sometimes arise from non-fundamental shocks (such as price pressure caused by fire-sales), which real
decision makers may misinterpret as arising from fundamental shocks.3

In this article, we survey models that feature a feedback effect from financial markets to the real economy
due to the informational role of prices.

Unlike the traditional approach, where prices only reflect

expected firm cash flows, in these models prices both affect and reflect firm cash flows. George Soros, a
prominent trader, has termed this feature "reflexivity," and summarized it as follows: “In certain
circumstances, financial markets can affect the so-called fundamentals which they are supposed to
reflect.”4 In reviewing the theoretical literature, we show that accounting for the feedback effect from
market prices to the real economy significantly changes our understanding of the price formation process,
the informativeness of the price, and speculators’ trading behavior.
We make two main points. First, if one accepts the idea that secondary prices have an effect for
informational reasons, it follows that the traditional definitions of price efficiency need to be augmented.
In particular, while financial economists typically study whether prices forecast future cash flows, a
potentially more important question to ask is whether prices accurately convey information about
underlying economic state or choice variables that are important for real efficiency. We show that the
two notions often diverge in models with feedback effects.5 In particular, market prices may convey less
useful information to decision makers than traditional notions of market efficiency would suggest. In
addition, the extent to which prices reveal information about an underlying state variable depends
critically on how decision makers will use this information. When using the information in the price,
decision makers might harm the informativeness of the price about the variable they wish to learn.
Second, we discuss the implications of the informational feedback from financial markets to real activities
for various topics of research in finance, and in particular show how it generates natural explanations of

3

In contrast, note that it is quite possible for fluctuations in primary financial prices to have an effect, even if these
fluctuations come solely from irrationality on the part of investors: see the survey of Baker and Wurgler (2012).
4
This quote is taken from a testimony given by George Soros before Congress in 1994.
5
This point goes back to Hirshleifer (1971), Bresnahan, Milgrom, and Paul (1992), and Dow and Gorton (1997).

6

phenomena – such as manipulative short selling, the asymmetric dissemination of bad news and good
news, financial-market runs, information-based trading, and the presence of non-controlling blockholders
– that otherwise seem puzzling.
The remainder of the survey is organized as follows. Section II describes models of learning by decision
makers from market prices.

Section III describes models in which financial markets have real

consequences due to their incentive effect. Section IV discusses the implications of feedback from
financial markets to real activity for various research topics in financial economics. Section V reviews
empirical evidence on the real effect of secondary financial markets. Section VI concludes.

II.

Learning by decision makers

A central topic in financial economics is price efficiency, which is defined as the extent to which market
prices are informative about the value of traded assets. Financial economists often argue that price
efficiency is desirable because market prices guide real decisions (such as investment). Thus, informative
prices enable superior decision-making: price efficiency promotes real efficiency. For example, Fama
and Miller (1972) note: “(an efficient market) has a very desirable feature. In particular, at any point in
time market prices of securities provide accurate signals for resource allocation; that is, firms can make
production-investment decisions ..." (p 335).

This idea is quite natural: if prices are efficient and

aggregate information from various sources, then decision makers in the real sector, who are likely to be
only partially informed, will wish to learn from prices. This idea goes back to Hayek (1945), who argued
that prices are a useful source of information.

There is vast empirical literature documenting the

informational content of prices. Strikingly, market prices contain information even about events farremoved from firm cash flows: Roll (1984) shows that futures markets improve weather-forecasting
relative to traditional meteorological forecasts, while a large literature on prediction markets (see Wolfers
and Zitzewitz (2004)) shows that markets provide the most efficient mechanism for predicting election
outcomes. As argued in the introduction, there are many types of decision makers who can potentially
7

learn from prices: managers, regulators, capital providers, customers, employees, etc. The assumption is
not that these agents (in particular, managers) are less informed overall than speculators, but simply that
speculators have some information that they do not have.
However, theoretical research on financial markets traditionally treats the real side of the firm as
exogenous. A large literature, starting from the seminal papers by Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Hellwig
(1980), Admati (1985), Glosten and Milgrom (1985), and Kyle (1985), analyzes models in which
informed speculators trade on their information about firm value and studies the extent to which their
information is incorporated into prices – i.e., whether prices are efficient. Since firm value in these
papers is typically exogenous to trading in the financial market, these models do not allow us to study
how real efficiency is affected by price efficiency.
An exception is the early literature on the desirability of insider trading. Fishman and Hagerty (1992),
Leland (1992), and Khanna, Slezak, and Bradley (1994) present models where different types of
speculators – insiders and outsiders – trade on their information. Limiting insider trading reduces price
efficiency since information possessed by insiders is no longer impounded into prices. On the other hand,
it also reduces adverse selection and thus encourages outsiders to trade on their information, increasing
price efficiency. Hence, there is a tradeoff with respect to the effect of insider trading on price efficiency.
In these models, real decision makers learn from the price, and so the implications of the effect of insider
trading on price efficiency are automatically translated into implications on real efficiency.
Similarly, Boot and Thakor (1997) and Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) use the feedback effect to
rationalize a firm’s choice to issue publicly-traded securities, rather than receiving private financing (e.g.
from a bank). In these models, public trading allows the firm to infer information from its stock price and
use it to improve its real decisions. Foucault and Gehrig (2008) extend this reasoning to explain the

8

decision of a firm to cross-list its shares in two different markets: cross listing enables the firm to obtain
more precise information from the stock market and improve the efficiency of its investment decisions.6
However, the link between price efficiency and real efficiency turns out to be more complicated, as was
shown by Dow and Gorton (1997). They study a model where managers learn from prices. There are
two equilibria. In the first equilibrium, speculators produce information and trade on it, so that their
information is incorporated in prices. Managers then base investment decisions on prices. In the other
equilibrium, speculators do not produce information, and investments are not made (because their
unconditional NPV is negative). Technically, in this second equilibrium, prices are efficient since they
fully reflect the fact that investment is not going to occur. However, real efficiency is low, since the
market does not provide information to guide real investment decisions. Hence, price efficiency does not
necessarily imply real efficiency.
We can express the tension between price efficiency and real efficiency as follows. The traditional focus
of price efficiency is whether the price of a given security accurately predicts the future value of that
security. However, what matters for real efficiency is whether the price reveals information necessary for
decision makers to take value-maximizing actions. To distinguish the two notions, we will refer to the
traditional notion - forecasting firm value - as forecasting price efficiency (FPE), while we term the extent
to which prices reveal the information necessary for real efficiency as revelatory price efficiency (RPE).
Dow and Gorton’s point is that it is quite possible for prices to be efficient in the forecasting sense, but
not in the revelatory sense. Revelatory price inefficiency immediately generates real inefficiency. In

6

Other papers in the IPO literature have also used the assumption that stock-market participants have information
about some aspects of the firm, which is not available to the firm’s managers. See, for example, Rock (1986),
Benveniste and Spindt (1989), Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990), and, Biais, Bossaerts, and Rochet (2002).

9

contrast, forecasting price inefficiency affects real inefficiency only to the extent to which it is related to
revelatory price inefficiency.7
The papers discussed above assume that decision makers lack information about state variables whose
realization affects the value maximizing action. Thus, in our definition of RPE, the information necessary
for decision makers to take value-maximizing actions is information about these state variables. Here, the
distinction between RPE and FPE is reminiscent of Hirshleifer’s (1971) distinction between discovery
and foreknowledge. Discovery is important to uncover unknown information that can guide decision
making, while foreknowledge is information about something that will be found out eventually and hence
learning it early has no real implications. Hirshleifer (1971) emphasizes that foreknowledge has no social
value, while discovery is valuable, and argues that economic forces do not guarantee optimal information
production. Looking ahead to the next section, agency problems sometimes imply that the information
necessary for real efficiency is instead information about the privately-observable actions of decision
makers, and RPE relates to how accurately prices reveal these actions.
The literature has identified at least three distinct ways by which RPE can fail in the case that state
variables are unobserved by decision makers.
First, assume there is perfect FPE, in that the security price perfectly aggregates all information currently
available to market participants. RPE commonly fails if expected firm value is non-monotonic in the
state variable under the efficient decision. To see this, observe that in this case, real efficiency and FPE
imply the price is non-monotonic in the state variable. But then a given price level can be associated with
multiple different realizations of the state variable, and so RPE fails. Such non-monotonicity can arise
when the decision maker would like to take a corrective action that increases firm value when the state
variable falls below a certain threshold. For example, a board of directors may fire a badly-performing

7

Although RPE is necessary for real efficiency, it is not sufficient. For example, firms may fall short of real
efficiency simply because limited enforceability makes it impossible for shareholders to force a manager to take a
particular action.

10

manager, a private-equity fund may buy out an underperforming firm, or the government may provide
assistance to an underperforming bank.

Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott (2010) analyze equilibrium

outcomes in this case. They show that in order to achieve the desirable outcome, the decision maker
cannot fully rely on the information in the price, but must have some independent information of his own.
In the context of monetary policy, Bernanke and Woodford (1997) observe that a similar problem
constrains inflation targeting. Sundaresan and Wang (2011) analyze the implications for the reliance on
contingent capital with market triggers.
Second, as in Dow and Gorton (1997), RPE can fail because a firm’s response to the information
conveyed in prices may destroy speculators’ incentives to collect information in the first place. In their
model, this occurs when a firm interprets security prices as being random and hence uninformative, and
so does not invest; but then foreseeing no investment, speculators do not find it profitable to collect
information, ensuring that prices are indeed uninformative. Bresnahan, Milgrom, and Paul (1992) present
a milder version of this general argument: speculators may have stronger incentives to collect information
about the future value of a firm’s assets-in-place than about cash flows that a firm’s current actions can
affect. Dow, Goldstein, and Guembel (2011) show how a similar mechanism can amplify bad economic
shocks. Bad shocks directly reduce firms’ investments, and this reduces speculators’ incentives to
produce information. As a result, firms’ investments decline further and so do their values (due to a
decrease in the amount of available information), amplifying the original shock. Faure-Grimaud (2002)
and Lehar, Seppi, and Strobl (2008) study another effect: if a regulator acquires information from market
prices, his incentives to acquire distinct information by himself are reduced, and so for some parameter
values, the regulator’s total information (from all sources) is reduced.
Third, even if speculators receive information costlessly, RPE may fail if prices do not efficiently
aggregate speculators’ diverse pieces of information. This possibility is analyzed by Bond and Goldstein
(2011), who characterize circumstances under which the act of using prices as an input to economic
decisions reduces RPE. The decision maker’s reliance on market prices affects speculators’ incentives to
11

trade on their information, in light of the traditional tradeoff they face between risk and return. The extent
of information aggregation also affects the traditional notion of FPE, but the two efficiency measures do
not coincide. Bond and Goldstein’s analysis highlights another dimension of RPE: even if a decision
maker could increase RPE by committing to completely ignore security prices, he would prefer instead to
put some weight on security prices. The reason is that RPE is a relevant metric only if prices are actually
used in making decisions. Hence the appropriate welfare-measure must combine RPE with the extent
prices are actually used in decisions.
In summary, the papers above explain why market prices may convey less useful information to decision
makers than is commonly assumed to be the case when markets are efficient in the traditional sense: in
our terminology, RPE may fail even when FPE holds. In addition, they show that the extent to which
prices reveal information about an underlying state variable depends critically on the uses to which the
information will be put by decision makers. When using the information in the price, decision makers
might harm the informativeness of the price about the variable they wish to learn.
While the above discussion focuses on the effect of financial markets on production efficiency, a distinct
welfare effect of financial markets relates to the possibility of sharing consumption risk. Under some
circumstances, increases in RPE lead to a reduction in risk-sharing possibilities, due to what has been
dubbed the Hirshleifer (1971) effect: one cannot insure against shocks after their realization has become
public.

Dow and Rahi (2003) develop a full welfare analysis of the effect of informed trading,

considering both production and consumption effects.

III. Improved incentives
A second channel through which financial markets may have real effects is by affecting a decision
maker’s incentives to take real decisions. This effect was first discussed by Baumol (1965) and an early
formalization can be found in Fishman and Hagerty (1989). In their paper, a manager chooses the firm’s

12

investment level, which is unobservable to investors. By assumption, the manager’s aim is to maximize
the firm’s share price. If the share price perfectly reflected expected cash flows, the manager would
choose the efficient investment level, i.e., equate the marginal benefit of investment to its marginal cost.
However, since the investment choice is unobservable to market participants, prices do not reflect
expected cash flows: an investment that raises expected cash flows by $1 augments the expected share
price by less than $1. Consequently, the manager underinvests. If price efficiency increases, the price
more closely reflects the fundamental value of the firm and thus the benefits of any investment that the
manager has undertaken.

This reduces the underinvestment problem and increases real efficiency.

Fishman and Hagerty use this insight to examine a firm’s incentives to disclose information, and thereby
affect price efficiency.
In the incentives channel, decision makers such as the manager do not learn from prices. Instead, prices
affect the manager’s incentives as his contract is tied to them. Thus, in our definition of RPE, the
information that the price must reflect for the manager to take value-maximizing actions is information
about his actions. Put differently, the greater the extent to which the stock price reflects the manager’s
actions, the greater his incentives to take desirable actions and avoid undesirable ones. Thus, the role
played by RPE in the two channels is subtly different. In the incentives channel, RPE affects the decision
maker’s incentives to take the efficient action. In the learning channel, RPE affects his ability to take the
efficient action, by revealing to him what the efficient action is. As in Section II, RPE and FPE here need
not coincide. Paul (1992) theoretically demonstrates that efficient markets (i.e., markets that exhibit FPE)
weight information according to the informativeness about asset value, while for optimal incentives,
information should be weighted according to its informativeness about the manager’s actions. The fact
that FPE and RPE diverge is illustrated by Singh and Yerramilli (2010), who show that certain types of
transparency simultaneously increase FPE but decrease RPE.
A limiting case of Paul (1992) is that speculators have no information about the manager’s actions. Stein
(1989) analyzes a model of this type, and shows that even when financial markets are efficient in the
13

traditional (FPE) sense, managers who seek to maximize the stock price have the incentive to take nonvalue-maximizing actions – in his model, earnings manipulation – that are not observed by the market.
Again, the real inefficiency reflects a failure of RPE. In the same vein, Brandenburger and Polak (1996)
show that managers who seek to maximize the stock price have the incentive to ignore their own
(superior) information about the best decision, and follow the market priors, again leading to non-valuemaximizing actions. Aghion and Stein (2008) make a related point, showing that managers will choose to
pursue the strategy expected by the market.
The above papers generally take as exogenous the dependence of the manager’s contract on the stock
price. Holmstrom and Tirole (1993) endogenize this dependence by solving for the optimal contract
between shareholders and the manager. In such a case, changes in stock market efficiency have a second
effect, in that they affect the equilibrium contract, and thus the extent to which the manager cares about
the price. In Holmstrom and Tirole, when price efficiency increases, the stock price provides a less noisy
signal of firm value. Thus, if the manager is risk averse, it is optimal to increase the weighting of the
contract on the stock price relative to non-price measures of performance, such as accounting profits.
Simply put, shareholders pay the manager according to the stock price since it reflects firm value. Hence,
it is effectively shareholders (the “principal”) rather than the manager (the “agent”) who learn from stock
prices. This endogenous response of the contract amplifies the effect of price efficiency on real efficiency
in their model. Separately, there are a number of other potentially important reasons why the manager
may care about the stock price, which is essential for the incentives channel to operate. For example,
shareholders may have short horizons themselves, and hence want to incentivize the manager with
contracts that depend on the short-term share price. Alternatively, the manager may care about the shortterm share price due to takeover threats, reputational considerations, or expecting to sell his own shares in
the short-run.
In all the papers mentioned above, the decision maker is the manager of a firm. In common with the
learning channel discussed in Section II, stock-market efficiency may also affect the actions of other
14

decision makers. For example, Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) show that an increase in RPE raises the
incentives of a blockholder to take a value-augmenting action, the benefits of which may not materialize
until after a liquidity shock forces the blockholder to sell.

IV. Implications for financial markets and corporate finance
Considering a feedback effect from financial markets to firms’ real decisions generates an array of
implications for the study of financial markets and corporate finance. Often, phenomena that are believed
to be puzzling can be rationalized in a model in which financial markets have real effects. We will
frequently draw a distinction with the “traditional” view of security prices, in which cash flows affect
prices, but prices have no effect on cash flows. Our focus here is on models that exhibit endogenous
feedback, i.e., via learning and/or incentives. Several papers in the literature generate related implications
based on models with exogenous feedback, i.e., where firm value or the firm’s investment decision is
assumed to be mechanically tied to the price; see: Khanna and Sonti (2004) and Ozdenoren and Yuan
(2008).

IV.A Manipulative short-selling
Regulators and firm managers are often concerned about manipulative short-selling in financial markets,
whereby speculators drive down the price of a stock by short selling. Such concerns have led to
restrictions on short selling activities in different countries and at different points in time.

These

concerns, however, are difficult to rationalize in a traditional model of financial markets. First, in such a
model, the stock price has no real effect, so there is no reason to be concerned about artificially low stock
prices. Second, it is often hard to generate manipulation as an equilibrium phenomenon, since price
impact will cause a manipulator to sell at a low price and buy at a high price and hence lose money
overall (Jarrow (1992)).

15

Goldstein and Guembel (2008) consider a model where the manager of the firm learns from the stock
price about the profitability of an investment project. Due to this feedback effect, manipulation arises as
an equilibrium phenomenon. A speculator realizes that if she drives the stock price down, even when she
has no information, the manager might cancel the investment since he thinks that the price decrease may
have been due to negative information. Since the cancelation is based on no actual information, it reduces
firm value, allowing the speculator to profit from her short position. Interestingly, the effect cannot work
in the opposite direction. If the speculator buys without information, she causes overinvestment, which is
also bad for firm value, and so she loses from her long position.
Related to the distinction made earlier between RPE and FPE, this paper also shows that the feedback
effect can hamper the ability of decision makers to learn from the price about their optimal decision.
Here, the feedback effect generates the manipulative motive that makes it hard to infer the profitability of
the investment from the price. Khanna and Mathews (2011) allow a large blockholder to counter the
manipulators’ strategies, and identify more precisely when such manipulative strategies are likely to
succeed.

IV.B Limits to arbitrage
In standard trading models in which firm value is exogenous, speculators can make profits by trading on
their information. Existing papers have identified limits to such arbitrage activities, typically based on
exogenous forces such as trading restrictions or agency problems between the speculator and her own
investors. Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2011b) show that the informational role of prices generates a
limit to arbitrage that arises endogenously as part of the trading process. Consider a speculator who has
negative information about firm prospects. If she short-sells, this lowers the stock price. The manager
will observe the reduced stock price and infer that firm prospects are poor. Consistent with the models in
Section II, this may lead him to take a corrective action, such as reducing investment. Downsizing the
firm in response to poor firm conditions is efficient and improves the firm’s fundamental value, reducing

16

the profitability of the speculator’s short position. Thus, the speculator may refrain from short-selling in
the first place.
Interestingly, this feedback-driven limit to arbitrage is asymmetric: it deters informed selling, but
encourages informed buying. Trading on information in either direction increases price informativeness
and thus firm value, through guiding the manager’s action. This reduces the profitability of a short
position, but increases the profitability of a long position. This asymmetry originates from a similar force
to the one present in Goldstein and Guembel (2008): in the presence of feedback, a speculator who shortsells benefits from hurting the firm, but loses from helping it. However, while Goldstein and Guembel
(2008) highlight that the feedback effect can lead an uninformed speculator to short-sell, Edmans,
Goldstein, and Jiang (2011b) highlight that it may deter an informed speculator from short-selling.
IV.C The survival of irrational traders
An important question in asset pricing is whether irrational traders can survive in the long run. Under the
traditional view, irrational traders, who trade based on considerations unrelated to firms’ fundamentals,
will lose money, and hence disappear from the market over time. Hence, markets will be populated only
by rational traders, and so prices will be efficient, correctly reflecting firms’ fundamentals. However, as
pointed out by Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (2006), when prices affect firms’ cash flows, this
traditional view no longer holds. Irrational traders can end up making a profit because their trades on
non-fundamental considerations end up affecting firms’ cash flows in a way that allows them to make a
profit on their trades.

IV.D Runs in the financial market
Another type of market behavior that is puzzling under the traditional view is a self-reinforcing “run” on a
stock, where many investors seek to sell a stock because other investors are also selling. While many
commentators believe that such runs are commonplace, they are hard to explain in traditional models.

17

The reason is that self-reinforcing selling can occur only if selling exhibits strategic complementarity (i.e.,
the gain is larger when more people sell). However, traditional forces in financial markets generate
strategic substitutability: due to the price mechanism, when speculators sell, the price goes down,
increasing the incentive for other speculators to buy, rather than sell. Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan
(2011b), building on Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2011a), show that strategic complementarities
arise if capital providers base their decision on how much capital to provide to the firm on its stock price.
The reason is that if many other speculators sell, the fall in the share price leads to a reduction in
financing, and hence to a fall in firm value. This can create ‘trading frenzies’ that resemble ‘run’
phenomena.

IV.E

Information-based trade

A long-standing puzzle in financial economics is the apparent existence of trade for purely informational
reasons. When cash flows are exogenous, no-trade theorems (see Milgrom and Stokey (1982)) imply that
such trade is impossible, and so the only way to generate trade is to assume that some people trade for
non-informational reasons (e.g., “noise traders” are present). However, Bond and Eraslan (2010) show
that trade based purely on informational differences can arise when decision makers observe the terms of
trade (such as volume or price), and use the information revealed to make real decisions that affect the
cash flows of the asset being traded.

IV.F

Governance through financial markets and the value of blockholders

The traditional view of blockholders is that they exert governance through direct intervention in a firm’s
operations, otherwise known as “voice”. However, particularly in the U.S., blockholders appear to be too
small to intervene effectively: while Holderness (2009) finds that 96% of U.S. firms have at least one
blockholder with a stake exceeding 5%, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) document that
only 20% (10%) of large (medium) U.S. firms contain a blockholder who owns at least 20%, which they
argue is the threshold required to exert control. The governance role of such blockholders, and thus the
18

rationale for their existence, appears puzzling in the light of existing intervention theories. However, the
incentives channel studied in Section III shows that blockholders can exert governance even in the
absence of control rights. By gathering and trading on private information - known as governance
through trading or “exit”8 – they increase price informativeness and thus the manager’s incentives to take
actions that improve firm value.
A central question is why blockholders have a special role in such informed trading compared to other
investors. Edmans (2009) analyzes the link between block size, information acquisition incentives, and
informed trading. In the presence of short-sales constraints, a trader with a zero position has little
incentive to acquire information, because if she receives a negative signal, she cannot trade on it. Up to a
point, the larger one’s stake, the more one can sell upon a negative signal, and thus the greater the
incentives to gather the signal to begin with. However, if the block becomes too large, liquidity becomes a
constraint and so the blockholder cannot sell her entire stake upon a negative signal. Thus, the optimal
block size is finite.
The particular managerial agency problem examined by Edmans (2009) is that managers may behave
myopically, and in this context he shows how blockholders, by increasing price efficiency, can help
augment long-term investment. In a contemporaneous paper, Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) study a
different specification of the firm’s agency problem, and show that, while the blockholder alleviates the
agency problem of the manager taking a “bad” action (e.g. shirking), she can sometimes make it more
difficult to motivate the manager to take a “good” action (e.g. exerting effort).
Goldman and Strobl (2011) study a different aspect of blockholder behavior. When blockholders’ timehorizons are shorter than project horizons, they have the incentive to try to manipulate short-term share
prices upwards. A manager who is himself compensated on the basis of short-term share prices then
responds by extending the time horizon of the project. Consequently, the combination of short horizons
8

The survey of McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011) shows that exit is the leading governance mechanism used by
institutions.

19

for both blockholders and managers can, counterintuitively, end up inducing managers to extend project
time horizons.
Viewing governance as occurring through financial markets, rather than the exercise of control, in turn
has new implications for the optimal blockholder structure. In voice theories, a single large blockholder
is optimal, as she has strong incentives to engage in costly intervention; breaking up the block into
multiple units weakens voice due to the free-rider problem. However, if governance occurs through exit,
Edmans and Manso (2011) show that multiple small blockholders can be optimal. The same free-rider
problems that hinder voice actually enhance exit: since multiple blockholders cannot co-ordinate to limit
their orders and maximize combined trading profits, they trade competitively, impounding more
information into prices. The optimal number of blockholders is thus a trade-off between the positive
effect on “exit” and the negative effect on “voice.”
Blockholder models also make precise a potential cost of price efficiency. Maug (1998) studies a
blockholder who is considering a value-adding intervention. Due to the free-rider problem, her stake in
the firm may be insufficient to induce her to bear the costs of intervention. However, she can profit from
intervention through a second source: the ability to buy additional shares at a price that does not fully
reflect the benefits of her intervention. Consequently, lower price efficiency facilitates blockholder
intervention, raising real efficiency. In a similar vein, Kyle and Vila (1991) and Kahn and Winton (1998)
show that when the price impact of trades is lower – often associated with low price efficiency – there is
more blockholder formation in the first place. This in turn improves real efficiency as the blockholder
subsequently engages in intervention.

IV.G

Optimal disclosure policy

A key topic in accounting and finance is the extent to which firms should disclose their private
information to the market. The decision about disclosure changes fundamentally when there is potential
for two-way learning, i.e., the market can learn from the firm and the firm can learn from the market.
20

Bond and Goldstein (2011) show that a benefit of disclosure is that it reduces the uncertainty that traders
are exposed to, encouraging them to trade more aggressively on their information, and so enables the firm
to learn from the market more effectively. On the other hand, when the information available to the firm
is correlated with the information available to traders, disclosure reduces speculators’ informational
advantage and so they trade less aggressively, reducing the ability of the firm to learn. Overall, disclosure
is beneficial when it involves dimensions of information that speculators do not have access to, but may
be harmful otherwise. Gao and Liyang (2011) study a different tradeoff, whereby the disclosure of
information by the firm is beneficial because it reduces the adverse selection in the financial market, but
costly since it discourages speculators from producing their own information, and so the firm learns less.
Langberg and Sivaramakrishnan (2010) study a third tradeoff, based on the idea that the disclosure of
information by the firm is the trigger for feedback from the market. The benefit in disclosing is then the
ability to gain feedback from the market, while the cost is that it makes the manager appear uninformed
(as he is seeking feedback). In the paper by Fishman and Hagerty (1989), which we reviewed earlier,
disclosure enhances the efficiency of the firm’s investment, and is thus desirable for the firm. However,
due to externalities among firms, they end up disclosing too much in equilibrium.
IV.H

Security design

Considering the effect of market information on real investment decisions can have important
implications for the firm’s choice of capital structure. In a model of primary markets, Fulghieri and
Lukin (2001) challenge the conclusion of the pecking-order theory by Myers and Majluf (1984),
according to which firms will issue debt rather than equity, because the former is less informationsensitive and thus subject to fewer adverse selection costs. Fulghieri and Lukin note that because equity
is more information-sensitive, its issuance encourages speculators to acquire more information. This in
turn reduces information asymmetry between the market and the firm, rendering equity sometimes
preferable.

21

Chang and Yu (2010) study a related problem in a model of secondary markets. Informed speculators
create a benefit because the firm can learn from their information when making an investment decision.
However, this comes with a cost, due to the adverse selection between informed speculators and
uninformed investors, which increases the firm’s cost of capital. As a result, the firm will design its
capital structure to increase information production when it can benefit more from market information.
The firm does this by increasing leverage, which makes equity more information-sensitive and enables
informed speculators to profit more when they trade equity. Hennessey (2009) studies a similar tradeoff,
but endogenizes noise trading. This leads to different implications for the optimal capital structure.
Informed traders can no longer profit by trading on the most information-sensitive security since noise
traders will refrain from trading it. Hence, the way to generate market information is to create a debt
security that is risky enough to enable speculators to make a profit, but not too risky so that noise traders
still trade in it.

V.

Empirical evidence

We now turn to empirical evidence of the real effects of secondary financial markets. Identifying this real
effect is a challenging task. It is obviously not sufficient to regress investment (or other real variables) on
stock prices and controls, for at least two reasons. First, a positive relation between stock prices and
investment does not imply causality from the former to the latter: it could arise from an omitted variable
that affects both, or reverse causality. Second, even assuming a causal explanation, it may result from
mechanisms other than the learning or incentives channels, such as a primary markets explanation.
One approach in the literature is to conduct cross-sectional analyses showing that the real effect is greater
in exactly those firms where theory would predict that the learning or incentive channels are likely to be
stronger. This can shed light on the mechanism behind the feedback effect, and also address endogeneity
concerns. For example, showing that the correlation between prices and real decisions is stronger when

22

the price contains information not available to managers suggests that causality is likely to go from prices
to real decisions.
An important case in which decision makers may learn from prices is in the evaluation of merger
opportunities, as discussed in the introduction. If a manager encounters a negative market reaction after
announcing an acquisition, he will likely realize that there is a collective view that the acquisition is
value-destroying, and may cancel it. In an early paper, Jennings and Mazzeo (1991) do not find evidence
consistent with this hypothesis. In a more recent paper, Luo (2005) uses new test specifications closer to
the underlying theory, combined with a much larger sample, and finds support for this hypothesis. He
shows that in those cases where learning is most likely, i.e., when the deal is irreversible and when the
market most plausibly has information that the manager does not, the probability of cancellation is much
higher after a low announcement return. Kau, Linck and Rubin (2008) extend his analysis and show that
such learning is more likely when governance mechanisms are in place to reduce the agency problem
between the manager and the shareholders.
Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) study all investments. They show that the sensitivity of investment to
price (or Tobin’s Q) is stronger when there is more private information injected into the price in the
trading process (based on market microstructure measures). This information is not related to proxies of
managerial information, and so their result suggests that managers glean new information from the price
and use it in their investment decisions. Bakke and Whited (2010) demonstrate that the effect of price
informativeness on the sensitivity of investment to Q continues to hold when correcting for measurement
error in Q. However, the relation between the sensitivity of investment to price and a measure of capital
constraints, which was documented earlier by Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), ceases to hold when this
correction is in place. Foucault and Fresard (2011) show that the sensitivity of investment to price is
higher for firms that trade in two markets, especially if they can glean more new information from prices.

23

Relatedly, Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) show that price informativeness is positively related to the
efficiency of real investment, which is consistent with both the learning and incentives channels.9
Kang and Liu (2008) directly examine the incentives channel. Consistent with theory, they show that the
extent to which CEO compensation is based on market prices is positively related to measures of price
informativeness. Ferreira, Ferreira, and Raposo (2011) posit that, if price informativeness increases
managerial incentives, there is less need for other disciplinary mechanisms such as board monitoring.
Consistent with this hypothesis, they find a negative relation between price informativeness and board
independence. With regard to the incentives of other decision makers such as blockholders, Norli,
Ostergaard, and Schindele (2010) show that liquidity increases the likelihood of contested proxy
solicitations and shareholder proposals, consistent with Maug’s (1998) predictions.
To further address causality concerns, a number of recent papers have used exogenous shocks to market
liquidity (a driver of price efficiency) to analyze the real effect of financial markets. Fang, Noe, and Tice
(2009) demonstrate a causal effect of liquidity on firm value (as measured by Tobin’s Q) using the natural
experiment of decimalization: in 2001, the U.S. stock exchanges moved from tick sizes of 1/16 to one
cent, leading to an exogenous increase in liquidity. They find a positive effect, consistent with both the
learning and incentive channels. This effect of liquidity on firm value is particularly strong for firms with
high managerial incentives, consistent with the incentive channel in particular. Bharath, Jayaraman, and
Nagar (2011) show that positive shocks to liquidity (e.g., decimalization) improve firm value, particularly
for firms with larger block ownership. As predicted by the incentives channel, the impact of liquidity
shocks on the blockholder-firm value association is increasing in managerial incentives.
While Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) and Bharath, Jayaraman, and Nagar (2011) study the impact of
financial markets on firm value in general, other papers investigate the effect of financial markets on

9

Another approach is to compare the investment behavior of public and private firms. However, it is difficult to use
this approach to distinguish between different channels. Examples of such papers include Mortal and Reisel (2011)
and Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2011).

24

specific channels through which financial markets can increase firm value. Jayaraman and Milbourn
(2011) demonstrate that CEO incentives are increasing in liquidity, using stock splits as an instrument for
liquidity. Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2011) show that liquidity increases the likelihood of a hedge fund
acquiring a block in a firm to begin with. Conditional upon acquiring a block, liquidity induces the
blockholder to choose governance through exit rather than voice. They use decimalization to document
causal effects, and both of these effects are stronger for firms with higher managerial incentives. Kim and
Kang (2011) use decimalization to show that liquidity leads to a less negative relationship between R&D
and the probability of CEO firing, consistent with the hypothesis that liquidity causes the benefits of R&D
to be more closely incorporated into stock prices.
The previous papers study the real effects of a shock to liquidity, which affects the efficiency of prices.
As discussed in Sections II and III, price efficiency matters for both the learning and incentive channels.
Another approach is to identify a shock to the level of prices, which is related to the learning channel in
particular.10 This is the approach of Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2011a), who study the impact of a
firm’s market price on the likelihood that it will receive a takeover bid. While it is commonly believed
that firms, which trade at a discount to fundamental value, attract acquirers, it is difficult to detect this
relation in the data, since stock prices are endogenous and incorporate the anticipation of future takeovers.
Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang address this issue and identify a negative causal effect of prices on takeover
activity, using mutual fund redemptions caused by investor withdrawals to identify an exogenous shock to
market prices. This effect could arise from a learning channel if target shareholders learn the value of
their firm from the stock price and are willing to sell their shares at a price that is close to that – thus, the
market price is not a sideshow but affects the price that they are prepared to accept in a takeover. This
assumes that they are unable to disentangle a stock price decline caused by mutual fund redemptions from
one that is driven by information.

10

Under the learning channel, the level of prices reveals information about an underlying state and drives a real
decision; by contrast, in the incentives channel, it is only the informativeness of prices rather than their level that is
relevant.

25

Finally, while all the papers mentioned above test the extent to which markets affect real economic
activity, an important avenue for future empirical research to explore is how feedback from prices to cash
flows affects the price formation process. The papers reviewed in Sections II, III, and IV make numerous
theoretical predictions. In a recent paper, Davis, Korenok, and Prescott (2011) provide a first step in this
direction by performing a lab experiment to test the predictions of Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott (2010)
and Sundaresan and Wang (2011). They find results broadly consistent with the theory.
Before concluding this section, it is worth revisiting the well-known study of Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1990, “MSV”). MSV investigate whether stock returns (CAPM alphas) predict investment, at both an
individual firm level and at the aggregate level.11 Consistent with the learning channel laid out above (the
”active informant,” in MSV’s terminology), MSV find that stock returns are a positively significant
predictor of investment in all specifications, both economically and statistically, and that this significance
is robust to the addition of firm fundamentals (cash flow and sales) as controls. However, the increment
in R2 that results from adding stock returns, when the investment regression already contains firm
fundamentals, is low. Thus, the authors conclude that the economic significance of the market is limited
and that it is somewhat of a “sideshow”.
The published discussions by Matthew Shapiro and James Poterba, included at the end of the article,
highlight potential issues with the empirical results presented in MSV; and using a different methodology,
Barro (1990) finds that stock market changes have a strong effect on investment. Moreover, even taking
MSV’s results at face value, it is not clear that they imply that the market is a sideshow, for three main
reasons. First, the results have no implications for the incentives channel discussed in Section III. Under
this channel, the level of investment is increasing in the informativeness, rather than level, of stock prices.
Second, MSV’s empirical design cannot detect important examples of the learning channel. For example,
11

MSV also study the effect of stock returns on financing (debt and equity issuance). This is the primary-markets
channel that is outside the scope of this survey. The results are similar to the investment regressions in MSV. For
other papers that study the real effect of financial markets through the primary markets channels, see Baker, Stein,
and Wurgler (2003), Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005), Derrien and Kecskes (2011), and Grullon,
Michenaud, and Weston (2011).

26

if a firm announces a takeover, its stock price subsequently falls, and then the manager cancels the
takeover leading to a stock price recovery, the MSV approach would find no abnormal return and no
change in investment. Third, MSV’s preferred R2 measure does not capture the possibility that when
firms do learn from the prices, the improvement in efficiency is very large. Instead, the relatively small
change in R2 merely shows that, most of the time firms do not respond to abnormal stock returns over and
above their response to changes in fundamentals. However, it is possible that the times firms do respond
to price changes are particularly important – for example, if they cut investment when the return will be
disastrously low. By analogy, most of the time an airline pilot may learn nothing from his instrument
panel over and above what he can see with his eyes. Thus, in a regression analysis of pilot actions, the
increment in R2 of including instrument readings in addition to visual evidence would be small.
However, if the instrument panel occasionally enables the pilot to avoid a crash, it is very far from being a
“sideshow.” Consistent with the idea that stock price changes have a large effect, MSV’s results imply
that a one standard-deviation change in 3-year alphas is associated with 31% higher investment growth,
even after controlling for their measures of firm fundamentals, which is economically significant
compared to the mean (median) 3-year investment growth of 48% (10%) (see table 1 and regression 2.3).

VI. Conclusion
Over the last twenty years, a sizeable literature has emerged to analyze the ways in which secondary
financial markets affect the real economy. The literature is both theoretical and empirical, and lies at the
intersection of corporate finance, asset pricing, and market microstructure. In this article we have sought
to synthesize some of the main themes and insights of the literature; although we have made every effort
to widely survey the literature, it is also inevitable that our synthesis reflects our own research on the
topic.
Overall, we make two main points. First, precisely because the question of the real effects of financial
markets combines aspects of various sub-specialties in finance, it is necessary to augment the traditional
27

notion of price efficiency – what we have termed here as forecasting price efficiency – to take into
account whether prices reveal the information necessary for real efficiency; in our terminology, does
revelatory price efficiency hold? Second, taking seriously the real effect of financial markets helps shed
light on a range of phenomena that otherwise appear puzzling. Again, this is a consequence of combining
insights from various fields: block-holding patterns, traditionally a corporate finance topic, make more
sense once asset pricing considerations are added; and trading frenzies, traditionally an asset pricing topic,
make more sense once corporate finance considerations are added.
We began the survey by drawing a distinction between research on the real effects of primary versus
secondary financial markets. Looking ahead to future research, there is potential gain from combining the
two approaches.

First, the channels of amplification studied by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and

Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) in the context of primary financial markets are developed in models where the
need for collateral constrains borrowing but with symmetric information about collateral value, whereas
the models of secondary financial markets that we reviewed here build on asymmetric information.
Introducing asymmetric information into models of primary financial markets may enrich these models
and potentially strengthen the quantitative effects that they generate. Second, primary financial markets
and secondary financial markets are sometimes blended in real-world situations, creating room for models
that combine the two approaches. For example, consider financial institutions that hold stocks of firms
traded in the secondary market and use them as collateral when borrowing from other financial
institutions. Here, trading in secondary markets and the collateral channel in primary markets work
together to generate the overall effect of financial markets on the real economy.
Another direction for future research is to combine the feedback effect reviewed in this article into
traditional asset pricing models to explain patterns in stock returns. In a contemporaneous survey, Kogan
and Papanikolaou (2012) review a literature that attempts to explain patterns in stock returns based on
firm behavior.

This literature, however, is based on a world of symmetric information where the

28

secondary financial market is essentially a side show that has no effect on the firm. We believe it will be
interesting to introduce the feedback effect reviewed here into these models.
Finally, the literature reviewed in this article is still in its early stages. There is substantial scope for
further research to advance our understanding of the implications of the feedback loop between financial
markets and the real economy, whereby financial markets affect and reflect the events in the real
economy. As we argued in this article, this has implications for regulation of banks and firms, for
managerial behavior and corporate governance, and for many other aspects of financial economics. We
hope that our review will help stimulate this research going forward.

29

References
Admati AR. 1985. A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset securities markets.
Econometrica. 53(3):629–57
Admati AR, Pfleiderer P. 2009. The "Wall Street Walk" and shareholder activism: Exit as a form of
voice. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(7):2445–85
Aghion P, Stein J. 2008. Growth vs. Margins: Destabilizing consequences of giving the stock market
what it wants. J. Finance. 63(3):1025–58
Asker J, Farre-Mensa J, Ljungqvist A. 2011. Comparing the investment behavior of public and private
firms. Work. Pap., New York Univ.
Baker M, Stein JC, Wurgler J. 2003. When does the market matter? Stock prices and the investment of
equity-dependent firms. Q. J. Econ. 118(3):969–1006
Baker M, Wurgler J. 2012. Behavioral corporate finance: an updated survey, in G. Constantinides, M.
Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance Vol 2. Elsevier
Bakke TE, Whited TM. 2010. Which firms follow the market? An analysis of corporate investment
decisions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(5):1941–80
Barro R. 1990. The stock market and investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 3(1):115–31
Baumol WJ. 1965. The stock market and economic efficiency. Fordham Univ. Press, New York.
Benveniste L, Spindt P. 1989. How investment bankers determine the offer price and allocation of new
issues. J. Financ. Econ. 24(3):343–61
Benveniste L, Wilhelm WJ. 1990. A comparative analysis of IPO proceeds under alternative regulatory
regimes. J. Financ. Econ. 28(1–2):173–207
Bernanke BS, Gertler M. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. Am. Econ. Rev.
79(1):14–31
Bernanke B, Woodford M. 1997. Inflation forecasts and monetary policy. J. Money, Credit and Banking
29(4):653–84
Bharath ST, Jayaraman S, Nagar V. 2011. Exit as governance: An empirical analysis. Work. Pap.,
Arizona State Univ.
Biais B, Bossaerts P, Rochet JC. 2002. An optimal IPO mechanism. Rev. Econ. Stud. 69(1):117-46
Bond P, Eraslan H. 2010. Information-based trade. J. Econ. Theory. 145(5):1675–703

30

Bond P, Goldstein I. 2011. Government intervention and information aggregation by prices. Work. Pap,
Univ. of Pennsylvania
Bond P, Goldstein I, Prescott ES. 2010. Market-based corrective actions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(2):781–
820
Boot AWA, Thakor AV. 1997. Financial system architecture. Rev. Financ. Stud. 10(3):693–733
Brandenburger A, Polak B. 1996. When managers cover their posteriors: Making the decisions the market
wants to see. Rand J. Econ. 27(3):523–41
Bresnahan T, Milgrom P, Paul J. 1992. The real output of the stock exchange, in Z. Griliches (ed.),
Output Measurement in the Service Sectors. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago
Burton S, Seale G. 2005. A survey of current and potential uses of market data by the FDIC. FDIC
Banking Review. 17(1):1–18
Chang C, Yu X. 2010. Informational efficiency and liquidity premium as the determinants of capital
structure. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 45(2):401–40
Chen Q, Goldstein I, Jiang W. 2007. Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to stock price. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 20(3):619–50
Davis D, Korenok O, and Prescott ES. 2011. An experimental analysis of contingent capital triggering
mechanisms Work. Pap., Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Derrien F, Kecskes A. 2011. The real effects of financial shocks: Evidence from exogenous changes in
analyst coverage. Work. Pap., HEC Paris
Dow J, Goldstein I, Guembel A. 2011. Incentives for information production in markets where prices
affect real investment. Work. Pap., Univ. of Pennsylvania
Dow J, Gorton G. 1997. Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a connection? J.
Finance. 52(3):1087–1129
Dow J, Rahi R. 2003. Informed trading, investment, and economic welfare. J. Bus. 76(3):439–54
Durnev A, Morck R, Yeung B. 2004. Value-enhancing capital budgeting and firm-specific return
variation. J. Finance. 59(1):65–105
Edmans A. 2009. Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia. J. Finance.
64(6):2481–2513
Edmans A, Fang VW, Zur E. 2011. The effect of liquidity on governance. Work. Pap., Univ. of
Pennsylvania

31

Edmans A, Goldstein I, Jiang W. 2011a. The real effects of financial markets: The impact of prices on
takeovers. J. Finance. Forthcoming
Edmans A, Goldstein I, Jiang W. 2011b. Feedback effects and the limits to arbitrage. Work. Pap., Univ.
of Pennsylvania
Edmans A, Manso G. 2011. Governance through trading and intervention: A theory of multiple
blockholders. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24(7):2395–2428
Fama EF, Miller M. 1972. The theory of finance. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York.
Fang VW, Noe T, Tice S. 2009. Stock market liquidity and firm value. J. Financ. Econ. 94(1):150–69
Faure-Grimaud, A. 2002. Using stock price information to regulate firms. Rev. Econ. Stud. 69(1):169–90
Faure-Grimaud A, Gromb D. 2004. Public trading and private incentives. Rev. Financ. Stud. 17(4):985–
1014
Feldman R, Schmidt J. 2003. Supervisory use of market data in the Federal Reserve System. Work, Pap.,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Ferreira D, Ferreira M, Raposo C. 2011. Board structure and price informativeness. J. Financ. Econ.
99(3):523–45
Fishman MJ, Hagerty KM. 1989. Disclosure decisions by firms and the competition for price efficiency.
J. Finance. 44(3):633–46
Fishman MJ, Hagerty KM. 1992. Insider trading and the efficiency of stock prices. Rand J. Econ.
23(1):106–22
Flannery MJ. 2009. Stabilizing Large Financial Institutions with Contingent Capital Certificates. Work,
Pap., University of Florida
Foucault T, Fresard L. 2011. Cross-listing, investment sensitivity to stock price and the learning
hypothesis. Work. Pap., HEC Paris
Foucault T, Gehrig T. 2008. Stock price informativeness, cross-listings, and investment decisions. J.
Financ. Econ. 88(1):146–68
Fulghieri P, Lukin D. 2001. Information production, dilution costs, and optimal security design. J.
Financ. Econ. 61(1):3–42
Gao P, Liang PJ. 2011. Informational feedback effect, adverse selection, and the optimal disclosure
policy, Chicago Booth Research Paper No.11–13
Gilchrist S, Himmelberg CP, Huberman G. 2005. Do stock price bubbles influence corporate investment?
J. Monet. Econ. 52(4):805–25
32

Glosten L, Milgrom P. 1985. Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously
informed traders. J. Financ. Econ. 14(1):71–100
Goldman E, Strobl G. 2011. Large shareholder trading and the complexity of corporate investments. J.
Financial Intermediation. Forthcoming
Goldstein I, Guembel A. 2008. Manipulation and the allocational role of prices. Rev. Econ. Stud.
75(1):133–64
Goldstein I, Ozdenoren E, Yuan K. 2011a. Learning and complementarities in speculative attacks. Rev.
Econ. Stud. 78(1):263–92
Goldstein I, Ozdenoren E, Yuan K. 2011b. Trading frenzies and their impact on real investment. Work
Pap., Univ. of Pennsylvania
Grossman SJ. 1976. On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where traders have diverse
information. J. Finance. 31(2):573–84
Grossman SJ, Stiglitz JE. 1980. On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets. Am. Econ. Rev.
70(3):393–408
Grullon G, Michenaud S, Weston J. 2011. The real effects of stock market prices. Work. Pap., Rice Univ.
Hart O, Zingales L. 2011. A new capital regulation for large financial institutions. The Am. Law Econ.
Rev. Forthcoming
Hayek F. 1945. The use of knowledge in society. Am. Econ. Rev. 35(4):519–30
Hellwig M. 1980. On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Journal of Economic
Theory, 22(3):477–98
Hennessy C. 2009. Security design, liquidity, and the informational role of prices. Work. Pap., London
School of Business
Hirshleifer J. 1971. The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive activity. The
Am. Econ. Rev. 61(4):561–74
Hirshleifer D, Subrahmanyam A, Titman S. 2006. Feedback and the success of irrational investors. J.
Financ. Econ. 81(2):311−38
Holderness C. 2009. The myth of diffuse ownership in the United States, Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(4):1377–
1408
Holmstrom B, Tirole J. 1993. Market liquidity and performance monitoring. J. Polit. Econ. 101(4):678–
709

33

Jarrow R. 1992. Market manipulation, bubbles, corners, and short squeezes. J. Financ. Quant. Anal.
27(3):311–36
Jayaraman S, Milbourn T. 2011. The role of stock liquidity in executive compensation. Acct. Rev.
Forthcoming
Jennings R, Mazzeo M. 1991. Stock price movements around acquisition announcements and
management’s response. J. Bus. 64(2):139–63
Kang Q, Liu Q. 2008. Stock trading, information production, and executive incentives. J. Corp. Fin.
14(4):484–98
Kahn C, Winton A. 1998. Ownership structure, speculation, and shareholder intervention. J. Finance.
53(1):99–129
Kau JB, Linck JS, Rubin PH. 2008. Do managers listen to the market? J. Corp. Fin. 14(4):347–62
Khanna N, Matthews R. 2011. Doing battle with short sellers: The role of blockholders in bear raids. J.
Financ. Econ. Forthcoming
Khanna N, Slezak SL, Bradley M. 1994. Insider trading, outside search, and resource allocation: Why
firms and society may disagree on insider trading restrictions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 7(3):575–608
Khanna N, Sonti R. 2004. Value creating stock manipulation: feedback effect of stock prices on firm
value. J. Financial Markets. 7(3):237–70
Kim, YH, Kang MJ. 2011. Stock market liquidity and short-termism-driven CEO turnover. Work. Pap.,
Nanyang Technological Univ.
Kiyotaki N, Moore J. 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105(2):211-48
Kogan L, Papanikolaou D. 2012. Economic activity of firms and asset prices. Work. Pap., MIT
Kyle AS. 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica. 53(6):1315-36
Kyle AS, Vila J. 1991. Noise trading and takeovers. Rand J. Econ. 22(3):54–71
Langberg N, Sivaramakrishnan K. 2010. Voluntary disclosures and analyst feedback. J. Acct. Res.
48(3):603–45
La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 1999. Corporate ownership around the world. J. Finance.
54(2):471–517
Lehar A, Seppi D, Strobl G. 2010. Using price information as an instrument of market discipline in
regulating bank risk. Work. Pap., Carnegie Mellon Univ.
Leland HE. 1992. Insider trading: Should it be prohibited? J. Polit. Econ. 100(4):859–87
34

Luo Y. 2005. Do insiders learn from outsiders? Evidence from mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance.
60(4):1951–82
Maug E. 1998. Large shareholders as monitors: Is there a tradeoff between liquidity and control? J.
Finance. 53(1):65–98
McCahery J, Sautner Z, Starks L. 2011. Behind the scenes: The corporate governance preferences of
institutional investors. Work. Pap., Univ. of Amsterdam
McDonald R. 2010. Contingent capital with a dual price trigger. Work. Pap., Northwestern Univ.
Milgrom P, Stokey N. 1982. Information, trade, and common knowledge. J. Econ. Theory. 26(1):17–27
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny RW. 1990. The stock market and investment: Is the market a sideshow?
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1990(2):157–215
Mortal S, Reisel N. 2011. Capital allocation by public and private firms. J. Financ. Quant. Anal.
Forthcoming
Myers SC, Majluf NS. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have information
that investors do not have. J. Financ. Econ. 13(2):187–221
Norli Ø, Ostergaard C, Schindele I. 2009. Liquidity and shareholder activism. Work. Pap., Norwegian
School of Management.
Ozdenoren E, Yuan K. 2008. Feedback effects and asset prices. J. Finance. 63(4):1939–75
Paul JM. 1992. On the efficiency of stock-based compensation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 5(3):471-502
Rock KF. 1986. Why new issues are underpriced. J. Financ. Econ. 15(1–2):187–212
Roll R. 1984. Orange juice and weather. Am. Econ. Rev. 74(5):861–80
Singh R, Yerramilli V. 2010. Can transparency be too much of a good thing? Work. Pap., Univ. of
Minnesota
Stein JC. 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms. J. Finance. 44(5):1335–50
Subrahmanyam A, Titman S. 1999. The going public decision and the development of financial markets.
J. Finance. 54(3):1045–82
Sundaresan, S, Wang Z. 2011. On the design of contingent capital with market trigger. Work. Pap.,
Columbia Univ.
Wolfers J, Zitzewitz E. 2004. Prediction markets. J. Econ. Persp. 18(2):107–26

35

