                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ROLE OF FIRM FACTORS IN DEMAND, COST, AND EXPORT MARKET
               SELECTION FOR CHINESE FOOTWEAR PRODUCERS

                                           Mark J. Roberts
                                            Daniel Yi Xu
                                            Xiaoyan Fan
                                          Shengxing Zhang

                                        Working Paper 17725
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17725


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




Previously circulated as "A Structural Model of Demand, Cost, and Export Market Selection for Chinese
Footwear Producers." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Amit Khandelwal, Jan
De Loecker, the editor Stéphane Bonhomme, and three anonymous referees for helpful comments.
This research was supported by NSF grant SES-1125963.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Mark J. Roberts, Daniel Yi Xu, Xiaoyan Fan, and Shengxing Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Firm Factors in Demand, Cost, and Export Market Selection for Chinese Footwear
Producers
Mark J. Roberts, Daniel Yi Xu, Xiaoyan Fan, and Shengxing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 17725
January 2012, Revised January 2016
JEL No. F1,L0

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we use micro data on both trade and production for a sample of large Chinese manufacturing
firms in the footwear industry from 2002-2006 to estimate an empirical model of export demand, pricing,
and market participation by destination market. We use the model to construct indexes of firm-level
demand, cost, and export market profitability. The empirical results indicate substantial firm heterogeneity
in both the demand and cost dimensions with demand being more dispersed. The firm-specific demand
and cost components are very useful in explaining differences in the extensive margin of trade, the
length of time a firm exports to a destination, and the number and mix of destinations, as well as the
export prices, while cost is more important in explaining the quantity of firm exports on the intensive
margin. We use the estimates to analyze the reallocation resulting from removal of the quota on Chinese
footwear exports to the EU and find that it led to a rapid restructuring of export supply sources in favor
of firms with high demand and low cost indexes.


Mark J. Roberts                                      Xiaoyan Fan
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
513 Kern Graduate Building                           Fudan University
Pennsylvania State University                        ecofan0613@vip.163.com
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER                                             Shengxing Zhang
mroberts@psu.edu                                     Department of Economics
                                                     London School of Economics
Daniel Yi Xu                                         oo7zsx@gmail.com
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Science Bldg
419 Chapel Drive
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
daniel.xu@duke.edu
      The Role of Firm Factors in Demand, Cost, and Export
        Market Selection for Chinese Footwear Producers
                  Mark J. Roberts                                        Daniel Yi Xu
              Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
     The Pennsylvania State University and NBER                    Duke University and NBER
                      Xiaoyan Fan                            Shengxing Zhang
                Department of Economics                  Department of Economics
                   Fudan University                     London School of Economics

                                            January 2016



                                               Abstract
         In this paper we use micro data on both trade and production for a sample of large Chi-
      nese manufacturing …rms in the footwear industry from 2002-2006 to estimate an empirical
      model of export demand, pricing, and market participation by destination market. We use
      the model to construct indexes of …rm-level demand, marginal cost, and …xed cost. The
      empirical results indicate substantial …rm heterogeneity in all three dimension with demand
      being the most dispersed. The …rm-speci…c demand and marginal cost components ac-
      count for over 30 percent of market share variation, 40 percent of sales variation, and over
      50 percent of price variation among exporters. The …xed cost index is the primary factor
      explaining di¤erences in the pattern of destination markets across …rms. The estimates
      are used to analyze the supply reallocation following the removal of the quota on Chinese
      footwear exports to the EU. This led to a rapid restructuring of export supply sources on
      both the intensive and extensive margins in favor of …rms with high demand and low …xed
      costs indexes, with marginal cost di¤erences not being important.


1    Introduction

Firm-level heterogeneity has become a driving factor in theoretical models and empirical studies
that analyze …rm pricing decisions, destination decisions, and trade patterns in international
markets. Theoretical models that embody heterogeneous …rms have been developed by Eaton
and Kortum (2002), Melitz (2003), and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) and used
to analyze aggregate patterns of trade.
     We are grateful to Amit Khandelwal, Jan De Loecker, the editor Stéphane Bonhomme, and three anonymous
referees for helpful comments. This research was supported by NSF grant SES-1125963.


                                                    1
    There are multiple potential sources of …rm heterogeneity that can generate di¤erences
across …rms in their trade decisions.       Building on models of industry dynamics by Jovanovic
(1982) and Hopenhayn (1992), heterogeneity in production costs has been one, heavily-analyzed
source of …rm di¤erences. In an empirical study using French …rm-level data, Eaton, Kortum,
and Kramarz (2011) …nd that accounting for …rm heterogeneity in e¢ ciency results in substan-
tial improvements in the ability to predict which …rms enter which destination markets and, to
a lesser degree, the volume of sales in the destination. A second source of …rm heterogeneity
re‡ects di¤erences in the …xed cost of entering new export markets. In addition to …rm e¢ -
ciency, Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007), Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), and Arkolakis
(2010) …nd that di¤erences in entry costs are important in explaining patterns of dynamic ex-
port entry, or the number of markets a …rm serves, or the size distribution of exporting …rms.
More recently, a third source of heterogeneity, re‡ecting di¤erences in product quality or other
demand-side factors that lead to di¤erences in market shares across …rms, has been incorpo-
rated in trade models. Johnson (2012) and Khandelwal (2010) estimate structural models of
demand using product-level data on prices and trade ‡ows between countries and …nd evidence
consistent with quality variation at the country level.1 Crozet, Head, and Mayer (2012) exploit
…rm level data on prices, exports, and direct quality measures for champagne producers and
…nd quality is positively correlated with price, quantity and the number of destination markets
the …rm sells in. They also show that it is important to correct for the endogenous selection of
destination markets when estimating the e¤ect of quality on export variables.
    In this paper we quantify the importance of three sources of …rm heterogeneity, marginal
production cost, export …xed cost, and demand, in explaining the export decisions of Chinese
footwear manufacturing …rms across seven destination markets. Our framework allows us to
tie together the pricing, output, and participation decisions with a consistent set of …rm-level
demand and cost components.           Based on their empirical study of French exporting …rms,
Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) conclude that it is important to recognize that …rm-
level characteristics impact decisions in many markets and conclude that “any theory ignoring
   1
     Reduced form empirical studies by Hallak and Sivadasan (2009), Kugler and Verhoogen (2012), Manova
and Zhang (2012), and Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) use …rm-level export price data and conclude that quality
variation is an important dimension of …rm heterogeneity in traded goods.



                                                    2
features of the …rm that are universal across markets misses much.” We focus on these …rm-
level characteristics that are universal across the …rm’s markets.
       The success of Chinese manufacturing exports is one of the most signi…cant phenomena in
world trade in the last two decades, however, debates remain about the underlying causes at the
individual producer level. One possibility is that Chinese …rms invested in “capability building”
to improve their product appeal and demand (See Sutton (2007), Brandt, Rawski, and Sutton
(2008) and Schott (2008)) while a second possibility is that they succeeded primarily because of
low labor and input costs that allow them to serve as a manufacturing base for foreign-owned
…rms (Branstetter and Lardy (2008)). In this paper we study the relative importance of …rm-
level cost and demand factors in explaining Chinese …rm-level export performance by developing
a structural model of demand, cost, and dynamic export participation that can quantify …rm
heterogeneity in each of these dimensions.2
       We estimate the model using micro data on prices and quantities of exported goods and …rm
costs for a panel of 738 large Chinese exporting …rms in the footwear industry from 2002 2006.
In our data set, the …rm-level export price, quantity, and destination patterns indicate a poten-
tially important role for three dimensions of …rm heterogeneity that persist across destinations.
Firms that export to many destinations also export to more di¢ cult destinations and have
higher average export quantities in each destination. This is consistent with either persistent
…rm-level demand heterogeneity or heterogeneity in marginal cost. These same …rms also have
higher average export prices which suggests that the demand di¤erences are costly to produce
or maintain and is not consistent with low cost being the sole determinant of export success.
Furthermore, conditional on the same average sales per destination, some Chinese …rms sys-
   2
    Several other empirical papers allow for multiple dimensions of heterogeneity. Gervais (2015) uses U.S.
manufacturing sector production data to estimate …rm-level demand and productivity components and shows
that these help to explain patterns of …rm exporting. Eslava, Haltiwanger, Kugler, and Kugler (2004) use plant-
level input and output prices for Colombian manufacturing plants to estimate demand curves and production
functions at the plant level and then analyze patterns in the residuals and how they are related to reallocations
of activity across …rms in response to economic reforms. Aw and Lee (2014) …nd that both …rm-level demand
and productivity components are important in explaining the decision of Taiwanese …rms to enter a foreign
market with the relative performance of the two factors depending on the destination market and whether it
enters by exporting or through FDI. Hottman, Redding, and Weinstein (2014) use price and quantity data for
highly-disaggregated consumer goods to estimate a structural model of product demand and pricing. They …nd
that di¤erences in quality account for 50 to 70 percent of the variance in …rm size, while product scope accounts
for 20 to 30 percent, and cost di¤erences for less than 24 percent. Heterogeneity in demand characteristics is
the dominant source of …rm size variation.


                                                       3
tematically export to more markets, implying lower …rm-level export …xed cost. The only way
to distinguish the role of cost and demand heterogeneity is to specify a structural model that
includes distinct demand, marginal cost and …xed cost components at the …rm level.
   In the econometric model we develop, the measure of …rm demand heterogeneity relies on
across-…rm di¤erences in export market shares, controlling for …rm prices, in the destination
markets. The measure of cost heterogeneity relies on di¤erences in …rm export prices, control-
ling for observable …rm costs and markups, across destinations. Fixed cost heterogeneity relies
on di¤erences in market participation patterns, controlling for cost and demand di¤erences.
All three factors play a role in determining the …rm’s pro…ts in each export market and thus
the decision to export.     We exploit the fact that, in the export context, we have multiple
observations on many of the …rms because they export to multiple destination markets and this
helps to both identify the distribution of …rm-level demand and cost components and control for
the endogenous selection of which markets to sell in. The econometric methodology we utilize
is a practical application of a Hierarchical Bayesian method that relies on MCMC and Gibb’s
sampling for implementation. This allows us to both include a large number of unobservables,
three for each of our 738 …rms, and to incorporate them in nonlinear equations, such as the
probability of exporting, in a very tractable way.
    The empirical results indicate that across-…rm di¤erences in the number and mix of export
destinations is substantially a¤ected by heterogeneity in the …xed cost dimension.     Demand
heterogeneity also has a small impact on di¤erences in the extensive margin of exports. On the
intensive margin, both the demand and marginal cost factors are approximately equally impor-
tant in explaining export price variation across …rms and destinations, but demand di¤erences
are more important in explaining variation in export revenue. Finally, we use our …rm indexes
to study the reallocation of export sales across Chinese producers in response to the removal of
the quota on Chinese exports of footwear to the EU. We …nd that removal of the quota led to
a substantial change in the mix of …rms that exported to the EU with the shift in composition
toward …rms with higher demand and lower …xed cost indexes, but no strong correlation with
marginal cost di¤erences.




                                               4
        The next section of the paper develops the theoretical model of export demand, pricing,
and market participation. The third section develops the estimation methodology, the fourth
section describes the Chinese …rm-level data and summary statistics. The …fth section presents
the structural parameter estimates and the …nal section analyzes the changes in the composition
of exporting …rms in response to removal of the EU quota on Chinese footwear imports.


2        Theoretical Model of a Firm’s Export Revenue
2.1       Demand

We begin with a demand model that can be used to estimate an index of …rm demand. Denote
k as an individual 6-digit product produced by a speci…c …rm f . A …rm can produce and export
multiple products. An individual importer’s utility function from purchasing product k from
…rm f is :
                                               dt         dt
                                              Ukf =       kf   + :                                           (1)

                                                                        dt
This speci…cation allows for a variety-speci…c component                kf    that varies by destination market
and year and a transitory component             that captures all heterogeneity in preferences across
importers.3      Berry (1994) shows that, if        is assumed to be a Type I extreme value random
variable then we can aggregate over importers and express the market share for product kf in
                                                                             P
market dt. De…ne the inclusive value of all varieties in the market as V dt = kf exp( dt
                                                                                      kf ). The
                                                                                                        dt
market share for product kf in market dt can be written in the logit form s~dt
                                                                            kf = exp(
                                                                                                              dt
                                                                                                        kf )=V .
                                                                             dt
If we normalize this market share by a single variety where                  0    = 0 the normalized logarithmic
market share takes the simple form:

                                            sdt
                                         ln(~kf )    ln(sdt
                                                         0 )=
                                                                     dt
                                                                     kf :                                    (2)
    3
    We think of the consumers in the destination market as wholesalers, retailers, or trading companies that
buy from the Chinese producers and resell to households. The wholesalers demand for Chinese exports will
depend on the household demand in their own country but, since we do not have household-level data, we do
not attempt to model this household demand. Instead, we capture all the e¤ects of consumer income, tastes,
competing suppliers in the destination and market power in the wholesale/retail sector in the modelling of the
destination-speci…c utility component dt
                                       kf :




                                                      5
                                                     dt
We will model the variety-speci…c term               kf   as a combination of …rm, product group, destination
market, and variety components. Speci…cally, if product k is produced by …rm f , then

                                       dt
                                       kf   =    f   +     k                ~dt
                                                                       d ln p kf       + udt
                                                                                          kf                                (3)

This equation says that there is a …rm component                               f   or "brand-name" e¤ect to the utility
derived from this product. This brand-name e¤ect will be unique to each …rm and constant
across all markets in which it operates and over time. It could re‡ect di¤erences in the stock
of customers that are familiar with …rm f , size of its distribution network, or quality of the
…rm’s product.       Holding price …xed, an increase in                            f    will raise the market share for this
variety in all markets.        Since the    f    captures all …rm-level factors that systematically a¤ect
the utility that importers receive from this product, we will refer to it as a …rm demand
component.4 There is also a product group utility shifter                                   k   that will lead to higher utility
for some product groups in all markets, holding price …xed. The utility and market share of the
variety will be declining in the price of the variety where p~dt
                                                              kf is the price paid by the importers

for product kf in the destination market. To convert this price into the FOB price, pdt
                                                                                     kf ; set by

the producing …rm, we incorporate ad valorem trade costs between China and each destination
market ln p~dt       dt
            kf = ln pkf + ln(1 + ~ dt ). In this case ~ dt captures all exchange rate e¤ects, tari¤s,

and shipping costs between China and each destination market in each year. The …nal term
udt
 kf captures market level shocks to the demand for product kf . Substituting equation (3) and

destination-speci…c price into the normalized market share equation gives the demand equation
for product kf :

                    ln(sdt
                        kf )        sdt
                                 ln(~kf )       ln(sdt
                                                    0 )=           f   +   k
                                                                                              dt
                                                                                        d ln pkf   +   dt   + udt
                                                                                                               kf           (4)

where     dt   =   d ln(1   + ~dt ). The parameter             d,      which captures the market share response to
a change in the FOB price, is allowed to vary across destination markets to re‡ect the country-
speci…c di¤erences in the consumer tastes, income, and the structure of the domestic retail
sector.
  4
    The demand model we use relies on horizontal di¤erentiation across varieties and is not one where …rm’s
products can be ranked by quality. For this reason, we do not refer to f as an index of …rm "quality" but
rather use the broader term "…rm demand component" because it will capture any factor that generates larger
market shares for the …rm’s varieties, holding price …xed.


                                                               6
       This demand equation can be estimated using data on the market shares of varieties in
di¤erent destination markets. Overall, the demand model contains a destination-speci…c price
parameter         d,   destination market/year e¤ects                               dt ,   product group e¤ects        k,   and a …rm-speci…c
demand shifter           f.          One goal of the empirical model developed below will be to estimate the
parameters of equation (4) including the …rm-speci…c demand factor                                                f:


2.2       Cost and Pricing

To incorporate heterogeneity arising from the production side of the …rm’s activities we model
log marginal cost of product kf in market dt as:

                                          ln cdt
                                              kf = ~ dt +          k    +        t
                                                                            w lnwf
                                                                                                             dt
                                                                                           + h( f ) + ! f + vkf                           (5)

where ~ dt and           k       are destination/year and product-group cost factors, and wft is a set of
observable …rm-speci…c variable input prices and …xed factors. The speci…cation includes two
additional sources of …rm-level unobservables. The function h( f ) is included to control for the
fact that …rms that have higher demand or more desirable products will likely have higher costs
if the extra demand is the result of higher quality or investments to build a customer base. The
second …rm-level unobservable ! f is included to capture time-invariant di¤erences in marginal
cost across producers.                              dt are cost shocks at the product-…rm level and the …rm is
                                           Finally vkf
assumed to observe these prior to setting the price.                                         For estimation purposes we will combine
the …rm costs resulting from                     f      and ! f into a single …rm marginal cost component that
we will represent as cf = h( f ) + ! f :
       Assuming monopolistically competitive markets, a pro…t-maximizing …rm facing the demand
curve in equation (4) will charge a price for product kf in market dt given by:5

                                              ln pdt
                                                  kf =           dt   +     k   +          t
                                                                                      w lnwf
                                                                                                       dt
                                                                                               + cf + vkf                                 (6)

where       dt   = ln(       d
                                 d
                                     1)   + ~ dt : This pricing equation shows that the price of product kf in
market dt will depend on the destination-speci…c demand parameter                                                  d   and all the marginal
   5
       If we assume …rms compete by taking into account the impact of their prices on the inclusive value V dt ;
                                                     d (1    sdt
                                                              i )
then the markup term becomes ln(                            sdt
                                                                   ):   Because virtually all of our exporting …rms have small market
                                                 d (1        i ) 1
shares (as described in the data section), we ignore the e¤ect of the …rm’s price on the inclusive value.



                                                                                7
cost determinants in equation (5). In particular, this pricing equation shows that cf will be a
…rm-level component of the export price. A second goal of our empirical model is to estimate
the parameters of the pricing equation (6) including the …rm cost component cf while allowing
for an unconstrained correlation between cf and                   f:


2.3     Export Revenue and Pro…tability

Using the demand and pricing equations, (4) and (6), we can express the expected revenue
of product kf in market dt.              De…ne the destination speci…c markup as                       d    =   d
                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                        1   and the
aggregate demand shifter in market dt as M dt =V dt where M dt is the total market size. Using
these de…nitions we can express the logarithm of the expected revenue for product kf as the
sum of three components, one of which depends only on market-level parameters and variables,
one which incorporates all product-group variables, and one which incorporates all …rm-level
variables:
                                         dt          dt
                                     ln rkf = ln          + ln rkd + ln rdt ( f ; cf )                                           (7)

where

                                    dt
                               ln        = ln(M dt =V dt ) +           dt   + (1    d )(ln   d   +   dt )                        (8)

                                 ln rkd =     k   + (1       d) k

                    ln rdt ( f ; cf ) =       f   + (1       d)
                                                                         t
                                                                    w lnwf     + cf + Cuv

In this equation ln       dt   captures all market-level factors that a¤ect product revenue, including
the market size and overall competition, tari¤, exchange rate e¤ects, markup, and destination-
speci…c cost.   The second term ln rkd captures all product group e¤ects in both demand and
cost.
   The …nal term, ln rdt ( f ; cf ); combines all the …rm-speci…c factors that a¤ect the export rev-
enue of product kf in the market: the …rm demand component                            f;   the …rm cost component cf ,
and the observable …rm-level marginal cost shifters                          t
                                                                        w lnwf :   The expectation over the variety-
speci…c demand and cost shocks udt      dt                                   dt
                                kf and vkf is denoted by Cuv = ln Eu;v [exp(ukf +(1
                                                                                                                                dt
                                                                                                                            d )vkf )]:

A larger value of    f;   re‡ecting higher demand for the …rm’s variety, will imply a larger value of
ln rdt ( f ; cf ). Since the term (1         d)   is negative, a higher value of cf will imply a lower level


                                                             8
of export revenue for the …rm in this destination market. If variation in cf across …rms only
re‡ects productivity di¤erences, then high cf would imply lower export revenue.                                       However,
as explained above, cf can also include the cost of producing higher demand, so in this case
corr(cf ;   f)   > 0 and thus, as we compare across …rms, higher-demand …rms will have higher
export revenue if their larger market share, due to                       f;   outweighs the increase in cost captured
by cf : Finally, the …rm export revenue will vary by destination market because the marginal
cost terms are scaled by (1                    d)   and   d   is destination speci…c. In a destination with more
elastic demand (larger              d ),   the cost di¤erences across …rms are more important as a source of
export revenue di¤erences.
       Given the functional form assumptions on demand and marginal cost, we can use the revenue
equation for product kf; (7), to express the total expected pro…ts that …rm f will earn in market
dt: If the …rm sells a set of varieties, or product line, denoted by Kf , its pro…t in destination
market dt is the sum of revenues over all its varieties scaled by the demand elasticity or, if
expressed in logs:
                                                                                2          3
                                                          1                         X
                 ln   dt
                           ( f ; cf ; wft ; Kf ) = ln         + ln   dt
                                                                          + ln 4         rkd 5 + ln rdt ( f ; cf ):        (9)
                                                          d
                                                                                  k2Kf

As shown by this equation, the …rm component of export revenue enters directly into the …rm’s
pro…ts in the market and will be a useful summary statistic of the role of …rm demand and cost
factors in generating di¤erences in the pro…tability of exporting …rms in a destination market.
For this reason we will refer to ln rdt ( f ; cf ) as the …rm pro…t component.6
   6
     Several other papers have characterized a …rm’s market participation decision when …rm heterogeneity arises
from both demand and cost factors. In a model in which …rms produce di¤erentiated goods and consumers
value variety, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) develop a "…rm pro…tability index" that is the di¤erence
between a …rm’s demand shifter and its marginal cost. They show that this is correlated with patterns of
…rm survival. Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2009) use …rm-level revenue and cost data to estimate indexes of
marginal cost and product appeal which they relate to consumer and producer surplus. Sutton (2007) introduces
a measure of …rm capability, de…ned as the pair of …rm quality and labor productivity, which is similar to our
ln rdt ( f ; cf ). In his framework the two arguments of …rm capability are not isomorphic because there is a
lower threshold on …rm quality which a …rm must exceed to be viable. In our setting the two terms contribute
di¤erently to …rm pro…t and participation across destination markets because the cost component is weighted
by the demand elasticity in the destination market.




                                                                 9
2.4     Exporting Decision

This model of demand, cost, and pro…ts also implies a set of destination countries for each
…rm’s exports.                The …rm’s decision to export to market dt is based on a comparison of the
pro…ts earned by supplying the market with the costs of operating in the market.                                                   If …rm f
sells in market d in the current year t we assume that it needs to incur a …xed cost                                                     f   + "dt
                                                                                                                                                f

where        f   is a …rm-speci…c …xed cost and "dt
                                                 f is a destination …xed cost shock that is modeled as

an independent draw from a N (0; 1) across all markets and years. By specifying the …xed cost
in this way, we are allowing a third source of …rm heterogeneity, in addition to                                             f   and cf : We
will refer to            f   as the …rm …xed cost component. If the …rm has not sold in the market in
the previous year, then it must also pay a constant entry cost                                       s:   De…ne Ifdt     1
                                                                                                                             as the discrete
export indicator that equals one if the …rm exported to market d in year t                                             1 and zero if it did
not. The …rm will choose to export to this market if the current plus expected future payo¤ is
greater than the …xed cost it must pay to operate.
    To describe each …rm’s export participation decision, we summarize their individual state
variables into stf = f f ; cf ;                           t
                                               f ; K f ; wf g   and previous export status Ifdt               1
                                                                                                                  . The input price wft
and aggregate state variables                      dt   are assumed to evolve exogenously and the …rm has rational
expectation of future values. We de…ne the value function of the …rm that is making the choice
to export to a particular destination dt is:
                                      h                                                                                                                        i
V dt (stf ; dt ; Ifdt 1 ; "dt
                           f  ) = max   dt t
                                          (sf ; dt )                    (1    Ifdt   1
                                                                                         )   s   (    f   + "dt      dt t
                                                                                                             f ) + Ve (sf ;
                                                                                                                                   dt
                                                                                                                                        ); Vndt (stf ;   dt
                                                                                                                                                              )
                                       Ifdt (0;1)
                                                                                                                                              (10)
The …rst term in brackets is the payo¤ to exporting, which is the sum of the current pro…t,
net of the …xed and startup costs, plus the expected future value of they choose to export
Vedt (sf ;       dt ):   The second term in brackets is the expected future payo¤ if they choose not to
export in period t; Vndt (sf ;                 dt ):    These expected future values are de…ned as:
                                                                               0     0
                                 Vedt (stf ;     dt
                                                      ) = E"0 ;s0 ; 0 V dt+1 (sf ;       jIfdt = 1; stf ;     dt
                                                                                                                   )
                                                                f   f
                                                                               0     0
                                 Vndt (stf ;     dt
                                                      ) = E"0 ;s0 ; 0 V dt+1 (sf ;       jIfdt = 0; stf ;     dt
                                                                                                                   )
                                                                f   f


 Since the …xed cost contains the stochastic component "dt
                                                        f we can de…ne the probability that

the …rm exports to a particular market as the probability that this component is less than the

                                                                        10
net bene…ts of exporting. De…ne the latent export payo¤ variable as the di¤erence in the two
choices in equation (10):

                 Yfdt =    dt
                                (stf ;    dt
                                               )   (1     Ifdt   1
                                                                     )    s       f   + Vedt (stf ;   dt
                                                                                                           )   Vndt (stf ;   dt
                                                                                                                                  )   (11)

     The discrete export participation variable is de…ned as:

                                                        Ifdt = 1 if Yfdt                 "dt
                                                                                          f                                           (12)

                                                             = 0 otherwise

The third goal of our empirical model is to estimate the …rm’s market participation decision. In
our model it is a function of the …rm factors                            f ; cf   and     f;   the observable marginal cost shifters
wft , the …rm’s product mix Kf , the aggregate desirability of the product in this destination
  dt ,   and the …rm’s prior period export experience Ifdt                               1
                                                                                             : De…ne the vector of these variables
Xfdt = ( f ; cf ;        t               dt ; I dt 1 )   and assume that the latent variable Yfdt is approximated
                    f ; wf ; K f ;             f

by a linear function of them, Yfdt = Xfdt                            where            is the parameter vector to be estimated.
Since the random component of the …xed cost "dt
                                             f is normally distributed, this leads to a probit

approximation to the policy function for the …rm’s export participation decision:

                                                        P (Ifdt jXfdt ) = (Xfdt )                                                     (13)

where        is the normal cdf.7
     Overall, the model developed in this section provides a uni…ed framework for explaining a
combination of continuous (…rm-level sales, pricing) and discrete (market participation) deci-
sions for Chinese exporting …rms for a set of destination countries. It recognizes three sources
of unobserved …rm heterogeneity, in the form of correlated …rm-level demand, marginal produc-
tion cost, and …xed costs, that link the …rm data on the endogenous set of export destination
markets and the export prices and sales in each market chosen. We are interested in estimating
the empirical distribution of these e¤ects. The model can be estimated with …rm-level data
   7
     Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007), and Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) have estimated structural models of the
…rm’s discrete export decision. They calculate the long-run …rm values Ve and Vn and estimate the distribution
of …xed costs and entry costs. Using the insights of Hotz and Miller (1993), it is possible to invert the choice
probabilities in equation 13 and retrieve the value functions. We do not pursue this avenue in this paper because
we do not have any need for these objects and equation 13 is su¢ cient for our goal of estimating the distributions
of f and cf :


                                                                          11
on export prices, quantities, production costs, and destination markets.8                 It will allow us to
infer the three unobserved …rm-level components and combine them into a natural index of the
…rm’s ability to generate export market pro…ts. In the next section we discuss the econometric
methods that we use to estimate the model.


3    Estimation

Before we move to the details of estimation of the three structural equations, demand (4),
pricing (6), and export market participation (13), we summarize the data we observe. For each
…rm, we observe a sequence of cost shifters lnwft and export market participation dummies Ifdt .
Conditional on Ifdt = 1, we also observe prices lnpdt                        dt
                                                   f k and market shares ln sf k for each product

sold by …rm f . We denote the full set of data for …rm f (across all destinations, products,
and years) as Df and the full set of data over all …rms as D.
    In the demand equation we estimate destination-speci…c parameters                d   and destination-year
trade barriers     dt :   Using the pricing equation we recover how prices depend on …rm-level wage
rates with the parameter           w,   destination-speci…c cost di¤erences    d;   and product group cost
di¤erences    k.   The …nal speci…cation issue for the demand and pricing equation concerns the
shocks udt      dt
        kf and vkf : We allow them to be both serially and contemporaneously correlated.

                                                       u dt 1
                                            udt
                                             kf   =     ukf     + eudt
                                                                    kf                                    (14)
                                             dt        v dt 1       dt
                                            vkf   =     vkf     + evkf

where the two transitory shocks, eu and ev are distributed:

                                            e = (eu; ev)    N (0;   e ):


In the demand and pricing equations we allow for multiple sources of serial correlation through
the …rm e¤ects       f    and cf and the serially-correlated transitory shocks udt      dt
                                                                                kf and vkf :

    The export participation equation in each market (13) depends on all three sources of …rm-
level heterogeneity. Since they are assumed to enter the latent payo¤ Yfdt linearly, we combine
   8
     If we used only the price and quantity data from markets that the …rm chose to export to and ignored the
endogenous market participation decisions would likely result in upward biased estimates of the distribution of
 f and downward biased estimates of the distribution of cf :



                                                       12
these sources into a single …rm-speci…c random variable                                f   = ( f ; cf ;         f)   which we will refer
to as the …rm export participation component. The …nal element of the empirical model
is the speci…cation of the stochastic relationship between the three sources of …rm heterogeneity,

 f ; cf ;   and     f:     We model the …rm variables as:

                                                            ( f ; cf ;   f )~N (0;   f)


where        f   is an unconstrained covariance matrix among the three components. This covariance
matrix will provide estimates of the extent of …rm heterogeneity in demand, marginal production
cost, and …xed cost and the correlation between them.
      The structural parameters can be grouped in a way that will facilitate estimation. Denote
the set of demand and cost parameters that are common for all …rms as                                           =(                                     u; v ;
                                                                                                            1         d ; dt ; k ;   w;    dt ;   k;            e)

and the participation parameters as                             2   =    : Denote the …rm e¤ects as ( ; c; )f                        and let
g(( ; c; )f j       3)    be the joint distribution of the …rm e¤ects which depend on the parameter

  3   =     f.

      The likelihood function (conditional on ( ; c; )f ) for …rm f can be separated into a par-
ticipation component, which only depends on the parameters                                           2   and the …rm participation
component            f;    and the price and quantity components, which depend on                                       1   and the …rm
demand and marginal cost terms                          f   and cf .       In addition, because the participation decision
depends on lagged participation status, we face an initial conditions problem, which is common
in dynamic discrete choice models with persistent unobserved heterogeneity. Recognizing this,
we express the likelihood function for the set of discrete destination decisions as:

                                                      YYT
                                     0      0                                              dt 1
                 lp(Df j    2;       2; f ; f )   =    [ P (Ifdt j                    t
                                                                           2 ; f ; lnwf ; If    )]P (Ifd0 j     0 0        0
                                                                                                                2 ; f ; lnwf )            (15)
                                                      d t=1

The second term on the right-hand side of equation (15) represents the contribution of the initial
year observations on the …rm’s export destinations Ifd0 to the likelihood. We use Heckman’s
(1981) method and specify a separate, ‡exible probabilistic model of initial export status with
parameter vector                 0   and …rm component               0   and allow         and   0   to be freely correlated.
                                 2                                   f                 f         f

      We can express the likelihood for the price and quantity observations as:




                                                                         13
                                          Y Y1
                                                        dt dt 1 dt 1
                ld(Df j 1 ; ( ; c; )f ) =  [   h(udt
                                                  kf ; vkf jukf ; vkf ;                                     1; (   ; c; )f )]               (16)
                                                  d;k t=   0 +1

Since each …rm exports to di¤erent destinations during di¤erent years, the starting year that
we observe active price and quantity data                   0   and the ending year                 1     is …rm-destination-product
speci…c.9 Combining the participation, price, and quantity components, the likelihood for …rm
f (conditional on ( ; c; )f ) is then:


                                                                                0       0
                 l(Df j       1;    2; (   ; c; )f ) = lp(Df j          2;      2 ; f ; f )ld(Df j        1; (   ; c; )f )                  (17)


We could estimate the parameters                      1;   2;       3   by specifying a distributional assumption on
g(( ; c; )f j   3)   and constructing the full likelihood for Df by integrating over ; c; :
                                                  Z
                     l(Df j    1;    2;    3) =       l(Df j    1;       2; (    ; c; ))g(( ; c; )j         3 )d   dcd                      (18)

However, our primary interest is not to just estimate the common parameter vector                                                   1;   2;        3

but to also construct an estimate of ( ; c; )f for each …rm. The Bayesian MCMC methodology
is very attractive for this purpose. Instead of integrating ( ; c; ) out, we will sample from
the joint posterior distribution over all the parameters,                                 1;   2;     3    and the …rm components
( ; c; )f for all …rms.10
       The Bayesian approach requires we de…ne a prior distribution on the parameters. Denote
the prior on the common structural parameters as P (                                 1;   2;   3 ):       Assuming that ( ; c; )f is
independent across all …rms f = 1:::F , the joint posterior distribution is:
                                                 0                                                                                 1
                                                   Y
P ( 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; ( ; c; )1 ; :::; ( ; c; )F =D) / @ l(Df j 1 ; 2 ; ( ; c; )f )g(( ; c; )f j                                      3 ))A P (     1;       2;   3)
                                                                f
                                                                                                                                            (19)
 Our goal is to characterize the posterior distribution, equation (19) numerically.                                                 This will
allow us to describe the posterior distribution of both the                                parameters and the demand, mar-
   9
    We also make the assumption that the initial year of the shocks ud0    d0
                                                                     kf ; vkf are independent of ; c; and :
  10
    In addition, our data often contains a large number of observations (products, years, and destinations) for
each …rm. In this case, the average marginal e¤ects are robust to misspeci…cation of the distribution of and
c. see Arellano and Bonhomme (2011).



                                                                    14
ginal cost, and export participation component             f   , cf ; and   f   for each …rm.


    We use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation to generate a sequence of draws
from this posterior distribution. As we detail in the Appendix, the model structure allows us to
rely on Gibbs Sampling to simulate these draws sequentially for blocks of parameters. Specif-
ically, for each iteration, we sample the …rm heterogeneity components                         f ; cf ; f       conditional
on the data and common parameters           1;   2;    3.       We then draw         1,    2,   and         3   from their
respective conditional posterior distributions which depend on the data and …rm heterogeneity
components    f ; cf ; f .   1   includes the price elasticity parameters in the demand equation,
which could potentially be subject to endogeneity bias resulting from correlation in                              f   and cf
and in udt       dt
        f k and vf k . We rely on an empirical strategy outlined by Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch

(2007) to implement a sub-Gibbs Sampler within the step that draws                        1.   This step e¤ectively
uses the lnwft as instruments within our Bayesian framework.


4     Chinese Firm-Level Production and Trade Data
4.1   Data Sources

We will use the empirical model developed above to study the determinants of trade by Chinese
…rms operating in the footwear industry.         The data we use in this paper is drawn from two
large panel data sets of Chinese manufacturing …rms. The …rst is the Chinese Monthly Customs
Transactions from 2002       2006 which contains the value and quantity of all Chinese footwear
exporting transactions at the 6-digit product level. This allows us to construct a unit value price
of exports for every …rm-product-destination combination which makes it feasible to estimate
demand models and construct a measure of each …rm’s demand component.
    We supplement the trade data with information on manufacturing …rms from the Annual
Survey of Manufacturing, an extensive survey of Chinese manufacturing …rms conducted each
year by the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics. This survey is weighted toward medium and
large …rms, including all Chinese manufacturing …rms that have total annual sales (including
both domestic and export sales) of more than 5 million RMB (approximately $600,000). This
survey is the primary source used to construct many of the aggregate statistics published in


                                                      15
the Chinese Statistical Yearbooks. It provides detailed information on ownership, production,
and the balance sheet of the manufacturing …rms surveyed. It includes domestically-owned
…rms, foreign-owned …rms, and joint-venture …rms operating in China as long as they are
above the sales threshold. This data is important in our research to provide measures of total
…rm production, observable cost shifters including capital stocks and wage rates, and detailed
ownership information. In China, these two data sources are collected by di¤erent agencies and
do not use a common …rm identi…cation number. They do, however, each report the Chinese
name, address, phone number, zip code, and some other identifying variables for each …rm. We
have been engaged in a project to match the …rm-level observations across these two data sets
using these identifying variables. To create instrumental variables used in our estimation, we
further supplement data of rural wage, urban wage, and land transfer price of each city and its
surrounding rural areas from the Chinese City Statistical Yearbooks.
   In this paper we study the export behavior of …rms in the footwear industry. We chose this
industry for study because it is a major export industry in China, accounting for more than
70% of the footwear imports in the large markets in North America and Japan, has a large
number of exporting …rms, more than 2500 exporters were present in 2002, and was subject
to a quota in the countries of the European Union during the …rst part of our sample period.
We will use our estimated model to examine the sorting of …rms along demand and cost both
within and after the quota regime. In this industry there are 18 distinct 6-digit products and
they can grouped into three 4-digit product classes:   textile footwear, rubber footwear, and
leather footwear. In this industry we are able to identify 738 unique …rms in both the custom’s
and production data sets. Table 1 reports the number of these …rms that are present in each
of the sample years. This varies from 491 to 689 …rms across years.



            Table 1 - Number of Firms in the Sample
            Year Number of Firms Number of Exporting Firms             Export Rate
            2002         490                    329                       0.670
            2003         570                    448                       0.786
            2004         688                    609                       0.885
            2005         686                    609                       0.888
            2006         658                    541                       0.822


                                              16
       The key demand variable is the market share of each …rm/six-digit product in a destination.
The market share of variety i in market dt is de…ned as the sales of variety i divided by the
total imports of footwear from all supplying countries in market dt: The market shares for the
Chinese …rms in our sample are very small, more than 99% of the sample observations are
below .004 and the maximum market share in any destination-year is .039.                      Given the few
observations with larger market shares justi…es our assumption of monopolistic competition in
the …rm’s pricing decision.11

4.2      Empirical Patterns for Export Participation and Prices

In this subsection we summarize some of the empirical patterns of export market participation
and export pricing for Chinese …rms that produce footwear and discuss factors in the model
that will help capture them. The second and third columns of Table 1 summarize the number
and proportion of sample …rms that export in each of the years.                 To be in the sample it is
required that a …rm export to at least one destination in two consecutive years. The number of
exporting …rms varies from 329 to 610 and the export rate varies from 0.67 to 0.89 over time.
       Among the exporting …rms, the destination markets vary in popularity. Table 2 reports the
fraction of exporting …rms in our sample that export to each destination between 2002                   2006.
US/Canada is the most popular destination, with approximately half of the exporting …rms in
our sample exporting to these countries in any year. This is followed by Japan/Korea and Rest
of Asia, where approximately 40 percent of the exporting …rms sell. Japan/Korea has fallen
slightly over time as a destination. Between 28 and 37 percent of the exporting …rms sell in the
Non-EU countries of Europe, Africa, and Latin America. Australia/New Zealand is the least
popular destination market, with 19 percent of the Chinese exporters selling there on average,
and a declining export rate over time. These numbers suggest that export pro…ts will vary by
destination market. Market size, tari¤s, transportation costs, and degree of competition are
all country-level factors that could contribute to di¤erences in the pro…tability of destination
  11
     When estimating the demand curve we normalize this market share by sdt     0 the market share of a single
product, waterproof footwear, aggregated over all suppliers to market dt. In e¤ect, we treat the category of
waterproof footwear as being produced by a single …rm and the utility of this product is normalized to zero in
market dt: In the demand function the price of this normalizing good varies across markets but will be absorbed
in the destination-year dummies included in the empirical demand function.




                                                      17
markets and result in di¤erent export rates. They are captured in the theoretical model through
the terms in ln    dt   in equation (8) and the participation decision in each market will depend
on the interaction of these country-level factors and the …rm-level distribution of pro…tability.



                  Table 2 - Proportion of Exporting Firms By Destination
                  Destination       2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Average
                  US/Canada          .544 .533 .495 .493 .494           .512
                  Japan/Korea        .410 .384 .377 .380 .375           .385
                  Rest of Asia       .362 .413 .428 .430 .410           .408
                  Non EU Europe .365 .359 .356 .374 .390                .369
                  Africa             .234 .275 .282 .351 .348           .298
                  Latin America      .274 .263 .280 .290 .298           .281
                  Australia/NZ       .219 .221 .177 .184 .159           .192


   Table 3 provides evidence that the number of destinations a …rm exports to and the pop-
ularity of the destination are related.     The …rst column of the table reports the proportion
of …rms that sell in only one destination market (.348) through all seven destinations (.062).
Slightly more than one-third of the …rms sell in only one market. The fraction of …rms selling in
multiple markets declines monotonically as the number of markets increases from 18.2 percent
selling in 2 destinations to 6.2 percent selling in all seven destinations. The remainder of the
table gives the proportion of …rms exporting to n = 1; :::7 destinations, conditional on exporting
to one of the destinations. The destinations are ordered from most to least popular in terms
of overall export rate.      The table shows a clear correlation between number of destinations
and the popularity of the destination.      Firms that export to the most popular destinations,
US/Canada and Japan/Korea, are most likely to export to only one destination.          The …rms
that export to the least popular destinations, Africa, Latin American, and Australia/NZ, are
most likely to export to a large number of destinations. Firms that export to the Rest of Asia
and nonEU Europe are in the middle, more likely to export to one or two destinations than the
Africa, Latin American, Australia/NZ exporters, but less likely than the US/Canada and Japan
Korea exporters. This pattern is consistent with underlying sources of …rm heterogeneity that
persist across all the …rm’s destination markets. Firms with demand, marginal cost, and …xed
cost components that allow them to be pro…table in di¢ cult markets, that is ones with low


                                                 18
aggregate demand or high transport and entry costs, will also tend to be pro…table in more
popular markets and export to a larger total number of markets. This pattern is also consistent
with evidence in Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) who show that French …rms export to
a hierarchy of countries and conclude that …rm-level factors that persist across markets is an
important factor that generates the dependence in the set of destination markets. Firm-level
demand and cost components play a major role in the empirical model developed here.



 Table 3 - Frequency Distribution of Total Number of Destinations
 Number Destinations n                        Conditional on Exporting to:
   (overall frequency)    US/Can Jap/Kor Rest Asia non EU Africa Lat Am                      Aust/NZ
 1    (.348)                .209       .323      .095       .123    .033   .040                .063
 2    (.182)                .159       .108      .153       .136    .117   .056                .143
 3    (.134)                .130       .099      .172       .136    .168   .119                .080
 4    (.112)                .123       .112      .164       .158    .178   .181                .134
 5    (.102)                .143       .112      .149       .184    .182   .220                .170
 6    (.061)                .113       .121      .134       .114    .154   .181                .116
 7    (.062)                .123       .125      .134       .149    .168   .203                .295

   While Table 3 provides evidence that …rm-level factors help determine the extensive margin
of trade, we also …nd evidence that the intensive margin of trade is a¤ected. Table 4 investigates
the individual …rm’s price and quantity decision to highlight the important dimension of …rm
heterogeneity in the data. The table reports the R2 from OLS regressions of log price and log
quantity on combinations of product, destination, year, and …rm dummies in explaining price
and quantity variation.   The one-way regressions show that the product dimension accounts
for 33.7 percent of the sample variation in log price and 10.7 percent in log quantity. By itself,
the destination dimension accounts for just over 1 percent of the sample variation in prices and
just under 5 percent in quantity and the time dimension accounts for virtually no variation in
prices or quantities. Most importantly, the …rm dimension accounts for the vast majority of the
sample variation: 76.5 percent of the price variation and 44.5 percent of the quantity. Adding
characteristics sequentially, beginning with the product dimensions, we see that destination
and year contribute little additional explanatory power in the price and quantity regressions.
In contrast the …rm dimension continues to contribute substantial explanatory power for both
variables. Overall, the table simply illustrates that most of the micro-level price and quantity


                                               19
variation is accounted by across-…rm di¤erences, some by di¤erences in the type of product
(leather vs. rubber vs. plastic shoes), and very little by time and destination. This reinforces
the focus of our empirical model on characterizing the extent of …rm heterogeneity in demand
and cost conditions.


                 Table 4 - Source of Price and Quantity Variation
                                   R2 from OLS regressions
                 Categories of Controls               log price log   quantity
                 Four-Digit Product (3 categories)      .337          .107
                 Destination (7 areas)                  .014          .049
                 Year (5 years)                         .002          .002
                 Firm (738 …rms)                        .765          .445
                 Product, Destination                   .343          .145
                 Product, Destination, Year             .346          .146
                 Product, Destination, Year, Firm       .825          .492
   We also …nd that the extensive margin and the intensive margin are correlated in a way
that is consistent with …rm-level heterogeneity that persists across markets. Table 5 reports
coe¢ cients from regressions of log price and log quantity on dummy variables for the number
of destination markets. All coe¢ cients are relative to …rms with only one destination and the
regressions include a full set of product, year, destination dummies. The …rst column of the
table shows that …rms that export to three to six destinations have prices, on average, that are
statistically signi…cantly higher than …rms that export to one destination, but prices for …rms
that export to two or seven destinations are not signi…cantly di¤erent.     The second column
shows that, with the exception of three destinations, the average …rm export quantity to each
market also rises as the number of destinations increases. In these cases, the average quantity
of sales in in each market are between 11 and 51 percent higher than the base group.

        Table 5 - Price and Quantity Versus Number of Destinations (standard errors)
        Number of destinations            log price                 log quantity
                   2                     .020 (.024)                 .109 (.086)
                   3                     .133 (.025)                 -.172 (.088)
                   4                     .082 (.025)                 .173 (.088)
                   5                     .107 (.024)                 .145 (.084)
                   6                     .172 (.025)                 .507 (.088)
                   7                     .009 (.022)                 .281 (.079)
        Regressions include a full set of year,product,destination dummies


                                              20
    Overall, Table 5 shows that the intensive margin, the average quantity of sales in each
market, is positively related to the number of destinations the …rm exports to, but the pattern
is noisy.   The complex relationship between the quantity of sales and the extensive margin
indicates that there is likely a role for multiple sources of …rm-level heterogeneity. Firms with
low …xed costs of exporting would sell in more destinations, other things equal, but they would
also require higher demand or lower marginal cost to explain the higher quantity of sales. The
price is also higher for …rms that export to more markets, except for the seven destinations.
This is not consistent with low marginal cost and low price being the sole determinant of export
participation and price. This is consistent with underlying …rm di¤erences in demand: …rms
with high demand components export to more markets and sell more, but also have higher
marginal costs and thus higher prices. Overall, the empirical patterns summarized in Tables
3-5 suggest that …rm-level di¤erences in pro…tability that persist across destination markets
is a likely contributor to the export decisions on both the extensive and intensive margins for
Chinese footwear exporters, but it is not possible to identify the source of the …rm di¤erences
from this evidence, so we turn to estimation of a structural model with distinct …rm demand,
marginal cost, and …xed cost components.


5     Empirical Results

In this section we report estimates of the system of demand, pricing, and market participation
equations using the Bayesian MCMC methodology. We report the posterior means and stan-
dard deviations of the parameters that are common across …rms,           1;    2;   and   3   de…ned in
section 3, and summarize the role of the three sources of …rm heterogeneity in generating price,
quantify and export participation di¤erences across …rms.

5.1    Demand Estimates

Table 6 reports estimates of the demand curve parameters, equation (4) which include the
destination-speci…c price parameters     d   and group demand shifters   k:   The demand elasticity
in each market is    d   and the markup, the ratio of price to marginal cost, is     d =( d    1). The
…rst three columns of results correspond to our system of equations using the Bayesian MCMC



                                                 21
methodology where each column uses a di¤erent set of instrumental variables to control for
the endogeneity of the output price.12 The column labeled IV1 uses the log of the urban wage
and the log of the rural wage for manufacturing workers in the city where the …rm is located.
IV2 adds the log of the local land rental price to the instrument set and IV3 further adds the
log of the …rm’s capital stock. The IV1 and IV2 instruments vary at the city-year level. The
third set of instruments includes one …rm-level variable, the capital stock, in the set.13               For
comparison, the …nal two columns report OLS and IV estimates, using the IV1 instrument set,
of the demand curve. To be consistent with the model assumption of              f,   we use a random e¤ect
IV speci…cation.
       Focusing on the system estimates, we observe that the demand elasticity for each country
varies little across the di¤erent instrument sets.         Using the results for IV2, we see that the
demand elasticities        d   vary from -2.381 to -3.272 across destination countries. They are
highest in the low-income destinations, Africa, Latin America, and the Rest of Asia, where
they vary between -2.974 and -3.272. This implies lower markups in these destinations with
the ratio of price to marginal cost varying from 1.440 to 1.506. The higher-income destinations,
US/Canada, Australia/NZ, Japan/Korea, and non-EU Europe, have demand elasticities that
vary between -2.381 and -2.932 and markups that all exceed 1.518.               Finally, the two product
group coe¢ cients imply that consumers get higher utility from leather shoes and lower utility
from textile shoes, relative to rubber shoes.
  12
     Since we have a structural pricing equation, this is essentially a standard Hierarchical Bayes model. We
include the name IV to highlight the role of cost shifters in the pricing equation for model identi…cation.
  13
     We do not include the …rm’s own wage rate as an instrument because it can re‡ect the composition of the
labor force in the …rm and this could be correlated with the …rm demand and cost component.




                                                     22
  Table 6 - Demand Curve Parameter Estimates (standard error)
                                   Bayesian System of Equations                                 Demand       Equation
  Parameter                     IV1             IV2           IV3                              OLS                 IV1
  - d - US/Canada         -2.720 (0.319) -2.804 (0.319) -2.693 (0.348)                    -0.657 (0.075)      -1.735 (0.845)
  - d - Japan/Korea       -2.850 (0.326) -2.932 (0.326) -2.818 (0.356)                    -0.633 (0.096)      -2.140 (1.474)
  - d - Australia/NZ      -2.629 (0.343) -2.708 (0.342) -2.589 (0.366)                    -0.259 (0.128)      -2.083 (0.909)
: - d - Rest of Asia      -2.943 (0.326) -3.028 (0.327) -2.916 (0.356)                    -0.973 (0.082)      -2.949 (0.644)
  - d - Non-EU Europe -2.297 (0.325) -2.381 (0.325) -2.264 (0.349)                        -0.198 (0.089)      -1.157 (0.699)
  - d - Africa            -3.186 (0.334) -3.272 (0.334) -3.156 (0.359)                    -1.064 (0.097)      -3.286 (0.687)
  - d - Latin America     -2.889 (0.335) -2.974 (0.334) -2.856 (0.360)                    -0.800 (0.100)      -2.941 (0.654)
   g - leather             0.303 (0.242) 0.356 (0.244) 0.288 (0.254)                      -1.032 (0.069)       0.110 (0.384)
   g - textile             -0.899(0.162) -0.908 (0.160) -0.902 (0.161)                    -0.912 (0.069)      -0.826 (0.091)
  The models include a full set of destination*year dummies


In contrast, the OLS estimates of the price elasticity are substantially closer to zero, varying
from -0.198 to -1.064. This …nding of more inelastic demand is consistent with the expected
positive bias in the demand elasticity due to the endogeneity of prices when using the OLS
estimator. The IV estimator of the simple demand equation produces estimates of                          d   that
are much closer to the system IV estimates despite having larger standard errors.

5.2    Pricing Equation Estimates

Table 7 reports parameter estimates of the pricing equation (6).                  These include coe¢ cients
that shift the marginal cost function including the local wage rate for urban and rural workers,
the land rental price, and the …rm’s capital stock, as well as product dummy variables. The
coe¢ cients on both wage rates are always positive, as expected, but highly signi…cant. When
the land rental price is added to the marginal cost speci…ciation (IV2) it is also positive and
signi…cant but becomes insigni…cant when the capital stock is also added as a marginal cost
shifter (IV3).     The sign of the capital coe¢ cient in the last case is positive, which is not
consistent with it being a shifter of the short-run marginal cost function.14                    The product
  14
    Because we do not use any data on the cost of the …rm’s variable inputs, but instead estimate the cost
function parameters from the pricing equation, this coe¢ cient will capture any systematic di¤erence in prices
with …rm size. It is important to emphasize that the estimation has already controlled for …rm-speci…c factors
in cost (cf ) and demand ( f ) so the capital stock variable is measuring the e¤ect of variation in …rm size over
time which is likely to capture factors related to the …rm’s investment path and not just short-run substitution
between …xed and variable inputs.


                                                       23
dummies indicate that leather footwear prices are, on average 60 percent higher and textile
footwear prices are 5.5 percent lower than the base group, rubber footwear.
   The remaining parameters summarize the serial correlation structure in the shocks to the
demand and pricing equations. The autoregressive coe¢ cient in the demand shocks             u   is .640
(.009) and in the cost shocks    v    is .668 (.011). These indicate that, even within a …rm, some
product-market combinations tend to consistently do better. The …nal three parameters in the
table indicate that the demand shock has a much larger variance than the cost shock and there
is a positive covariance between the two shocks. The covariance between eu and ev is .177 and
the correlation coe¢ cient is .418.     The fact that the correlation is positive indicates that price
will be positively correlated with the transitory demand shock u; demand elasticity estimates
will be biased toward zero if this source of endogeneity is not controlled for by instrumental
variables. This bias was seen in the OLS estimates in Table 6.


           Table 7 - Pricing Equation Parameter Estimates
                                                  Bayesian System of Equations
                                                 IV1           IV2          IV3
           ln(urbanwage)f t                  .200 (.022)   .180 (.024)  .175 (.024)
           ln(ruralwage)f t                  .041 (.010)   .038 (.010)  .039 (.010)
           ln(landrentalprice)f t                          .014 (.007)  .011 (.007)
           ln(capital)f t                                               .005 (.002)
           Product Group Dummies ( k )
         : Leather Shoes                     .597 (.032)   .596 (.031)  .596 (.031)
           Textile Shoes                     -.054 (.037) -.054 (.036) -.055 (.036)
           Transitory Shocks ( u ; v ; e )
            u                                .640 (.009)   .640 (.009)  .640 (.009)
            v                                .671 (.011)   .669 (.011)  .669 (.011)
           V ar(eu)                         2.107 (.114) 2.134 (.115) 2.096 (.114)
           V ar(ev)                          .084 (.002)   .084 (.002)  .084 (.002)
           Cov(eu; ev)                       .169 (.026)   .177 (.026)  .167 (.028)
           The model includes a full set of destination*year dummies

5.3   Market Participation

The third equation in our empirical model is the probability of exporting, equation (13), and the
parameter estimates are reported in Table 8.       All the cost shifters have negative coe¢ cients as
expected. The …rm’s product mix, measured as the combination of the product coe¢ cients               k



                                                   24
and   k   in demand and cost equations, and de…ned in equation (8), is also highly signi…cant as a
determinant of the export decision. Firms producing products with high appeal or low cost have
higher probabilities of exporting. Finally, as seen in every empirical study of exporting, past
participation in the destination market raises the probability of exporting to that destination
in the current period. As was seen in Tables 6 and 7, the coe¢ cients are not sensitive to the
set of cost shifters that are used.
   The bottom half of the table reports the coe¢ cients for the initial conditions equation.
This is included to recognize that the participation variable in the …rst year we observe the
…rm in a market is not exogenous, but is likely to be determined by the same …xed cost factors
as the later years.    The cost shift variables for the wage rates and land rental price and the
product mix variable have the same signs as in the participation equation for the latter years.
The capital coe¢ cient is positive and signi…cant in the initial year.            All of the coe¢ cients
are larger in absolute value in the inital conditions equation indicating that observed …rm
characteristics play a larger role in explaining …rm di¤erences in participation than in the latter
years when the past participation variable captures much of the role of …rm heterogeneity in
participation. Finally, the covariance between            and   0   is positive, re‡ecting persistence in
                                                      f         f

the export participation component over time.

                Table 8 - Export Market Participation Equation
                                                Bayesian System of Equations
                Dependent Variable             IV1            IV2           IV3
                ln(urbanwage)f t          -.458 (.077) -.448 (.081) -.433(.081)
                ln(ruralwage)f t          -.081 (.041) -.076 (.041) -.071 (.042)
                ln(landrentalprice)f t                    -.007 (.028) -.004 (.028)
                ln(capital)f t P                                       -.005 (.013)
                product mix k2Kf rkd       .367 (.036)    .366 (.036)   .371 (.037)
                                    dt 1
                past participation If     2.071 (.030) 2.069 (.029) 2.080 (.030)
                Initial Conditions
                ln(urbanwage)f 0          -.907 (.156) -.859 (.159) -.717 (.148)
                ln(ruralwage)f 0          -.516 (.131) -.441 (.136) -.512 (.130)
                ln(landrentalprice)f 0                    -.162 (.063) -.109 (.059)
                ln(capital)f 0 P                                        .139 (.022)
                product mix k2Kf rk    d   .571 (.063)    .580 (.065)   .594 (.059)
                          0
                Cov( f ; f )              1.327 (.319) 1.462 (.374) 1.135 (.253)
                The model includes a full set of destination*year dummies


                                                 25
5.4    Firm Demand, Marginal Cost, and Fixed Cost

The empirical model and estimation method produce estimates of the …rm-speci…c demand,
marginal cost, and …xed cost factors,            f,   cf , and      f:   It is important to emphasize that all
three equations, including the export participation equation, are helpful in identifying the joint
distribution of the …rm components. Table 9 reports the posterior mean and standard deviation
of the variance matrix of the …rm e¤ects              f:


                                  Table 9 - Posterior Distribution of f
                                               Mean             Standard Dev
                               V ar( f )         3.687             (0.613)
                               V ar(cf )         0.341             (0.129)
                            :
                               V ar( f )         0.136             (0.024)
                              Cov( f ; cf )      0.795             (0.129)
                              Cov( f ; f )       0.099             (0.046)
                              Cov(cf ; f )       0.012             (0.012)
      The posterior variances are 3.687 for the demand component and 0.341 for the cost com-
ponent implying that producer heterogeneity is much more substantial on the demand side than
on the cost. The across-…rm hetergeneity in market shares is leading to substantial variation
in the estimated        f    across …rms while the heterogeneity in prices leads to a much smaller
degree of dispersion in cf : The variance of               f   cannot be interpreted in the same way because
it is estimated from a discrete choice equation.                 The parameters in the participation model,
equations (12) and (13) are normalized by the variance of the shock "dt
                                                                     f :

   The …nal three parameters reported in Table 9 are the covariances between the three …rm
components.     The covariance between the demand and cost components is .795, implying
that …rms with relatively high demand components also have higher costs and prices which is
consistent with the …rm making costly investments that raise marginal cost, such as improving
product quality or building a stock of customers, in order to increase demand. The …rm entry
component is also positively correlated with both the demand and cost components.
   As explained in the theory section, the cost heterogeneity term cf is the sum of …rm-level
costs to produce higher demand h( f ) as well as a pure marginal cost component ! f .                     The
entry heterogeneity term         f   is a function of the cost and demand terms as well as a pure entry
cost component     f:       If we approximate these relationships as linear functions, we can express

                                                           26
the three measured …rm components in terms of three orthogonal terms,                                                       15
                                                                                                        f;   ! f ; and    f.


                                              f   =     f                                                                    (20)

                                          cf      = a1      f   + !f :

                                              f   = a2      f   + a3 cf          f


       There is a one-to-one mapping from the six elements of                        f   in Table 9 to the six parameters,
a1 ; a2 ; a3 and variances of the three orthogonal terms                    f;   ! f ; and         f.   Solving for a1 ; a2 ; a3
gives a1 = 0.216, a2 = 0.038, and a3 =                 0:053: The variances are V ( f ) = 3:687, V (! f ) =
.170, and V (    f)   =0.127 The positive value of a1 implies that high demand …rms are also high
cost …rms and will therefore have higher prices.                    The marginal cost component ! f accounts
for one-half of the variance in the cost term cf while the demand component a1                                   f   accounts for
the other half of cost variation. The positive value of a2 and negative value of a3 imply that
high demand …rms will be more likely to enter markets while high cost …rms will be less likely.
Together, variation in      f   and cf account for very little (7%) of the variation in                         f    and, instead,
variation in the …xed cost component              f   is the major contributor.
       We can also use the model estimates to assess the role of                         f   and ! f on the intensive margin
of trade. We can explain the fraction of the variance of log market share, log price, and log
revenues due to variation in         f   and ! f in terms of the …rst two lines of the decomposition,
equation (20). The log market share components are:

                                   D      = V ((1           d a1 ) f )=V     (ln(sdt
                                                                                  kf ))                                      (21)

                                   D! = V (             d ! f )=V   (ln(sdt
                                                                         kf ))


The log market price components are:

                                          P       = V (a1        f )=V   (ln pdt
                                                                              kf )                                           (22)

                                         P! = V (! f )=V (ln pdt
                                                              kf )
  15
    The assumption that f , f and cf are multivariate normal implies that the mean of f is a linear function
of f and cf : In the participation probit, including f implies that f and cf have a linear e¤ect on the latent
value of exporting.




                                                            27
The log market revenue components are:
                                                                            dt
                            R     = V (1 + (1          d )a1 ) f )=V   (ln rkf )                      (23)
                                                                  dt
                            R! = V ((1          d )! f )=V   (ln rkf )

   The six components are reported in Table 10. The …rst column reports the values for the
demand component D ; P ; and R and the second column reports the values with respect to
the marginal cost shock D! ; P! ; R! : For the quantity shares, the …rm demand component
contributes 10.4 percent of the variation while the productivity component contributes twice as
much, 22.5 percent, to the variation in the log of the market shares. The reason that the demand
component is less important in this decomposition is that it captures two o¤setting e¤ects: a
…rm with a higher   f   will have higher demand, but also higher prices. In the decomposition
of log price in row 2, the contributions of   f   and ! f are very similar, 29.8 and 25.3 percent,
respectively, and together account for over 50 percent of the price variation observed in the
export data.    Finally, in terms of log revenue, the …rm demand variation accounts for 29.8
percent of total variation in sales, while the marginal cost component accounts for another 11.6
percent.   Overall, both the …rm-level demand and marginal cost components are important
sources of the variation in export quantities, prices, and sales among exporting …rms. Together
they account for over 30 percent of market share variation, 40 percent of revenue variation, and
more than 50 percent of price variation.


            Table 10: Intensive Margin
               Fraction of Variance Contributed by f and ! f (standard error)
                                         Demand f             Marginal Cost ! f
            log quantity share (D)        0.104 (0.032)          0.225 (0.027)
            log price (P )                0.298 (0.053)          0.253 (0.039)
            log revenue (R)               0.298 (0.046)          0.116 (0.024)
   The demand and marginal cost components will all contribute to variation in …rm pro…ts
across destinations and thus a¤ect the extensive margin of exporting. However, the extensive
margin is also a¤ected by the variation in the …xed cost               f   across …rms.   The relative im-
portance of the three …rm components on the extensive margin of exporting can be seen by
calculating how the probability of exporting changes with variation in each component.              Table
11 reports these contributions.

                                                  28
       Table 11: Extensive Margin
            Percentage Change in the Probability of Exporting (standard error)
       Change in Firm Component Demand f Marginal Cost ! f Fixed Cost f
       P10 to P90                   2.84 (1.29)      -1.23 (1.37)     22.32 (2.01)
       P25 to P75                   1.16 (0.53)      -0.49 (0.55)      8.52 (0.77)
The …rst row of the table shows that if we move the …rm component from the 10th to the
90th percentile of its distribution, the probability of exporting will rise, on average, by 2.84
percentage points for the demand component, fall by 1.23 percentage points for the marginal cost
component and rise by 22.32 percentage points for the …xed cost component. Clearly, di¤erence
in the …xed cost component     f   across …rms is the major source of …rm-level di¤erences in the
probability of exporting. However, the demand component still has some small but statistically
signi…cant impact on the extensive margin of trade. The reason that demand is more important
than cost is consistent with the fact that the variance of   f   is the more important determinant
for revenue (and subsequently pro…t). The second line of the table, shows that if we use more
modest movements in the …rm component, from the 25th to 75th percentile of their respective
distributions, the percentage change in the probability of exporting is reduced to approximately
one-third of the magnitude in the …rst row. In this case, di¤erences in the …rm …xed cost will
result in an increase in the probability of exporting of 8.52 percent.
   To summarize, this section provides estimates of structural demand, pricing and export
participation equations for Chinese footwear exporting …rms across seven destination markets.
Our econometric methodology provides a way to estimate unobserved …rm-level demand, mar-
ginal cost, and …xed cost components.       We …nd that the …rm-level …xed cost is the primary
determinant of the entry decision but the demand and marginal cost measures are very im-
portant in explaining the price, market share, and revenue variation across …rms, destination
markets, and time.    The …rm-level demand component has larger variance across …rms than
the marginal cost component but both play a signi…cant role in generating di¤erences in …rm
pro…tability in each market. The cost component is particularly important in accounting for
di¤erences in export quantities across …rms and both components are of approximately equal
importance in explaining across-…rm export price di¤erences. In the next section we study the
response of the 738 …rms in our sample to the removal of the EU quota on footwear exports

                                                29
from China and ask whether …rm demand and cost heterogeneity plays a role in explaining the
subsequent entry, exit, and growth patterns


6    Analyzing the EU Quota Restriction on Chinese Footwear
     Exports

One feature of the environment faced by the Chinese footwear exporters was a quota on total
footwear imports in the European Union that was in place during the …rst half of our sample.
In this section we analyze the mix of …rms that export to the EU and summarize how this
compares during and after the quota period. We have not used the data on exports to the EU
in estimating the structural parameters and constructing the …rm demand and cost indexes and
this section provides some validation that the estimates are capturing useful dimensions of …rm
pro…t heterogeneity.
    Restrictions on Chinese footwear exports to the EU countries date back to the 1990’s. Dur-
ing the the …rst three years of our data, 2002-2004, there was an EU quota on total Chinese
footwear imports.      The quota applied to all three product categories and substantially con-
strained total exports from China. The quota was adjusted upward between 10 and 20 percent
each year following China’s entry into the WTO in late 2001. In 2005 it was removed and this
expiration date was widely known ahead of time. As a consequence, part of the response of
Chinese exporters was already observed in 2004. The quota was monitored by the EU commis-
sion. It was directly allocated across importing …rms with 75 percent of the allocation given to
"traditional importers," …rms that could prove they imported the covered products from China
in previous years.     The remaining 25 percent of the allocation was given to "non-traditional
importers," basically new importing …rms, but they were constrained to a maximum of 5,000
pairs of shoes per importer. In e¤ect, the quota limited the ability of new importing …rms to
gain access to Chinese footwear exports. In addition, when the total application by the im-
porters exceeded the aggregate quota, as is the case for our sample years, applications were met
on a pro rata basis, calculated in accordance with each applicant’s share of the total imports
in previous years.
    These quota restrictions impacted the export decision of Chinese footwear producer’s in


                                                30
important ways. First, given the preferential treatment in quota allocation to “traditional
importers,”there was a lack of presence of “non-traditional”importers. Furthermore, the quota
may also constrain the traditional importers’choice of which Chinese export …rm to buy from.
If it takes time for traditional importers to switch their Chinese suppliers then any disruption
in their import quantity in one year would adversely a¤ect their quota allocation in the next
year. This suggests that traditional importers may not have been completely unconstrained
in their choice of Chinese …rm to buy from and, more generally, that the export history of a
Chinese supplier in the EU may have played a more important role than in other non-restricted
markets. Overall, the quota is likely to have discouraged the entry of new exporting …rms to
the EU and slowed the reallocation of market share towards high                 and low c …rms among
incumbent Chinese producers. Second, from the perspective of Chinese producers,the binding
quota restriction implied a constrained pro…t maximization problem. The shadow cost of the
quota restriction translates into a per unit trade cost incurred by producers. In addition to
lowering the overall pro…tability of Chinese exporters in the EU market, the per-unit trade cost
also has a composition e¤ect that favors …rms with a higher unit price (and higher demand
because of the positive correlation between         and c) in the quota regime.
       In this section we document the large increase in aggregate exports to the EU by Chinese
…rms in our sample and quantify the …rm adjustment in both the extensive and intensive
margins using the demand and cost indexes we constructed with data from the non-EU markets.
Table 13 shows the total exports to the EU by the 738 …rms in our sample for the years
2002-2006.      For comparison, the total exports of these same …rms to the US/Canada and
Japan/Korea are presented.         It is clear from the table that there was a gradual increase in
exports to the EU for all three categories of footwear that were under EU quota constraints
from 2002-2003 followed by a substantial increase in 2004 and 2005. In contrast, the magnitude
of this expansion was not present in either the U.S. or Japanese export markets.16
  16
   There was another change in policy that a¤ected leather footwear imports to the EU in 2006. An anti-
dumping tari¤ was placed on Chinese leather footwear exports and this contributed to the observed decline in
export quantity of this product in 2006.




                                                    31
        Table 13 - Quantity of Footwear Exports by Sample Firms (millions of pairs)
                             2002 2003 2004 2005 2006             Growth Rate
                                                                   2002-2006
        Plastic Footwear a

                EU           9.36 16.3 24.7 32.8 37.4                299%
           Japan/Korea       13.0 14.3 17.3 18.5 20.5                 58%
            US/Canada        14.0 23.4 33.3 29.5 38.5                175%
        Leather Footwearb
                EU           1.16 1.92 3.03 10.2 6.36                450%
           Japan/Korea       6.41 6.97 5.48 4.05 3.72                -42%
            US/Canada        7.68 7.80 9.85 14.1 12.2                 58%
        Textile Footwearc
                EU           2.42 5.87 11.9 15.9 21.7                799%
           Japan/Korea       20.8 20.4 23.7 26.6 27.2                 31%
            US/Canada        16.6 16.8 21.8 21.7 29.9                 80%
        a product 640299, b 640391 and 640399, c 640411 and 640419


   The changes in the quota constraint were accompanied by …rm adjustment on both the
extensive and intensive margins. The top panel of Table 14 summarizes the export participation
rate for our sample of …rms in the EU, US, and Japanese markets. The participation rate in
the EU market rose from .355 to .541 over the sample period, while it increased from .498 to
.536 in the U.S. and remained virtually unchanged at approximately .430 in Japan. Relaxing
the quota was accompanied by net entry of Chinese exporting …rms into the EU market. The
lower panel of the table shows the average size (in thousands of pairs of shoes) of continuing
…rms in the three markets in each year. In each destination there is a substantial increase in
the size of the exporting …rms from 2002-2005, followed by a drop in 2006. Across the three
destinations the proportional increase over the whole period was larger in the EU (134 percent)
than in the US (39 percent) or Japan (28 percent).       There is a signi…cant increase in the
average size of the Chinese …rms sales in the EU market as the quota was relaxed.




                                              32
                    Table 14: Source of Export Expansion by Year, Destination
                                    2002     2003    2004  2005       2006
                      Extensive Margin (Prop. …rms exporting to destination)
                    EU              .355     .440     .477  .536       .541
                    US/Canada       .498     .560    .509   .536       .536
                    Japan/Korea     .420     .432    .440   .440       .432
                            Intensive Margin of Long-Term Exportersa
                    EU              55.6     89.8    140.7 161.0      130.2
                    US/Canada       74.2     96.5    132.6 128.0      103.7
                    Japan/Korea     95.6    107.9 130.8 141.2         122.6
                    a Median quantity, thousands of pairs


    Table 14 implies that there is reallocation of market shares among the set of …rms that are
selling to the EU market. The next question we address is whether this reallocation is related
to the underlying …rm demand and cost indexes.17 In Table 15 we …rst examine reallocation
on the extensive margin resulting from the entry and exit of the exporting …rms from the EU
market then, in Table 16, we summarize reallocation on the intensive margin re‡ecting changes
in the size of continuing exporters.
                                                                           s
    Given our MCMC approach, for each set of simulations of                f;   ! sf ; or   s,
                                                                                            f    we assign the …rms
into 5 bins. For the demand index, we assign the …rm to bin 1 if its value of                     f   is in the lowest
20 percent of …rms. For the cost indexes we assign the …rm to bin 1 if its cost index is in the
highest 20 percent of …rms. In this way, …rms assigned to bin 1 will have the lowest pro…ts in
a particular dimension. The remaining bins each contain 20 percent of the …rms where pro…ts
will be increasing as we move to higher bins.            Firms assigned to bin 5 will have the highest
demand and lowest cost indexes and thus the highest pro…ts. In Table 5 we report turnover
patterns for each bin based on averages of all the simulations.18
  17
     It is not possible to construct the index of …rm pro…tability for the …rms in the EU market because we do
not have an estimate of the demand parameter d in this destination market. We will instead focus on the
separate comparisons of demand and cost.
  18
     Standard errors of these summary statistics are also calculated but we chose not to report them due to space
limit.




                                                       33
 Table 15: The Source of Adjustment in the Number of Firms Exporting to the EU
           Net Entry Ratea               Entry Rateb                           Exit Ratec
  f            2002-06      2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05                2005-06
 1 - low        0.146        0.153     0.209    0.218    0.123     0.325     0.316    0.280         0.257
 2              0.214        0.167     0.237    0.221    0.145     0.223     0.235    0.179         0.229
 3              0.277        0.192     0.270    0.230    0.184     0.167     0.160    0.155         0.188
 4              0.312        0.222     0.284    0.250    0.205     0.112     0.141    0.155         0.166
 5 - high       0.305        0.220     0.290    0.268    0.197     0.074     0.157    0.139         0.167
 !f
 1 - high       0.241        0.234     0.232    0.261    0.172     0.118     0.187    0.173         0.209
 2              0.252        0.213     0.255    0.239    0.189     0.101     0.176    0.181         0.190
 3              0.262        0.192     0.261    0.225    0.177     0.147     0.205    0.174         0.188
 4              0.279        0.174     0.259    0.215    0.154     0.220     0.204    0.165         0.180
 5 - low        0.287        0.147     0.267    0.239    0.145     0.364     0.199    0.180         0.216
  f
 1-high          0.138         0.130     0.166      0.132      0.129    0.279     0.332     0.364    0.325
 2               0.207         0.144     0.203      0.198      0.150    0.261     0.267     0.287    0.267
 3               0.262         0.171     0.234      0.252      0.167    0.218     0.230     0.219    0.224
 4               0.331         0.221     0.296      0.315      0.198    0.165     0.181     0.144    0.184
 5-low           0.383         0.338     0.491      0.421      0.293    0.097     0.101     0.050    0.115
 a change in the total number of exporting …rms 2002-2006 relative to number of exporting …rms 2002
 b number of new exporting …rms in year t relative to number of nonexporting …rms in year t     1
 c number of …rms that exit exporting in year t relative to the number of exporting …rms in year t 1


The …rst column of Table 15 shows that net entry is positive for all categories of …rms from
2002-2006 re‡ecting the loosening of the quota restrictions and the overall expansion of exports
to the EU. Net entry over the whole period shows a compositional shift toward …rms with high
demand, low marginal cost, and low …xed cost indexes.       For example, …rms with the lowest
demand indexes had a net entry rate of .146 while …rms with the highest demand indexes had
a net entry rate of .305. The di¤erences across pro…t bins is larger for the demand index (.146
to .305) and …xed cost index (.138 to .383), and is weaker for the marginal cost index (.241 to
.287). This also re‡ects the relatively low dispersion in the marginal cost index, so that there
is less pro…t heterogeneity across …rms in this dimension to begin with.
      The remainder of the table shows how this net change over the whole period is divided
among years and among entry and exit ‡ows. Focusing on the demand index in the top panel,
we see that the entry rate increases monotonically as     increases (move from bin 1 to bin 5)

                                              34
within each year. There is a higher entry rate by …rms with high demand indexes. The entry
rates are highest in 2003-04 and 2004-05 just as the quota is removed, and drop in all categories
by 2005-06, suggesting a fairly rapid response on the extensive margin to the quota removal.
The exit rate is decreasing as     increases and is particularly high for the …rms with the lowest
demand indexes, bins 1 and 2. While there is not a strong pattern in the exit rate over time,
both entry and exit rates contribute to the large increase in net entry rates as the demand index
     increases. Reallocation on the extensive margin following the quota removal is toward …rms
with high demand indexes.
      The second panel summarizes variation from high to low marginal cost indexes. The pattern
in the entry rate as ! increases is not stable across years. In 2002-2003 and 2004-2005 and
for the top 4 categories in 2005-2006, it falls as ! declines, indicating that …rms with higher
marginal costs have higher entry rates in these years.        In 2003-04 the pattern is reversed,
however, the di¤erences in the entry rates across bins are not very substantial in most years.
This weak relationship with ! is also seen in the exit rates.        The exit rates do not move
monotonically as ! increases and do not shift systematically for all categories between most
pairs of years.     Overall, …rm di¤erences in the marginal cost indexes do not translate into
strong entry or exit patterns.
      The …nal panel summarizes entry and exit patterns as …xed costs fall. The pattern is similar
to what is observed for the demand indexes but there are even larger di¤erences across bins.
The entry rate increases monotonically increases and the exit rate falls as …xed costs fall in
every year. Both entry and exit rates contribute to the pattern on net change seen in column
1.
      Overall, as the quota is removed, nonexporters with relatively high demand and low …xed
cost indexes move into the EU market while those with low demand and high …xed costs are
more likely to abandon it.       This movement starts before the quota is o¢ cially removed in
2005 and persists into 2006. Variation in the marginal cost index is not a strong predictor of
adjustment on the extensive margin.
      The quota removal can also lead to adjustment on the intensive margin as the initial group of
exporters expand or contract their sales in response to the changing market conditions. Table



                                                 35
16 focuses on the set of …rms that are present in the EU market in 2002 and follows their
growth and survival through 2005. The …rst column reports the average output growth rate
of the surviving …rms in each demand, marginal cost, and …xed cost bin.     The second column
reports the survival rate over the time period for the same group of …rms. The demand results
are clear: the average …rm growth rate increases substantially as the demand index increases.
Continuing exporters in the lowest demand category grew 1.2 percent, on average, over the
period. In contrast, …rms in the highest category increased their footwear exports to the EU
an average of 13.7 percent.   The survival rate also increases monontonically from 62.7 to 79.4
percent as demand increase. There is a clear reallocation of export sales toward the …rms with
higher demand indexes. In contrast, the variation in the export growth rate and survival rate
with the marginal cost index does not have a clear pattern. Firms in the three highest cost
categories grew between 8.8 and 10.3 percent, while the …rms in the two low cost categories
grew 4.4 and 6.1 percent. The survival rate declines as the cost index falls, until the lowest
cost category. There is no evidence that output was being relallocated to toward …rms with
the lowest marginal cost indexes.

            Table 16 - Quantity Adjustment by Existing Exporters
            Demand f           Average Growth Rate of Quantity Survival Rate
            1 - low demand                  0.012                  0.627
            2                               0.047                  0.669
            3                               0.088                  0.736
            4                               0.101                  0.754
            5 - high demand                 0.137                  0.794
            Marginal Cost ! f
            1 - high cost                   0.089                  0.753
            2                               0.103                  0.719
            3                               0.088                  0.693
            4                               0.061                  0.677
            5 - low cost                    0.044                  0.743

    Examining the adjustment in the EU market following the quota removal shows that there
is a clear pattern of reallocation on both the extensive and intensive margin and the adjustment
is related to the …rm-level demand and …xed cost measures that we estimate with our structural
model. High demand and low …xed cost …rms account for a more substantial part of Chinese
exports to the EU following the quota removal. Variation in marginal cost is only very weakly

                                              36
correlated with the magnitude of net entry but is not systematically related to adjustment
of exiting exporters on the intensive margin.    One reason for the relatively weak correlation
between export adjustment and marginal cost is that the overall variation in the marginal cost
index is small compared to the variation in the demand and …xed cost indexes. There is less
…rm heterogeneity in this dimension and so other factors, including observable di¤erences in
marginal and heterogeneity in demand and …xed cost will play a larger role in generating pro…t
di¤erences across …rms.


7    Summary and Conclusion

In this paper we utilize micro data on the export prices, quantities, and destinations of Chinese
footwear producers to estimate a structural model of demand, pricing, and export market
participation. The model allows us to quantify …rm-level heterogeneity in demand, marginal
cost and …xed costs and provides a way to combine them into a measure of a …rm’s pro…tability
in each of seven regional export destinations. Estimation of the heterogeneity in …rm demand
parameters relies on across-…rm di¤erences in export market shares, controlling for …rm prices,
in the destination markets. The measure of marginal cost heterogeneity relies on di¤erences in
…rm export prices, controlling for observable …rm costs and markups, across destinations. Both
factors play a role in determining the …rm’s pro…t in each export market and thus the decision
to export.   Estimation of the heterogeneity in the …xed cost of supplying a market exploits
data variation in the number and pattern of export market destinations across …rms.
    To estimate the model we use panel data from 2002-2006 for a group of 738 Chinese …rms
that export footwear.     The econometric methodology we utilize relies on Bayesian MCMC
with Gibb’s sampling for implementation.        This allows us to both include a large number
of unobserved …rm components, three for each of our 738 …rms, and to incorporate them
consistently in both the linear and nonlinear equations in our model in a very tractable way.
    The export price, quantity, and destination patterns across …rms indicate a potentially
important role for unobserved …rm components that persist across destinations.       Firms that
export to many destinations also export to more di¢ cult destinations and have higher average
export quantities in each destination.    This is consistent with persistent …rm-level demand


                                                37
heterogeneity.   These same …rms also have higher average export prices which suggests that
the demand di¤erences are costly to produce or maintain and is not consistent with low cost
being the sole determinant of export success. The empirical results indicate substantial …rm
heterogeneity in demand, marginal cost and …xed cost dimensions.       On the extensive margin,
the …xed cost factor is the most important determinant of the number and pattern of export
destinations.    Once in the destination market, the demand and marginal costs factors are
equally important in explaining export price variation across …rms and destinations but the
demand factor is approximately twice as important in explaining sales variation.      We use the
…rm indexes to study the reallocation of export sales across Chinese producers in response to
the removal of the quota on Chinese exports of footwear to the EU. We …nd that removal
of the quota led to a substantial change in both the intensive and extensive margins of trade
with the shift in composition toward …rms with higher demand and lower …xed cost indexes.
Di¤erences in marginal costs play very little role in the reallocation of supply sources.
   Overall, this paper represents a …rst step toward understanding how underlying …rm het-
erogeneity on both the demand and production sides in‡uences the long-run performance of
Chinese manufacturing exporters. This paper demonstrates that …rm parameters from demand,
production cost, and …xed cost of the …rm’s activities can be retrieved from micro data on …rm
production and export transactions and that the …rm parameters are useful in summarizing
di¤erences in …rm export patterns across destination markets.       The source of heterogeneity
is potentially very important in understanding the ability of Chinese …rms to compete in the
future with other low-cost supplying countries.     If there is limited scope for future cost im-
provements by Chinese producers, then the role of the demand component, both how it di¤ers
across …rms and how it impacts pro…tability in a destination, will be critical to continued export
expansion. The next step is to expand the framework we have developed here to allow these
…rm demand and cost components to vary over time and be altered by the …rm’s investments in
R&D or physical capital so that …rm export success or failure becomes a result of …rm decisions
to a¤ect its productivity or demand for its products.




                                               38
8    Appendix - Sampling Procedure

In this section we describe the process of sampling from the joint posterior distribution, equation
(19), using Gibbs sampling over                 1;    2;     3;    and ( ; c; )f .

8.0.1    Sampling from the Posterior Distibution of                                        1


The parameters in         1   =(      d ; dt ; k ;    w;     dt ;    k ; u; v ;       e)   include all common parameters in
the demand and pricing equations. Given draws of ( ; c; )s1                                   1
                                                                                                  :::( ; c; )sF         1
                                                                                                                            from iteration s       1;
we begin iteration s by sampling                s:   We rewrite the components of equation (16). First, using
                                                1

the demand curve (4) and serial correlation assumption on udt
                                                           kf de…ne the time-di¤erenced errors

in the demand equation as:

                       s 1                                                      dt 1                  s 1                          dt 1
et1 = ln(sdt
          kf )         f        k   +           dt
                                          d ln pkf           dt          u (ln(skf )                  f          k   +       d ln pkf          dt(24)
                                                                                                                                                   1)

                     s 1
     = et1 (    11 ; f ; u )


where    11   includes all the structural parameters in the demand curve. Similarly, for the pricing
equation (6) de…ne the time-di¤erenced errors as:



                                                                                dt 1                                             t 1
     et2 = ln pdt
               kf         dt        k
                                                 t
                                            w lnwf           cf          v (ln pkf                dt 1          k           w lnwf        cf ) (25)
                           s 1
          = et2 (    12 ; cf ; v )


where    12   iincludes all the structural parameters in the pricing equation.
    From equation (16), we can rewrite the joint density of udt     dt
                                                             kf andvkf in terms of the data

and parameters:



                 dt dt 1 dt 1
        h(udt
           kf ; vkf jukf ; vkf ;         1; (    ; c; )sf    1
                                                                 ) = (et1 (             s 1       t
                                                                                   11 ; f ; u ); e2 (
                                                                                                                           s 1
                                                                                                                     12 ; cf ; v );       e)


    where      is the bivariate normal density. Equation (16) can now be expressed as:

                                                                                        YY
                     ld(Df j   11 ;     12 ; u ; v ;        e; (    ; c; )sf   1
                                                                                   )=                    (et1 ; et2 ;       e)                  (26)
                                                                                        d;k       t



                                                                    39
      We specify the prior on each parameter in                                      11 ;       12 ;    u; v          as N (0; 1000) and the prior on

 e    as IW (I; 2): The conditional posterior distribution of                                                1   is:
               Y
                     ld(Df j     11 ;   12 ; u ; v ;          e; (   ; c; )sf      1
                                                                                       )    P(         11 )P (         12 )P ( v )P ( u )P ( e ):            (27)
                f

      We sample the subcomponents of                                 1;   again, using the Gibbs sampler.                                   First, we sample
 s                              s 1     s 1; s 1;                         s 1
 12    given values             11 ;    v    u               and          e      from the previous iteration.                               Given the linear
form of the demand and pricing equation and the multivariate normal prior, the posterior
distribution of            s    is multivariate normal and the mean and variance can be expressed in
                           12

closed form (Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch (2007), section 2.8) so it is simple to draw a value
for    s :     Second, we sample                   s ;      given     s ;        s 1; s 1;          and              s 1:    At this point we deal with
       12                                          11                 12         v    u                              e

the endogeneity of price in the demand equation.                                                Given                s ;    s 1; s 1;       and   s 1,   et2 in
                                                                                                                     12     v    u                e

equation (25) can be constructed from the data, treated as known, and the joint distribution
of    (et1 ; et2 ;   e)   in equations (26) and (27) can be written as                                                 (et1 jet2 ;   e ):   The mean of the
posterior distribution of                s    will have a closed form and depend upon et2 : Conditioning on et2
                                         11

in this way, e¤ectively controls for the source of endogeneity in the demand equation (Rossi,
Allenby, and McCulloch,(2007), section 7.1). The …nal step in our use of the Gibbs sampler
for         involves sampling            s;    s;       and      s   given           s     and         s :       Again, the mean and variance of
        1                                v     u                 e                   11                12

the posterior distribution have a closed form given the conjugate normal prior on                                                                  s;    s   and
                                                                                                                                                   v     u

the inverted Wishart prior on                          s:
                                                       e


8.0.2        Sampling from the Posterior Distribution of                                                         2


The next step is to sample                    2;   the parameters in the market participation equation (13). The
priors are all N (0; 1000): Using the likelihood for the participation condition, equation (15),
the conditional posterior distribution is:

                                               Y
                                                         lp(Df j      2; (      ; c; )sf    1
                                                                                                )      P(        2 ):
                                                   f

      The additional complication arising at this stage is that we cannot express the posterior
mean and variance in closed form because of the nonlinearity of the participation equation.
We could use Metropolis-Hastings accept/reject methodology to sample from the posterior

                                                                                40
distribution.      A faster alternative is to exploit the linearity of the latent variable equation
Yfdt = Xfdt   2   that underlies the participation decision.                          Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch (2007,
section 4.2) show that using the Gibbs sampler we can cycle between the parameter vector                                                  2
                                                                 s 1
and the latent variable Yfdt           "dt
                                        f :           Given      2 ;      if Ifdt = 1 (a …rm exports) the latent variable
                                                                                                  s 1
Yfdt    "dt                                               dt
         f is drawn from a normal distribution with mean Xf                                       2     and variance equal to 1 and
left-truncated at zero. If Ifdt = 0; the latent variable is sampled from a normal with the same
mean and variance and right-truncated at zero. Given the value of the latent variable, then
the posterior distribution of           s    has a multivariate normal distribution with a closed form for
                                        2

the mean and variance.

8.0.3    Sampling from the Posterior Distribution of ( ; c; )f

                   s;   s            s 1
Given values       1    2   , and    3       we next sample ( ; c; )sf for each …rm. This step uses the data
and model parameters from the demand, pricing, and export participation equations because
( ; c; )f enters into all these equations. The prior distribution P (( ; c; )f j                                     3)   is assumed to
be bivariate normal, BV N (0;              0 ):   The conditional posterior distribution for these parameters
                                           f

is:


                                    l(Df j    1;       2; (   ; c; )f )        P (( ; c; )f j       3 ):


At this stage we use Metropolis-Hastings accept/reject criteria …rm-by-…rm to sample from the
posterior distribution.

8.0.4    Sampling from the Posterior Distribution of                                          3


The …nal step samples          3;   the variance matrix for the                     f ; cf ; f :        It’s prior P (    3)   is IW (I; 3).
This allows us to sample from the conditional posterior distribution:

                                              Y
                                                      g(( ; c; )sf j      3)     P(    3 ):
                                                  f




                                                                   41
References

 [1] Arellano, M. and S. Bonhomme (2011), "Nonlinear Panel Data Analysis", .Annual Review
    of Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 395-424.

 [2] Arkolakis, C. (2010), "Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in In-
    ternational Trade," Journal of Political Economy, Vol 118, No. 6, pp. 1151-1199.

 [3] Aw, B.Y. and Y. Lee (2014), "A Model of Demand, Productivity, and Foreign Location
    Decision Among Taiwanese Firms," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 92, pp.
    304-316.

 [4] Aw, B.Y., M. Roberts, and D. Y. Xu (2011), "R&D Investment, Exporting, and Produc-
    tivity Dynamics," American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 4 (June), pp. 1312-1344.

 [5] Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan (2011), "Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and Trade
    Evidence," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, Vol. 3 (May), pp. 60-88.

 [6] Bernard, A., J. Eaton, J.B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003), "Plants and Productivity in
    International Trade," American Economic Review, Vol. 93, p. 1268-1290.

 [7] Berry, S. (1994), "Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Di¤erentiation," Rand
    Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 242-262.

 [8] Brandt, L., T.G. Rawski, and J. Sutton (2008), "China’s Industrial Development," L.
    Brandt, and T. Rawski (eds.), China’s Great Economic Transformation, Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, pp. 569-632.

 [9] Branstetter, L. and N. Lardy (2008), "China’s Embrace of Globalization," in L. Brandt,
    and T. Rawski (eds.), China’s Great Economic Transformation, Cambridge University
    Press.

[10] Crozet, M., K. Head, and T. Mayer (2012), "Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level Ev-
    idence for French Wine," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 79, No.2, (April), pp.
    609-644.


                                            42
[11] Das, S., M. Roberts, and J. Tybout (2007), "Market Entry Cost, Producer Heterogeneity,
    and Export Dynamics," Econometrica, Vol. 75, No. 3 (May), pp. 837-873..

[12] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002), "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica,
    Vol. 70, pp. 1741-1780.

[13] Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011), "An Anatomy of International Trade:
    Evidence from French Firms," Econometrica, Vol 79, No. 5 (September), pp.1453-1499.

[14] Eslava, M, J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler, and M. Kugler (2004), "The E¤ects of Structural
    Reforms on Productivity and Pro…tability Enhancing Reallocation: Evidence from Colom-
    bia," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, pp. 333-371.

[15] Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008), "Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
    E¢ ciency: Selection on Productivity or Pro…tability," American Economic Review, Vol.
    98, No. 1 (March), pp. 394-495.

[16] Gervais, A. (2015), "Product Quality, Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade," Cana-
    dian Journal of Economics. Vol. 48, No. 3, pp.

[17] Hallak, J.C. and J. Sivadasan (2009), "Firms’ Exporting Behavior Under Quality Con-
    straints," NBER Working Paper 14928..

[18] Hopenhayn, H. (1992), "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long-Run Equilibrium,"
    Econometrica, Vol. 60, No. 5 (September), pp. 1127-1150.

[19] Hottman, C., S.J. Redding, and D.E. Weinstein (2014), "What is ’Firm Heterogeneity’in
    Trade Models? The Role of Quality, Scope, Markups, and Cost," NBER Working Paper
    20436.

[20] Hotz, V.J. and R.A. Miller (1993), "Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation
    of Dynamic Models," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No. 3 (July), pp. 497-529.

[21] Johnson, R. (2012), "Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms," Journal of International
    Economics, Vol. 86, No. 1, pp. 43-56.


                                             43
[22] Jovanovic, B. (1982), "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica, Vol. 50,
    No. 3, pp. 649-670.

[23] Katayama, H, S. Liu, and J. Tybout (2009), "Firm-Level Productivity Studies: An Illusion
    and a Solution," International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 27, No. 3 (May),
    pp. 403-413.

[24] Khandelwal, A. (2010), "The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders," Review of Economic
    Studies, Vol. 77, No. 4, pp.1450-1476.

[25] Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen (2012), "Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,"
    Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 79, No. 1 (January), pp. 307-339.

[26] Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2012), "Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations," Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, pp.379-436.

[27] Melitz, M. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity," Econometrica, Vol. 71, No 6, pp. 1695-1725.

[28] Rossi, P., G. Allenby, and R. McCulloch (2005), Bayesian Statistics and Marketing, John
    Wiley and Sons, Ltd.

[29] Schott, P. (2008), "The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exporters," Economic Policy,
    Vol. 53 (January) pp. 5-49.

[30] Sutton, J. (2007), "Quality, Trade and the Moving Window: The Globalisation Process,"
    The Economic Journal, Vol. 117 (November), pp. F469-F498.




                                             44
