                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHO SHRUNK CHINA? PUZZLES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF REAL GDP

                                         Robert C. Feenstra
                                              Hong Ma
                                           J. Peter Neary
                                         D.S. Prasada Rao

                                        Working Paper 17729
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17729


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We thank Robert Inklaar for his helpful comments as well as participants at an April 2010 conference
in Oxford. George Dan provided excellent research assistance. This research received support through
NSF Grant No. 27-3457-00-0-79-195 for the project entitled “Integrating Expenditure and Production
Estimates in International Comparisons.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert C. Feenstra, Hong Ma, J. Peter Neary, and D.S. Prasada Rao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Shrunk China? Puzzles in the Measurement of Real GDP
Robert C. Feenstra, Hong Ma, J. Peter Neary, and D.S. Prasada Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 17729
January 2012
JEL No. E01

                                            ABSTRACT

The latest World Bank estimates of real GDP per capita for China are significantly lower than previous
ones. We review possible sources of this puzzle and conclude that it reflects a combination of factors,
including substitution bias in consumption, reliance on urban prices which we estimate are higher
than rural ones, and the use of an expenditure-weighted rather than an output-weighted measure of
GDP. Taking all these together, we estimate that real per-capita GDP in China was 50% higher relative
to the U.S. in 2005 than the World Bank estimates.


Robert C. Feenstra                                 J. Peter Neary
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
University of California, Davis                    University of Oxford
One Shields Avenue                                 Manor Road Building
Davis, CA 95616                                    Oxford OX1 3UQ
and NBER                                           United Kingdom
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu                             and CEPR
                                                   peter.neary@economics.ox.ac.uk
Hong Ma
Tsinghua University                                D.S. Prasada Rao
Department of Economics                            School of Economics
Beijing, China                                     University of Queensland
mahong@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn                         Brisbane Australia Qld 4072
                                                   d.rao@uq.edu.au
                                                        1


1. Introduction

        The International Comparison Program (ICP) is a collaborative effort of the World Bank

and other international agencies to estimate the “real GDP” of countries, i.e. the value of their

GDP when adjusted for price level differences across countries and priced in dollars. Because

market exchange rates cannot be relied upon to provide the right conversion from national

currencies to dollars, the ICP computes “purchasing power parity” (PPP) exchange rates, which

compare local prices of a basket of goods with the U.S. prices of those same goods in a

benchmark year. For China, the 2005 benchmark estimates from the World Bank show that real

GDP per-capita for China was 40% smaller in 2005 than real GDP for the same year based on

extrapolations from earlier rounds of the ICP. As Deaton and Heston (2010, p. 3) report:

        …the 2007 version of the World Development Indicators (WDI), World Bank (2007),
        lists 2005 per capita GDP for China as $6,757 and for India as $3,452, both in current
        international dollars. The 2008 version, World Bank (2008a), which includes the new
        [2005] ICP data, gives, for the same year, and the same concept $4,088 for China and
        $2,222 for India. For comparison, GDP per capita at market exchange rates is $1,721 for
        China and $797 for India.

        Maddison (2007) argues that such a downward revision for China is implausible because

extrapolating backwards it would imply per capita income below subsistence levels in early

years1. This observation raises the questions of why the downward revision occurred and

whether alternative calculations would give noticeably different results. The first of these

questions has been addressed by Heston (2007) and Deaton and Heston (2010).2 We will provide

some theoretical structure to help understand their critique, and then address the second question:



1
  Using the Chinese national accounts growth rates would imply a real per capita GDP in 1970 of $400 at constant
2005 prices. The corresponding figure at the current 1970 prices is $93.
2
  See also the comments by Diewert (2010a).
                                                      2


whether alternative, theoretically consistent calculations of real GDP make a difference, for

China or other countries.

        Among the reasons provided by Deaton and Heston as to why the relative position of

China was lowered in the most recent ICP round are the following:

        1) The price data provided by China for the most recent ICP was for urban areas, and

may have overstated the actual prices faced by rural consumers.

        This first issue is a well-recognized feature of the price data provided for the 2005 ICP,

which was the first time that China participated fully in the round3. While Deaton and Heston

note that there is a theoretical issue of aggregating over large countries with diverse prices

between regions, we do not address that issue here. Rather, we treat the urban bias in the prices

reported from China to the 2005 ICP as an empirical issue to be investigated, in section 2.

        2) Different index number methods imply different relative sizes of countries.

        There are very substantial differences in the index numbers methods used by the World

Bank, for example, and the methods used by Penn World Table (PWT). We focus here on just

one aspect of those differences, namely, the use of fixed-weight indexes used in PWT with

flexible-weight index used by the ICP. Neary (2004) has recently proposed an alternative that

requires estimating the expenditure function across countries to obtain indexes of real

consumption. The Neary approach was further developed by Feenstra, Ma and Rao (2009) and

empirically implemented for data covering 124 countries. In section 2 we use all these methods,

along with a recommendation by Barnett, Diewert and Zellner (2009), to calculate the size of

real consumption in China. In addition to showing the differences between the various index

number approaches we use two different sets of prices for China: the prices they reported to the


3
 See Asian Development Bank (2007) for more details regarding price data from China used in the 2005 ICP Asia-
Pacific region. It is clear that urban bias would have impacted on price data for consumption items.
                                                        3


2005 ICP, and our own estimates of alternative prices that adjust for urban versus rural

differentials. We find that the impact of adjusting China’s prices is quite large: real consumption

in China is 10 to 20% higher using our adjusted prices than using the ICP prices.4

        Closely related to the index number issue but conceptually distinct is:

        3) There are several different concepts of real GDP that can be measured, each of which

can imply different relative sizes of countries.

        Shifting attention from just real consumption to real GDP, in section 3 we incorporate

investment, government spending, and the trade balance. We draw on estimates of real GDP

from Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011), which provides the basis for the “next generation” of

PWT. They estimate real GDPe per-capita in China for 2005 at $5,097, which is 25% larger than

the estimate from the World Bank of $4,088. If the prices of consumption goods are adjusted

based on our regression model, then real GDPe per-capita rises to $5,543, or another 10% higher.

Comparing these estimates to the World Bank’s, we conclude that the World Bank estimate is

too low by as much as 25 – 35%. In addition, real GDP in China is even higher once we

incorporate the prices of exports and imports, in section 4.

        Feenstra, Heston, et al (2009) have recently contrasted real GDP measured on the

expenditure-side of the economy, as done by the World Bank and PWT, with real GDP measured

on the output-side. These two concepts differ by countries’ terms of trade, i.e. by the relative

prices of their exports and imports. We provide calculations of China’s real GDP in 2005

measured on the output-side, taking into account its terms of trade. We find that China’s real

GDP increases to $5,862 when measured in terms of its output, which exceeds expenditure-side

real GDP due to China’s low terms of trade. That measure of real GDP on the output-side is


4
 These differences in real consumption do not translate into major adjustments at the GDP level as consumption is
only one component of total domestic expenditure which includes investments and government expenditure.
                                                               4


greater than the World Bank estimate of $4,088 by nearly 45%. Furthermore, we argue that if

real GDP were corrected for substitution bias using a revenue function estimated across

countries, analogous to the expenditure function approach to real consumption of Neary (2004),

then China’s real GDP could be even higher: we conclude that real GDP in China relative to the

United States is quite plausibly 50% higher than estimated by the World Bank (2008a).

Additional empirical results are in Appendix A and the proofs of propositions are in Appendix B.


2. Real Consumption

        In Table 1 and the Appendix Table A1 we show various calculations of real consumption

using data for 124 countries from the 2005 International Comparisons Project (ICP).5 There are

12 categories of consumption goods that we aggregate to compute real consumption. We report

results for selected countries in Table 1, with results for all 124 countries shown in Appendix

Table A1.


2.1 Fixed and Flexible Weight Indexes

        The first calculation in Table 1, column (2) is the GK (Geary, 1958, Khamis, 1970, 1972)

system, as used by the Penn World Table (PWT), but applied here to only i =1,…,M final

consumption goods, with prices pij and quantities qij across countries j = 1,…,C. The reference

prices (denoted by “e” for expenditure)  ie and the purchasing power parities PPPje are defined

as the solution to the simultaneous system:

                                     C                             C
                           ie       ( pij /   PPPje ) qij    qij   ,   i =1,…,M.                      (1)
                                     j 1                      j 1




5
  The total number of countries in the 2005 ICP is 146, but we omitted 22 countries with missing expenditures or
prices for some consumption goods, or for other data reasons. Details are available on request.
                                                        5

                                     M           M
                          PPPje   pij qij       ieqij   , j = 1,…,C.                                 (2)
                                    i 1         i 1


subject to a normalization. The PPP in (2) is used to adjust expenditure in national currency to

obtain that in reference prices, or real consumption:

                           M             M
                           ieqij   pij qij / PPPje ,              j =1,…,C.                          (3)
                          i 1           i 1


        Because real consumption for different countries is computed as in (3) using fixed

quantities qij, we refer to it as a “fixed-weight” index. It is reported in column (2) of Table 1,

relative to the United States. We see that real consumption in China is only 5.9% of that in the U.S.

in 2005. This estimate is more than twice as large as what we get from comparing nominal

consumption in U.S. dollars using official exchange rates in column (1), but is much smaller than

the figure for total real GDP per capita (including C, I, G, and X–M) relative to the U.S. of 9.8%

from the 2005 ICP (World Bank, 2008a), 6 let alone the estimate of 18.5% for real GDP per capita

that Maddison (2007, Table 5) claims is needed to avoid having Chinese living standards below

subsistence in past decades. So the conclusion is that per-capita real consumption is low for China,

relative to other countries or relative to its GDP. We now investigate whether this finding depends

on the index number method which is used to compute real consumption.

        In column (3)-(5) we report various “flexible-weight” indexes, so named because they use

index formulas that are known to be exact for underlying expenditure functions.7 The first method,




6
  As explained in the introduction, World Bank (2008a) which uses the 2005 ICP data gives real GDP per capita in
China of $4,088 in 2005, as compared to $41,674 in the United States. The ratio of these is 9.8%.
7
  See Balk (2008), Diewert (1976, 1999) and Neary (2004). Neary questions whether the exact results for bilateral
comparisons extend to a multilateral context when tastes are non-homothetic.
                                                                    6


which is used by the World Bank, is the so-called EKS system,8 which starts from the Fisher

quantity indexes in each country j relative to a base country k:

                                                           0.5                         0.5
                                     M p q                       M p q          
                           Q Fjk
                                       i 1 ij ij
                                    M                            i 1 ik ij            ,   j,k = 1,2,…,C.
                                                                 M p q          
                                      i 1 pij qik               i 1 ik ik   

Because this comparison between countries is not transitive in general, the EKS index takes the

geometric mean of all possible bilateral comparisons to yield a transitive multilateral index:


                                                  
                                       C
                                   Q Fj QFk
                                                       1/ C
                           Q EKS
                             jk                               ,                    j,k = 1,2,…,C.                 (4)
                                        1


The EKS estimates of real consumption are shown in column (3), from which we see that

China is 5.7% of the U.S., which is even lower than in the GK system. More generally, the GK

estimates of real consumption understate the EKS estimate for rich countries and overstate the

EKS estimates for poor countries. Specifically, when measured relative to the United States, the

GK estimates are less than the EKS estimates for most countries with higher nominal GDP per

capita than South Korea (ranked 31st out of 124 countries), and greater than the EKS estimates

for most countries with lower nominal GDP per capita than Macedonia (ranked 61st out of 124),

with a mixed pattern in-between. Those two countries are included in Table 1, and we will argue

below that the GK reference prices can be thought of as lying in-between the prices of South

Korea and the United States.

        An alternative flexible-weight system is the CCD (Caves, Christensen, Diewert, 1982a,b)

index, which makes use of the Törnqvist index instead of the Fisher index. The index of real

consumption in country j relative to consumption in country k measured using the Törnqvist

index is given by:
8
  Or the GEKS system, after Gini, Eltetö and Köves, and Szulc. Rather than providing the historical references to
the multilateral comparison methods we employ, we refer the reader to Balk (2008), which provides a modern
treatment of them all.
                                                               7

                                        sij  sik
                          M    qij        2                          pij qij
                QTjk                            where sij                      , j,k = 1,2,…,C.
                                                                   
                                                                       M
                         i 1  qik                                       p q
                                                                       i 1 ij ij


It is easy to see that these quantity indexes are not transitive unless the expenditure shares are the

same in all the countries. The CCD index is a transitive index generated from the matrix of all

binary Törnqvist indexes and is defined as:


                                                      
                                        C
                                  Q Tj QTk
                                                        1/ C
                          Q CCD
                            jk                                                      j,k =1,2,…,C.      (5)
                                         1


The CCD indexes are reported in column (4) of Table 1, and are quite close to the EKS indexes.

       Generally, the three indexes of real consumption discussed so far – the GK, EKS and CCD –

give quite similar results especially for China. We conclude that the index number method cannot

account for the very low level of real consumption in China that is obtained when we use the price

collected for the 2005 ICP. But the validity of these prices themselves are open to question. It is

clear from Asian Development Bank (2007) that the price surveys in China were restricted to 11

capital cities and the rural areas surrounding these 11 cities. The ADB, following the

recommendation of an Expert Group, constructed a national average price using a method of

extrapolation also described in ADB (2007). However, the extrapolation method did not make

any explicit allowance for spatial price differences across different regions and across rural and

urban regions of China. As a result the general consensus is that national average prices have a

tendency to overstate the actual prices. Accordingly, in Appendix A we make an adjustment to

the Chinese prices by predicting them from a simple model of price levels based on data for the

other Asian countries. Of the 12 categories of consumption goods, we adjust five prices

downwards (for food and non-alcoholic beverages; clothing and footwear; education; restaurants;

and other goods and services), four prices upwards (for gross rent, fuel, power; medical and
                                                        8


health services; transport; and recreation), and leave three prices unchanged due to lack of data to

adjust them.

       Real income comparisons based on the adjusted prices for China are presented at the

bottom of Table 1. In the GK calculation, real consumption in China relative to the U.S. rises

from 5.9% to 6.4%, which is a rise of 9% in Chinese real consumption. Similar increases are

seen for the flexible-weight indexes using the EKS and CCD methods. We will find even larger

increases due to the adjustment in Chinese prices as we next consider results based on the

expenditure function.


2.2 Expenditure Function Approach

       Neary (2004) has recently proposed that real consumption should be measured with an

expenditure function. This avoids the substitution bias implied by fixed-weight indexes such as

GK, and allows for departures from homotheticity. The measure of real consumption at reference

prices  is:

                                            M
                               e( , u j )   i qij* ,             j =1,…,C,                 (6)
                                            i 1


where we use an asterisk to denote optimally chosen quantities, as contrasted with the fixed

quantities in (1). The real consumption in country j relative to country k is then given by,

                                                   e( , u j )
                                                                 .
                                                   e( , uk )

Neary argues that this formulation will give better estimates than using an index number method

because quantities respond to the reference prices.
                                                                    9


        The expenditure function approach could be implemented in many alternative ways. Her

we shall use the expenditure function corresponding to the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS)

of Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), which is given by:9

                                                        M M
                   ln e( p, u )   0   'ln p    1
                                                    2     ij ln pi ln p j  b( p )ln u ,                       (7)
                                                        i 1 j 1


where b( p )    i pi i . We impose “money metric scaling”, which leads to the following

restrictions on the parameters:  0  0,   1. To ensure that the expenditure function is

homogeneous of degree one in prices we require that                         i  i  1 and i  i  i  ij  0 for all j,
and to ensure that expenditure is increasing in utility we require that b( p )  0 . We report the

estimated parameter values using data on 124 countries and 12 commodity groups in Appendix

Table A2.10

        We assume that the parameters of the expenditure function are common across countries.

Then it is immediate by computing e( , u j ) and e( , uk ) from (7) that the ratio of real

consumption in country j relative to k is:

                                                              b( )
                                     e( , u j ) uj 
                                                                     .         j =1,…,C.                       (8)
                                     e( , uk )  uk 

For any reference prices , we refer to (8) as a measure of real consumption based on the

expenditure function, and it depends on the reference price vector .

        To obtain a reference-price vector, Neary (2004) proposes that it should be computed as

the solution to:

9
  Estimates are also available on request for the QUAIDS expenditure function of Banks et al. (1997), which extends
the AIDS model by adding a quadratic term in income. As in Neary (2004), this made relatively little difference in
practice, and also lacks the convenient theoretical properties that we exploit in (8) and subsequently.
10
   These are estimated with the software provided in Neary (2004) for estimating the AIDS expenditure function
using the semi-parametric approach of Diewert and Wales (1988).
                                                            10

                             C                          C
                   iGAIA   ( pij / PPPj* )qij        qij*     ,                           i =1,…,M,      (9)
                             j 1                      j 1


                             M           M                      e( p j , u j )
                  PPPj*   pij qij /   iGAIAqij*                             ,   j =1,…,C.               (10)
                            i 1         i 1                 e( GAIA , u j )



which extends the GK system in (1)-(2) by using optimal quantities qij* in the denominators of (9)


and (10). Notice that PPPj* is the ratio of the expenditure function at two different prices, but

constant utility, so it can be viewed as an exact cost-of-living index in the spirit of the Allen

index. 11 For this reason, Neary (2004) refers to (9)-(10) as the Geary-Allen International

Accounts (GAIA).

         We have computed the GAIA reference prices  GAIA for the 124 countries and 12

consumption goods using Neary’s software. We follow his procedure of first normalizing the

prices of each goods by the arithmetic mean of the country prices, so that   1 is the sample

mean of prices. In Table 2 we report this sample mean along with the actual U.S. prices, the

Geary-Khamis reference prices  GK , the GAIA reference prices  GAIA , and the actual prices for

South Korea. It can be seen that the GK and GAIA reference prices fall in between those of the

United States and South Korea for most commodities.

        From (8), it is evident that real income at any reference prices πB can be computed from

real income at any other reference prices πA by:

                                                                       b( B )/ b( A )
                                     e( , u j )  e( A , u j ) 
                                         B
                                                                                       ,                  (11)
                                     e( B , uk )  e( A , uk ) 


11
   Neary uses the reciprocal of (10), which he calls a “real exchange rate.” We instead follow the PWT convention
of using the purchasing power parity, defined as expenditure at domestic prices relative to expenditure at reference
prices.
                                                                            11


so it is very easy to make the transformation between one reference price vector to another, as noted

by Feenstra, Hong and Rao (2009). At the bottom of Table 2 we report the values of

b( GK ) =0.996 and b( GAIA ) =1.026, which can be compared to b(1)  1 at the sample mean.

With these values, we can easily make the transformation between the real consumption based

on the GK reference prices in column (5) of Table 1, and real consumption based on Neary’s

GAIA reference prices reported in column (6). Using either the GK or GAIA reference prices, we

see in columns (5) and (6) of Table 1 that real consumption per capita in China is increased by

21% due to the adjustment in prices, which is even more than what we found for the

consumption indexes in column (2)–(4).

       A final reference-price calculation we shall make is due to a suggestion by Barnett,

Diewert and Zellner (2009). To compare the real consumption of two countries j and k, they

recommend that every country’s price vector p ,  =1,…,C, be used, and then take the

geometric mean of the resulting comparisons. From (9), this procedure results in:

                                                                       b  p  1 / C                  1b ( p ) / C
                                                                                                          C

                 e( p  , u j ) 
                   C
                                         1/ C
                                                   C uj                                uj    
                                                                                                          .   (12)
                  1 e( p , u k )               1  u k                          uk    

Thus, it is apparent that in the AIDS case this recommendation corresponds to the use of

reference prices  D where b  D                  1 C
                                                       b p  ;we refer to these as “Diewert reference prices”
                                                     C  1

for brevity. For our sample of 124 countries we obtain b( D ) = 0.988, and it turns out that

b( D )  [b( us )b( kor )]0.5 , which means that the Diewert reference prices are equivalent to

using the geometric mean of the U.S. and South Korean prices. With these values for b( D )

column (7) of Table 1 is readily computed. Like the other expenditure function methods, real

consumption in China is revised upwards by about 21% due to the adjustment in its prices. Using
                                                   12


these prices, we find that real consumption per capita in China is 6.6% of that in the United

States, which is the highest of any consumption estimate shown in Table 1.

       We conclude that the downward bias in real consumption from the ICP’s use of urban

prices for China is quite substantial: roughly 10% for the consumption indexes and 20% when

using the expenditure function. The question we address next is how these higher estimates for

real consumption influence the total measure of real GDP.


3. Real GDP on the Expenditure Side

       PWT defines real GDP by using the fixed-weight index in (3) to convert nominal exports

and imports, or nominal GDP, to real GDP measured in dollars across countries:

                        RGDPje  (Nominal GDPj )/ PPPje

                                   i1 ie qij + (Xj – Mj) / PPPje
                                     M
                              =                                                                 (13)


                                                      i 1 pij qij + (Xj – Mj), where Xj and Mj are the
                                                        M
where the equality follows from nominal GDPj =


nominal values of export and imports. Note that qij and PPPje are defined as in (2) and (3), but

now computed over all final goods, i.e. for consumption, investment and government

expenditures. We use the superscript e on real GDPe to stress that this is an expenditure-based

measure, since the price used to compute PPPje are those for final goods only. As discussed by

Feenstra, Heston et al (2009), this measure of real GDP is intended to reflect the living standards

or consumption possibilities of an economy. In the next section we will discuss an alternative

output-based measure, real GDPo, that reflects the production possibilities of an economy.
                                                 13


3.1 Estimates of Real GDPe in 2005

       Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011) compute (13) for all countries included in the 2005

ICP. The preliminary results of this calculation for China and selected other countries are shown

in column (8) of Table 1. For China, without making any adjustment to the ICP prices, we find

that real GDPe per-capita is $5,097 in 2005, or 25% larger than the estimate of $4,088 from the

World Bank (2008a). The difference between these two estimates can only come from one of

two sources: (i) the use of the EKS method by the ICP/World Bank, rather than the GK method

used here; (ii) the fact that the ICP/World Bank does not compute the real GDPs over all

countries simultaneously, but rather, used certain “link” countries across regions and then

computes regional and intra-regional real GDP based on the linking methodology described by

Diewert (2010b). Heston (2007) and Deaton and Heston (2010) argue that this linking method

probably leads to an understatement of Chinese real GDP, which we confirm. Surprisingly,

however, the understatement of real GDP for India is not as large, which we report as $2,423 in

Table 1 or about 10% larger than the estimate of $2,222 from the World Bank (2008a).

       We also compute real GDPe using the same adjustment to the Chinese prices for final

consumption goods used in the earlier sections. This adjustment to the final consumption goods

is combined with unadjusted prices for investment and government expenditures, since these

were not subject to the same urban bias in their collection, obtaining the results reported at the

bottom of Table 1. Using the adjusted prices for final consumption goods, we find that real GDPe

per-capita in China is $5,543, or a further 8.8% higher than the unadjusted estimate of $5,097.

Comparing these estimates with the World Bank (2008a) figure of $4,088, we conclude that the

World Bank underestimates real GDPe in China by fully 25 – 35%.
                                                 14


3.2 Comparison with PWT 7.0

       Given the very large difference between our estimate of real GDPe in China and that of

the World Bank, it is useful to compare our estimates to those from PWT version 7.0, available

online since June 3, 2011, at: http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/. PWT reports two sets of estimates for

China, labeled as “China version 1”, with per-capita real GDP of $4,736 in 2005, and “China

version 2” with per-capita real GDP of $5,218. Both of those estimates use the GK system, and

the difference between them is for an adjustment to the ICP prices for China: “version 2” lowers

all the prices for Chinese consumption goods by 20%, as described in the online documentation

“Description of PWT 7.0 (June 3, 2011),” resulting in a 10% increase in real GDP.

       We find a slightly lower 8.8% increase when adjusting the prices of consumer goods,

from $5,097 to $5,543, but of roughly the same magnitude as PWT. That gives us confidence in

the specific adjustments to the consumer prices that we made. Still, our estimates of real GDP –

both with and without the adjustment to consumer prices – are higher than reported in PWT

version 7. Because all estimates use the GK system, this difference must be due to differing

reference prices, which in turn are quite sensitive to the set of countries used in the calculation.

Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011) compute real GDP as in (13) for all countries included in

the 2005 ICP, and in addition, all countries that were included in any former ICP benchmarks but

were not used in 2005. The latter set of countries have their ICP prices for C, I and G aggregated

within the benchmark year and then moved up to 2005 using those respective rates of inflation

relative to the United States. So in the end, 167 countries are used to compute real GDP in 2005.

       In contrast, PWT encompasses a broader group of 189 countries, some 22 of which have

never been included in an ICP benchmark, and with various extrapolation methods used to infer

what the ICP-equivalent prices in these countries would be. Because the GK calculation in PWT
                                                         15


is made over this broader set of countries, and those being added are lower-income countries,

that will move the reference prices in the direction of developing countries’ prices. When

China’s real GDP is computed with reference prices more typical of developing countries, its

real GDP will fall.12 We believe this factor accounts for the differing estimates of real GDP in

Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011) and PWT version 7.0.13

4. Real GDP on the Output-Side

         We will now establish results for real GDP on the output-side. Suppose that the M final

goods now include those used for consumption, investment and government purchases, all of

which are non-traded. In addition, suppose that there are i =M+1,…,M+N intermediate inputs

that can be both imported and exported (imports and exports are different varieties). This

convention that all traded goods are by definition intermediate inputs follows the “production

approach” to modeling imports and exports of Diewert and Morrison (1986) and Kohli (2004), or

the “middle products” approach of Sanyal and Jones (1982).

         Specifically, let us denote three groups of commodities:

        those for final domestic demand (quantities qij  0 and prices p ij > 0, for i = 1,…,M);

        those for exports (quantities xij  0 and prices pijx > 0, for i = M+1,…,M+N);

        imported intermediate inputs (quantities mij  0 and prices pijm > 0, i = M+1,…,M+N).

12
   Samuelson (1974) summarizes this principle as “it always looks better to ride the other fellow's horse”, or in the
words of Robert Summers, “the grass is greener on the other side,” meaning that real GDP tends to be higher when
prices different from a country’s own are used. It is an illustration of what is called more formally the Gershenkron
(1951) Effect.
13
   Having found that our own estimates are not that different from PWT, the remaining feature is that both sets of
estimates differ in a consistent manner from the World Bank (2008a). As noted above, that difference must come
from one of two sources: (i) the use of the EKS method by the ICP/World Bank, rather than the GK method used
here; (ii) the fact that the ICP/World Bank does not compute the real GDPs over all countries simultaneously, but
rather, used certain “link” countries across. PWT version 7.0 assesses the first of these reasons by providing another
measure of real GDP, called “cgdp2” and referred to as “average GEKS-CPDW.” This calculation uses the EKS
method. For “China version 1,” per-capita real GDP is $4,813 in 2005, and for “China version 2,” per-capita real
GDP is $5,366 that year. Both of these estimates exceed that obtained by PWT using the GK system. Evidently, the
use of EKS by the World Bank cannot explain its low estimate for China’s real GDP, which leaves the use of “link
countries” – or other unknown factors – as the culprit.
                                                                     16


The world price vectors for exports and imports are p xj and p mj in country j, and domestic

prices are p xj  s j and p mj  t j . We use sj and tj to denote the vectors of export subsidies and

import tariffs respectively, though differences between home and world prices may also reflect

natural trade costs. The column vector of prices is then Pj = ( p j , p xj  s j , p mj  t j ) , and we let

y j  ( q j , x j ,  m j ) denote the corresponding column vector of outputs and inputs. Then the

revenue function for the economy is defined as:

                          rj ( Pj , v j ) 
                                                    max
                                              qij , xij , mij  0,   Pj ' y j                           
                                                                                      Fj ( y j , v j )  1 ,         (14)


where F j ( y j , v j ) is a transformation function for each country, which depends on the vector vj

representing primary factor endowments in country j, and also depends in the subscript j

representing differences in technologies across countries.


4.1 Real Output with Reference Prices

        We will distinguish the reference prices  i for final goods, i =1,…,M, and two sets of

reference prices  ix ,  im for exports and imported intermediate inputs, i =M+1,…,M+N. Denote

the M+2N dimensional vector of reference prices by   ( , x , m ) . We suppose that the

country is engaged in free trade at these reference prices, and evaluate GDP on the output-side

using the revenue function:

                 RGDO*j (  )  rj (  , v j ) 
                                                                 max
                                                           qij , xij , mij 0,    ' y j                      
                                                                                            Fj ( y j , v j )  1 .   (15)


Provided that F j ( y j , v j ) is sufficiently concave we can expect (15) to have a well-defined


solution, which we denote by qij* , xij* , mij* . Let us make this assumption on the revenue function:
                                                                   17


Assumption 1: For all  > 0, rj ( , v j ) is positive, bounded above and continuously

differentiable.

In economic terms, the assumption that the revenue function is positive implies that, even if the

price of an imported intermediate input is very high, the country can economize on its imports to

still produce positive revenue; while the assumption that it has an upper bound means that the

economy cannot make arbitrarily high revenue by importing some inputs and exporting other

goods.

         To obtain real GDP on the output-side, we shall use the reference prices  to obtain

final demands, net outputs, exports and imports as qij*  rj (  , v j ) /  i , i =1,…,M, and,


xij*  rj (  , v j ) /  ix ,  mij*  rj (  * , v j ) /  im , i =M+1,…,M+N. We assume that the sum

across countries of each of these quantities is strictly positive:


Assumption 2:

                    J                                      J                      J
For all  > 0,           qij*    0, i = 1,…,M, and             mij*      0,    xij*  0,   for i = M+1,…,N.
                   j 1                                    j 1                   j 1



Notice that this assumption applies to the observed prices Pj > 0 and quantities, too.

         Consider computing the reference prices as a weighted average of free-trade prices:

                                 J                 J
                   i   ( pij / PPPj* )qij       qij*           ,           i =1,…,M,                           (16)
                             j 1                  j 1

                                 J                     J
                   ix   ( pijx / PPPj* ) xij     xij*              ,       i =M+1,…,M+N,                       (17)
                             j 1                  j 1


                                 J                         J
                   im   ( pijm / PPPj* )mij          mij*              ,   i = M+1,…,M+N,                      (18)
                                 j 1                  j 1
                                                            18


                                    rj ( Pj , v j )
and,                      PPPj*                      ,   j =1,…,C.                            (19)
                                    rj (  , v j )

Thus, in (16)–(19) we use the optimal quantities in the denominators, but the observed quantities

in the numerators. In (19), the purchasing power parity on the output-side, PPPj* , is computed

by comparing nominal GDP to real GDP at free-trade reference prices. The system defined in

(16)–(19) is an extension of the GAIA system in Neary (2004) by introducing exports and

imports explicitly into the system. In order to be able to use this system, we need to demonstrate

the existence of a positive solution for  i ,  ix ,  im and PPPj* . We follow Neary (2004) in

proving the following result.


Proposition 1

Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exists a positive solution for  i ,  ix ,  im and PPPj* satisfying

the system (16) – (19).

Proof: See Appendix B.


       Using the reference prices coming from Proposition 1, or any other, we can make

comparisons across countries of real GDP on the output-side – or real output for short – using

the ratio of revenue functions:
                                              rj (  , v j )
                                                               .                               (20)
                                              rk (  , vk )

We first show how this can be implemented using a fixed-weight index, and then discuss in

Section 4.3 the implications of estimating the revenue function directly.
                                                                               19


4.2 Fixed-Weight Index on the Output-side

       The measure of real GDP on the output-side, or real GDPo, is defined by Feenstra, Heston

et al (2009) using reference prices for final outputs io , exports ix and imports im , as:

                                           M                   M N
                  RGDPjo                       ioqij                 ( ix xij   immij )
                                       i 1                    i  M 1
                                        M
                                       io qij  ( X j / PPPjx )  ( M j / PPPjm ) ,                                             (21)
                                           i 1


where the equality follows by defining the PPPs of exports and imports, over the traded goods

i = M+1,…,M+N:

                  M N                          M N                                      M N                  M N
        PPPjx                pijx xij /                 ix xij and PPPjm                      pijmmij /          immij .   (22)
                  i  M 1                      i  M 1                                 i  M 1               i  M 1


       The measurement of real GDPo requires disaggregate prices for traded goods, pijx and

pijm , which are used to obtain the reference prices as a weighted average of observed prices:

                           C                                         C
                 io     ( pij /              PPPjo )qij           qij ,                       i =1,…,M,                        (23)
                           j 1                                      j 1
                           C                                         C
                 ix            ( pijx    /   PPPjo ) xij           xij      ,                 i =M+1,…,M+N,                    (24)
                           j 1                                      j 1
                             C                                          C
                 im   ( pijm / PPPjo )mij                           mij         ,             i =M+1,…,M+N,                    (25)
                           j 1                                        j 1
and,
                                                          Nominal GDP j
                PPPjo                                            M N
                                                                                                    , j =1,…,C.                    (26)
                                                           i  M 1( ix xij   immij )
                                       M o
                                            q
                                       i 1 i ij


As in the GK system (1)–(2), one normalization is needed in the system (21)–(26). This system

extends the GK system by adding information on export and import prices and quantities.
                                                          20


       We follow Feenstra, Heston et al (2009) in rewriting RGDPjo to give a clear

interpretation of the difference between it and RGDPje . Notice that RGDPjo in (21) can be

decomposed as:
                     M  io qij    M              M  N  ix xij            M  N  im mij   
        RGDPjo   =  iM1              pij qij   i  M 1            X j   i  M 1           M j .   (27)
                     pij qij        i 1          M  N pijx xij            M  N pijm mij   
                    i 1                          i  M 1                   i  M 1           

We can define the three ratios appearing in (27) as the inverse of the PPP’s for final expenditure,

exports and imports, the latter two already given in (22):

                                                          M pij qij 
                                              PPPjq     iM1 o  .
                                                           i qij 
                                                         i 1        

It will be convenient to work instead with the associated price levels for final goods, exports and

imports, obtained by dividing the PPP’s by the nominal exchange rate Ej:

                         PPPje                PPPjq                 PPPjx                  PPPjm
                PLej            ,   PLqj            ,    PLxj            ,     PLmj              .
                          Ej                   Ej                    Ej                     Ej


Comparing (13) and (27), it is immediate that the difference between RGDPje and RGDPjo is:


        RGDPje  RGDPjo
             RGDPje

             PLej    iM1 pij qij        PLej   X j        PLej   M j 
         1  q                      1       
                                                 x           1  m          .                         (28)
             PL    GDPj                   PL      GDPj       PL     GDPj 
                j                            j                 j        

We will find in practice that PLej and PLqj are quite similar, since they are both computed from

final expenditures, but with different reference prices. If these two deflators for final expenditure

are equal, then either PLxj > PLej or PLmj < PLej is needed to have real GDPje exceed real


GDPjo , and both inequalities holding is sufficient for this. To interpret these conditions, having
                                                            21


export prices above their reference level and import prices below their reference level will

contribute towards RGDPje exceeding RGDPjo . For example, proximity to markets that allow

for higher export prices would work in this direction, but being distant from markets leading to

high import prices would work in the opposite direction, raising PLmj and tending to make

RGDPje less than RGDPjo .

         Empirical implementation of the fixed weight index from the output-side described in

equations (23)-(26) is currently being undertaken as a part of the next generation PWT

methodology described in Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011), using the 2005 ICP benchmark.

Earlier results for 1996 are reported in Feenstra, Heston et al (2009), who use the normalization

that RGDPje equals RGDPjo when summed across the 1996 sample of countries. China

was not included in the 1996 ICP benchmark, but we can give preliminary results for 2005 from

Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011), using the same normalization that RGDPje equals RGDPjo

when summed across the 2005 sample of countries.14 The complete results are shown in the final

column of Table A1, and results for selected countries are in Table 1.

         We see from Table 1 that per-capita RGDPjo for China exceeds RGDPje , so China is

even bigger when viewed from its ability to produce goods. To see where this calculation comes

from, we compute (28) as:

         RGDPje  RGDPjo
                                =  0  0.95  1   0.32   .36  1   0.32   0.31  –0.06.
                RGDPje                                0.45                  0.68
                                                                                       



14
   As noted in section 3.2, Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011) compute real GDPe and real GDPo for countries in
the 2005 ICP and any earlier benchmark, by carrying forward prices for C, I and G for the latter group of countries
using their respective rates of inflation relative to the U.S. Thus, while the 2005 ICP includes 146 countries, their
calculations are over a broader set of 167 countries. For brevity in Appendix Table A1, we report results only for the
124 countries that had complete data on consumption prices, and therefore already appear in the table.
                                                         22


The first term appearing on the right of (28) is zero, because the price levels PLej and PLqj , both

computed over final goods only, are equal at 0.32. The price level for Chinese exports is 0.45, or

slightly less than one-half of the reservation prices for exports, while the price level for imports

is 0.68. That means the terms of trade for China is 0.45/0.68 < 1, so RGDPje is less than


RGDPjo . This holds even though nominal exports are larger than nominal imports, which would


tend to make RGDPje exceed RGDPjo (i.e. as would occur if the price levels for exports and

equal were equal but above that for final goods). So we see that real GDP on the output side for

China is higher than that on the expenditure side, by about 6%. This means that RGDPjo exceeds

the World Bank estimate of real GDP by more than 40%.15

         Finally, recall that this estimate of real GDP is based on the normalization that world

GDP is the same whether calculated on the output or expenditure basis. Mirroring the fact that

China and other developing countries have higher real GDP from an output perspective, Table 1

also shows that real GDP on the output-side for the United States falls relative to real GDP on

the expenditure-side, from $41,553 to $39,550 per-capita. Thus, taking the ratio of real GDP on

the output-side for China relative to the U.S., we obtain $5,862/$39,550 or 15%, using the

adjusted Chinese prices. That is fully 50% higher than the ratio of real GDP from the World

Bank in 2005, which is $4,088/$41,674 or 9.8%. On this basis, we conclude that real GDP in

China relative to the United States is quite plausibly 50% higher than estimated by the World

Bank (2008a).


15
  This estimate is not significantly affected by the nominal undervaluation of the Chinese currency. If the renminbi
were to appreciate, this would raise the absolute values of the price levels of both exports and imports, 0.45 and
0.68. This would be neutral if trade were balanced, and would raise real GNP on the expenditure side relative to that
on the output side slightly (as measured by these fixed-weight indexes) reflecting a relatively small wealth transfer
to Chinese consumers (both public and private).
                                                 23


        The finding that RGDPjo exceeds RGDPje holds for the other developing countries and

newly-industrialized countries in Table 1, with the reverse comparison holding for the developed

countries. This illustrates the tendency for the developed countries to have strong terms of trade

which tend to make (28) positive. There are many exceptions to this tendency, however. Norway,

for example, has the highest value of RGDPjo , at $58,842 per-capita in Table A1, which is more

than 25% above its per-capita RGDPje , at $46,242. This result comes from a low term of trade

for Norway, which can be traced to unusually high import prices. Conversely, Chad has RGDPjo

at $4,030 per-capita in Table A1, which is 25% below its per-capita RGDPje , at $5,373. That

result, in turn, can be traced to a strong terms of trade. So the terms of trade faced by countries

are positively but only weakly correlated with the real GDP.


4.3 Revenue Function Approach

        The fixed-weight estimates in the previous sub-section do not take account of substitution

bias on the production side. However, we do not view it as feasible to estimate the revenue

function in (14) across a comprehensive set of countries in the same way that Neary (2004)

estimates the expenditure function. The reason for this is that (14) depends on a full set of factor

endowments vj that differ across countries, and also depends on the subscript j representing

differences in technologies across countries. Both of these features represent formidable hurdles

to estimation. But there is one theoretical result we can provide which suggests that real GDP in

China would be even bigger if measured using the revenue function approach.

        To obtain this result, let   ( , x , m ) denote the reference prices used to compute

RGDPjo (  ) in (21). Then because the quantities in (21) are feasible to produce but not optimal

at the prices  , it follows that:
                                                         24


                                   RGDPjo (  )  rj (  , v j ) .                                      (29)

Using this inequality we can obtain a result on the comparison of real GDP on the output-side

across countries. Consider reference prices that equal the observed prices of a high-income

country j,   Pj  ( p j , p xj , p mj ). Then it is immediate that RGDPjo  rj ( Pj , v j ) , while


RGDPko ( Pj )  rk ( Pj , vk ) for all other countries k. It follows that,


                                   RGDPko ( Pj )       rk ( Pj , vk )
                                                                        .                              (30)
                                   RGDPjo ( Pj )       rj ( Pj , v j )

That is, with reference prices close to those of a high-income country j, the ratio of output-side

real GDP for any lower-income country k relative to country j will be even greater using the

revenue function than in the fixed-weight GK approach. In particular, this suggests that real GDP

in China relative to the U.S. could be even higher using the revenue function, if this approach

were feasible to implement.


5. Conclusions

        In this paper we have analyzed the revision to real GDP for China made by the World

Bank using prices from the 2005 round of the International Comparison Program. Because those

prices were higher than expected for China, the corresponding estimate of real GDP in China

was lowered: from $6,757 per-capita in World Bank (2007) to $4,088 in World Bank (2008a).

Possible reasons for this downward revision have been discussed by Deaton and Heston (2010),

and here we provide a quantitative evaluation of the possibilities.

        Our first objective was to examine the sensitivity of real consumption comparisons to the

choice of the index number methods used. We included the fixed-weight GK index, three

variations of flexible weight indexes, the EKS and CCD indexes along with the index suggested
                                                 25


by Barnett, Diewert and Zellner (2009), and finally, the expenditure function approach of Neary

(2004). In all cases we compare estimates for real consumption in China after making

adjustments to prices reported in the 2005 ICP comparisons in the Asia-Pacific region. Making

use of a regression model to explain commodity-specific price levels as a function of real per

capita income in other Asian countries, and applying the resulting adjustments to price data for

China, we measure the revisions to be anywhere between 9% to 21% depending upon the index

number method used. Our results confirm that an upward revision of real consumption in China

somewhere between 10 to 20 percent is quite realistic.

       We then moved to calculation of total real GDP, including investment, government and

the trade balance. We find that the GK estimate of real GDP on the expenditure-side for China is

$5,097 in 2005, which is 25% larger than the estimate from the World Bank of $4,088. If we

adjust the prices of consumption goods, then real GDPe per-capita rises to $5,543, or another

10%. Furthermore, from Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011), preliminary estimates of real

GDP measured on the output-side for China are obtained, which are $5,433 per-capita without

the adjustment to consumption prices and $5,862 with this adjustment. The latter estimate is

nearly 45% higher than the World Bank figure of $4,088. Furthermore, the same calculation,

switching from expenditure to output, lowers U.S. real per-capita GDP from $41,553 to $39,550.

Relative to this, China’s real GDP per capita is $5,862/$39,550 or 15%, using the adjusted

Chinese prices, fully 50% higher than the ratio of real GDP from the World Bank in 2005. Thus

our final estimate of real per-capita GDP in China relative to the United States in 2005 is that is

50% higher than estimated by the World Bank (2008a).
                                                         26


Appendix A: Data and Estimates

         In Table A1 we report the calculations of real consumption for all 124 countries. In Table

A2 we report the estimates of the AIDS expenditure function, listing first the R2 values for the

share equations for each product and then the parameters α, β and Γ.16

         In Table A3 we report the correction made to Chinese prices for 2005. As noted in the text,

we used a regression approach to determine predicted prices for China. A simple regression

model is used with the price level (ratio of PPP to exchange rate) for each commodity group is

expressed as a function of the real income per capita index. The real income per capita index is

computed using the real per capital income estimates from the ICP Asia-Pacific 2005 which are

based on the EKS index number formula. The real incomes are expressed as index relative to the

Asian Region =100. All the relevant data are drawn from the Final Report of the ICP Asia-

Pacific (ADB, 2007) and the sample is restricted to all Asian countries except China. The total

number of countries in the Asia-Pacific comparison was 23 including China..17

         A log-linear model with a dummy variable for Fiji is our chosen model, and a separate

regression is run for each of the commodities except alcoholic beverages. 18 The predicted prices

from these regressions are shown in Table A2. Using these predicted or “adjusted” prices for

China we also re-estimated the AIDS expenditure function, but it is essentially unchanged from

Table A1 because data for only one country out of 124 has been adjusted. Using the AIDS

estimates we can compute the estimated shares for China, using actual or predicted prices. These

are shown in Table A2 together with the actual shares. It can be seen that the adjustment to the

16
   These estimates are taken from Feenstra, Ma and Prasada Rao (2009).
17
   As fixity of the regional comparisons was maintained in the global comparisons and that there could be regional
differences in the regression relationships, it was decided that only data on countries from the Asian region would be
utilized in the regressions.
18
   A linear model with a dummy variable for Fiji also performed well, and gave results quite similar to those
obtained with the log-linear model. The rationale for excluding Fiji is that, as an island economy where most
consumer and investment goods are imported, its national price level is a lot higher than comparable economies, so
it is an outlier in terms of the theory explaining national price levels.
                                                     27


shares is not that large, but nevertheless, the estimated shares using predicted prices are closer to

the actual shares for food and non-alcoholic beverages, recreation, and restaurants.


                       Table A1: Comparisons of Real Consumption and real GDP, 2005
                                   (USA = 1 except in final two columns)

                                                              Using AIDS expenditure fcn.          e            o
                                                                                             RGDP         RGDP
                       Nominal        Consumption indexes      and reference prices from:
                                                                                            per capita   per capita
                      consump.     Geary‐                     Geary‐    Neary,
                                                                                  Diewert       ($)          ($)
    Countries         per capita   Khamis     EKS      CCD    Khamis     GAIA
                          (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)          (9)
 Albania                0.068       0.137     0.14    0.143     0.14     0.132     0.142      5,340        5,459
 Angola                 0.016       0.022    0.022    0.022    0.019     0.017      0.02      3,093        2,979
 Argentina              0.099       0.232    0.237    0.243    0.239     0.229     0.242     10,654       10,640
 Armenia                0.038       0.121    0.119    0.121     0.12     0.113     0.122      6,004        6,528
 Australia              0.722       0.678    0.701    0.702    0.703     0.695     0.704     35,139       35,365
 Austria                0.814       0.758    0.779    0.792    0.768     0.761     0.769     32,147       29,769
 Azerbaijan             0.025       0.095    0.094    0.095    0.094     0.088     0.096      5,805        6,402
 Bahrain                0.277       0.414    0.387    0.393    0.385     0.374     0.388     33,916       36,556
 Belarus                0.061       0.233     0.22    0.222    0.218     0.208      0.22     11,095       12,164
 Belgium                0.735       0.653    0.671    0.679    0.671     0.663     0.673     31,596       24,360
 Benin                  0.015       0.033    0.033    0.034     0.03     0.027     0.031      1,402        1,435
 Bolivia                0.024        0.09    0.089    0.089    0.087     0.081     0.089      4,387        4,178
 Bosnia & Herzeg.       0.099       0.208     0.21    0.215    0.212     0.202     0.214      6,317        7,143
 Botswana               0.057        0.1     0.098    0.096    0.095     0.089     0.097     13,864       12,387
 Brazil                 0.101       0.174    0.177     0.18    0.185     0.175     0.187      8,235        8,421
 Bulgaria               0.091       0.239     0.24    0.244    0.242     0.232     0.244     10,223       10,950
 Burkina Faso            0.01       0.025    0.025    0.026    0.025     0.022     0.026      1,126        1,197
 Cambodia               0.012       0.043    0.039    0.039    0.036     0.033     0.037      1,812        1,880
 Cameroon               0.022       0.043    0.045    0.045    0.044      0.04     0.045      2,006        2,014
 Canada                 0.731       0.722    0.735    0.733    0.739     0.733     0.741     33,975       32,159
 Cape Verde              0.06        0.08    0.082    0.082    0.083     0.077     0.084      3,047        2,899
 Central African R.      0.01       0.019     0.02    0.021    0.018     0.016     0.019       752          752
 Chad                   0.013        0.03    0.029    0.027    0.026     0.024     0.027      5,373        4,030
 Chile                  0.144       0.225    0.231    0.234    0.237     0.227      0.24     11,276       11,314
 China                  0.023       0.059    0.057    0.057    0.053     0.049     0.054     5,097        5,433
 Colombia               0.063       0.136    0.137    0.139    0.137     0.129     0.139      7,277        7,303
 Congo, Dem. Rep.       0.003       0.004    0.004    0.005    0.004     0.003     0.004       298          n.a.
 Congo, Rep.            0.018       0.034    0.032    0.032    0.028     0.025     0.029      3,769        3,096
 Côte d'Ivoire          0.019       0.033    0.034    0.035    0.033      0.03     0.034      1,516        1,552
 Croatia                0.226       0.341    0.347    0.353    0.349     0.338     0.352     14,432       14,612
 Cyprus                 0.597       0.647     0.67    0.691    0.667     0.659     0.669     21,957       21,271
 Czech Republic         0.238       0.425    0.429    0.436    0.432     0.421     0.434     20,285       21,837
 Denmark                0.982       0.663    0.685     0.69    0.686     0.678     0.688     32,530       31,954
 Ecuador                0.061       0.135     0.14    0.142     0.14     0.132     0.142      6,481        6,630
 Egypt, Arab Rep        0.035        0.12    0.119    0.121     0.12     0.113     0.122      5,173        5,679
 Equatorial Guinea      0.062        0.09    0.089     0.09    0.086      0.08     0.088     24,389       21,498
 Estonia                 0.22       0.366    0.378    0.384     0.38     0.369     0.383     16,243       18,159
                                           28


Fiji               0.092   0.115   0.115   0.115   0.121   0.114   0.123    4,732    4,688
Finland            0.773   0.601   0.623    0.63    0.62   0.611   0.623   29,191   29,095
France             0.775   0.693   0.716   0.726   0.704   0.696   0.706   28,342   26,451
Gabon              0.067   0.103   0.098   0.098   0.092   0.085   0.093   16,265   14,333
Georgia            0.033   0.107   0.103   0.103   0.102   0.095   0.104    4,716    5,236
Germany            0.727   0.662    0.67   0.684   0.669    0.66   0.671   30,168   30,419
Greece             0.541    0.61   0.637   0.667   0.629    0.62   0.631   23,355   22,184
Guinea             0.007   0.021    0.02    0.02   0.016   0.014   0.017    1,191    1,197
Guinea-Bissau      0.006   0.012   0.013   0.012   0.012   0.011   0.013    1,136    1,180
Hong Kong, China   0.504   0.643   0.634   0.635   0.634   0.625   0.636   35,220   48,773
Hungary            0.237   0.391   0.399   0.404   0.403   0.392   0.406   16,556   16,936
Iceland            1.248   0.767   0.794   0.795   0.79    0.784   0.791   38,592   37,640
India              0.014   0.048   0.046   0.047   0.046   0.042   0.047   2,423    2,479
Indonesia          0.028   0.072   0.073   0.074   0.074   0.068   0.075    3,647    3,676
Iraq               0.021   0.067    0.06   0.059   0.059   0.054    0.06    3,809    3,648
Ireland            0.843   0.638   0.662   0.648   0.663   0.655   0.665   34,931   39,707
Israel             0.422   0.501   0.516    0.52   0.516   0.506   0.519   23,554   21,462
Italy              0.679   0.622   0.636   0.648   0.631   0.623   0.634   26,941   26,439
Japan              0.743   0.626   0.618   0.625   0.658    0.65    0.66   30,596   30,922
Jordan              0.07   0.128   0.122   0.125   0.125   0.117   0.127    4,754    5,486
Kazakhstan         0.066    0.21   0.195   0.195   0.195   0.186   0.197   11,221   11,680
Kenya              0.015   0.038   0.038   0.039   0.037   0.034   0.038    1,413    1,489
Kyrgyz Republic    0.014   0.068   0.063   0.064    0.06   0.055   0.061    3,134    3,676
Lao PDR             0.01   0.037   0.035   0.035   0.032   0.029   0.033    1,927    2,148
Latvia             0.153   0.302   0.305    0.31   0.307   0.297    0.31   13,065   14,521
Lebanon            0.169   0.284   0.277   0.283   0.285   0.274   0.287   10,712   11,016
Lesotho            0.026   0.058   0.055   0.054   0.053   0.048   0.054    1,508    1,523
Liberia            0.004    0.01   0.008   0.008   0.007   0.006   0.007     404      400
Lithuania          0.179   0.357   0.368   0.373   0.372   0.362   0.375   14,542   14,810
Luxembourg         1.071   0.925   0.919   0.924   0.912   0.909   0.913   73,405   67,921
Macao, China       0.236    0.34   0.348    0.36   0.345   0.334   0.348   35,754   37,889
Macedonia, FYR     0.076   0.192   0.192   0.195   0.193   0.184   0.196   7,374    8,240
Madagascar         0.008   0.025   0.024   0.023   0.021   0.019   0.022     963      994
Malawi             0.006   0.017   0.016   0.016   0.014   0.012   0.014     662      767
Malaysia           0.084   0.177   0.176    0.18   0.177   0.168    0.18   12,169   12,361
Mali               0.011   0.022   0.023   0.023   0.021   0.019   0.022    1,287    1,273
Malta              0.397   0.548   0.573   0.593   0.575   0.565   0.577   19,524   16,821
Mauritius          0.123   0.244   0.247   0.249   0.247   0.237    0.25   10,984   12,185
Mexico             0.175   0.289   0.292   0.298    0.29   0.279   0.292   12,824   12,551
Moldova            0.026   0.107   0.097   0.097   0.093   0.087   0.095    3,313    4,314
Mongolia           0.018   0.059   0.052   0.051    0.05   0.045   0.051    3,268    3,431
Montenegro         0.087   0.174   0.174   0.175   0.173   0.164   0.175    8,319     n.a.
Morocco            0.044   0.072   0.073   0.075   0.074   0.069   0.076    3,481    3,492
Namibia            0.064   0.095   0.094   0.095   0.094   0.087   0.095    5,539    5,591
Nepal              0.009   0.031   0.029   0.029   0.029   0.026    0.03    1,072    1,116
Netherlands        0.756   0.696   0.72    0.736   0.697   0.689   0.699   33,626   31,065
New Zealand        0.606   0.574    0.59   0.599   0.594   0.585   0.597   24,488   24,594
Niger              0.006   0.013   0.014   0.014   0.013   0.011   0.013     594      626
Nigeria            0.019   0.039    0.04   0.039   0.034    0.03   0.034    2,019    1,920
Norway             1.100   0.737   0.758   0.768   0.755   0.749   0.757   46,242   58,842
                                                    29


 Oman                 0.153      0.249     0.237      0.24     0.237     0.227   0.239     22,122   23,827
 Paraguay             0.031      0.101     0.105     0.107      0.11     0.103   0.112      4,083    4,546
 Peru                 0.063      0.136     0.141     0.145     0.143     0.135   0.145      6,369    6,268
 Philippines          0.026      0.069      0.07     0.071      0.07     0.064   0.071      3,027    3,083
 Poland               0.183      0.332     0.329     0.335      0.33     0.319   0.333     14,393   14,800
 Portugal             0.441      0.489     0.501     0.515     0.501     0.491   0.504     19,499   18,635
 Romania              0.113      0.227     0.231     0.233     0.233     0.223   0.236      9,219   10,130
 Russian Fed,         0.093      0.243     0.248     0.253     0.255     0.245   0.258     13,439   13,408
 Rwanda               0.007      0.019     0.018     0.019     0.019     0.017   0.019      1,094    1,169
 São Tomé, Prin.      0.023      0.042     0.044     0.044     0.042     0.038   0.043      2,628    3,157
 Senegal              0.021      0.039     0.041     0.042     0.038     0.034   0.039      1,558    1,571
 Serbia                0.09      0.217     0.212     0.214      0.21     0.201   0.213      8,352    9,396
 Sierra Leone         0.009      0.025     0.023     0.023     0.018     0.016   0.019       917     1,011
 Singapore            0.377      0.506     0.498     0.503     0.506     0.495   0.508     43,182   35,300
 Slovak Republic      0.179      0.354     0.354      0.36     0.355     0.344   0.358     16,628   17,897
 Slovenia             0.378      0.484     0.499     0.505     0.503     0.493   0.506     22,161   23,479
 South Africa         0.118       0.18     0.185     0.188      0.19     0.181   0.193      8,363    8,426
 South Korea          0.297      0.375     0.375     0.378     0.381     0.37    0.383     24,044   26,774
 Spain                0.582      0.624     0.648     0.677     0.632     0.623   0.634     25,732   24,774
 Sri Lanka            0.029      0.082     0.087     0.088     0.088     0.081   0.089      4,079    4,342
 Sudan                0.025       0.05     0.054     0.051     0.052     0.047   0.053      2,007    2,090
 Swaziland             0.05      0.096     0.093     0.092      0.09     0.083   0.091      4,947    5,015
 Sweden               0.838       0.67     0.693     0.696     0.693     0.686   0.695     32,695   32,636
 Switzerland          1.043      0.726     0.739     0.749     0.749     0.743   0.751     36,786   30,869
 Syrian Arab Rep      0.036      0.095     0.094     0.089     0.097      0.09   0.099      4,519    4,966
 Taiwan, China        0.324      0.566     0.549     0.554     0.572     0.563   0.575       n.a.     n.a.
 Tajikistan           0.009       0.06     0.047     0.045     0.039     0.036    0.04      3,718    4,115
 Thailand             0.054      0.146     0.147     0.151     0.145     0.137   0.147      6,747    6,801
 Togo                 0.013      0.027     0.027     0.028     0.026     0.023   0.027       829      902
 Tunisia              0.068       0.14      0.14     0.144     0.139     0.131   0.141      7,143    7,294
 Turkey               0.116      0.183     0.183     0.185     0.183     0.174   0.186     11,095   11,551
 Ukraine               0.04      0.167     0.155     0.158     0.157     0.148   0.159      7,458    8,084
 United Kingdom       0.895      0.772     0.793     0.807     0.778     0.772   0.779     32,401   30,637
 United States           1          1         1         1        1          1       1      41,553   39,550
 Uruguay              0.122      0.214      0.22     0.223     0.224     0.215   0.227      9,228    9,549
 Venezuela, RB        0.089      0.163     0.167      0.17     0.167     0.158   0.169      9,491   10,590
 Vietnam              0.013       0.05     0.043     0.042     0.039     0.035    0.04      2,728    2,898


Source: Authors’ calculations as explained in the text, and Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2011).
Notes: Table 1 reports results for selected countries, shown here in bold.
n.a. not available due to missing data
                                                    Table A2: Parameter Estimates for AIDS

            Category                 R2     alpha   beta                                                     gamma
Food and non-alcoholic beverages    0.736   0.183   -0.193   0.050    -0.035   -0.012   -0.047   0.001    -0.021   -0.023   0.013    0.034    -0.062   0.079    0.024
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco     0.172   0.033   0.004    -0.035   -0.017   0.011    -0.030   0.003    -0.016   0.037    -0.008   0.025    0.009    0.012    0.010
Clothing and footwear               0.075   0.050   -0.005   -0.012   0.011    0.009    -0.007   -0.010   -0.011   0.011    0.025    -0.029   0.016    0.020    -0.022
Gross Rent, water, fuel and power   0.407   0.158   0.017    -0.047   -0.030   -0.007   0.108    0.005    -0.002   0.011    -0.003   -0.016   -0.005   0.004    -0.017
Household furnishings               0.123   0.053   0.007    0.001    0.003    -0.010   0.005    -0.027   -0.008   -0.003   0.004    0.043    0.009    0.017    -0.033
Medical and health services         0.407   0.093   0.029    -0.021   -0.016   -0.011   -0.002   -0.008   0.021    0.029    0.001    -0.007   0.008    -0.002   0.010
Transport                           0.218   0.104   0.035    -0.023   0.037    0.011    0.011    -0.003   0.029    -0.041   0.001    0.051    -0.066   -0.047   0.041
Communication                       0.167   0.027   0.008    0.013    -0.008   0.025    -0.003   0.004    0.001    0.001    -0.009   0.006    -0.001   -0.006   -0.023
Recreation                          0.641   0.070   0.044    0.034    0.025    -0.029   -0.016   0.043    -0.007   0.051    0.006    -0.061   0.027    -0.025   -0.046
Education                           0.136   0.078   -0.001   -0.062   0.009    0.016    -0.005   0.009    0.008    -0.066   -0.001   0.027    0.005    0.025    0.035
Restaurants                         0.325   0.057   0.017    0.079    0.012    0.020    0.004    0.017    -0.002   -0.047   -0.006   -0.025   0.025    -0.111   0.035
Other goods and services            0.507   0.093   0.038    0.024    0.010    -0.022   -0.017   -0.033   0.010    0.041    -0.023   -0.046   0.035    0.035    -0.014



                                               Table A3: Chinese Prices and Consumption Shares

                                                    Chinese prices                               Chinese Consumption Shares
                                                                                                       Estimated with  Estimated with
                Category                      Actual          Predicted                 Actual          actual prices  predicted prices
Food and non-alcoholic beverages              0.742             0.557                   0.241              0.333            0.318
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco               0.976             0.976                   0.020              0.030            0.031
Clothing and footwear                         0.950             0.573                   0.064              0.052            0.052
Gross Rent, water, fuel and power             0.775             0.840                   0.146              0.147            0.148
Household furnishings                         0.837             0.837                   0.039              0.044            0.044
Medical and health services                   0.252             0.399                   0.062              0.072            0.075
Transport                                     0.692             0.781                   0.041              0.072            0.074
Communication                                 0.435             0.435                   0.042              0.018            0.018
Recreation                                    0.521             0.606                   0.046              0.035            0.039
Education                                     0.424             0.295                   0.097              0.081            0.081
Restaurants                                   0.850             0.758                   0.053              0.046            0.049
Other goods and services                      0.821             0.743                   0.149              0.068            0.070
                                                           31


Appendix B: Proof of Proposition 1

              We first derive a reduced system either in the international prices vector, Π, or in the

output-based real exchange rates, RO. Following Neary (2004), we start with an international

price vector Π0 which is positive. Then using Π0 in (19), we get a value for ROj for j=1,2,…,C.

Substituting these ROj’s into (16), (17) and (18) yields a new price vector Π1. Thus we have a

function that maps Π0 to Π1. We represent this relationship by:

                      1  H ( o ) or in general,  t  H ( t 1 )                                      (A1)

Equation (A1) represents a system of non-linear simultaneous equations. We can state the

following general properties of H: (i) H is positive for all Π0 >0 ; (ii) H is linearly homogeneous;

and (iii) H is a continuous function. These properties follow from the structure of the equations

(16) to (19) and the assumed properties of the revenue function.

              Further we observe that if Π is a solution to equations (16) to (19), then kΠ is also a

solution for any k>0. This means that we can have a solution that is unique up to a factor of

proportionality. Thus we can restrict ourselves to solutions of (A2) up to a linear restriction


     M 2 N
     i 1
               i  1 with πi > 0. This basically means the mapping H in (A2) is a mapping from the unit

simplex into itself. Further H is continuous. From Brower’s fixed point theorem there exists a

fixed point Π* such that Π*=H (Π*). We note here that uniqueness of the fixed point is not

guaranteed by this theorem.19




19
  Likewise, Neary (2004) proves the existence of a unique positive solution to the Geary system but only shows the
existence of a positive solution to the GAIA system.
                                             32


                                         References

Asian Development Bank , 2007, Purchasing Power Parities and Real Expenditures, Manila,
       Philippines.

Balk, Bert M., 2008, Price and Quantity Index Numbers. Cambridge University Press.

Banks, James, Richard, Blundell, and Andrew Lewbel, 1997, “Quadratic Engel Curves and
       Consumer Demand,” Review of Economics and Statistics 79(4), 527–539.

Barnett, William A., W. Erwin Diewert and Arnold Zellner, 2009, “Introduction to Measurement
       with Theory,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13(S2), 151-168.

Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen and W. Erwin Diewert, 1982a, “The Economic
       Theory of Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output, and Productivity,”
       Econometrica, 50(6), 1393-1414.

Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen and W. Erwin Diewert, 1982b, “Multilateral
       Comparisons of Output, Input, and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers,”
       Economic Journal, 92, March, 73-86.

Deaton, Angus and Alan Heston, 2010, “Understanding PPPs and PPP-based National
      Accounts,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 1-35.

Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer, 1980, “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” American
      Economic Review, 70(3), 312-326.

Diewert, W. Erwin, 2010a, “Understanding PPPs and PPP-based National Accounts: Comment,”
      American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 36-45.

Diewert, W. Erwin, 2010b, “New Methodological Developments for the International
      Comparison Program”, Review of Income and Wealth, Series56, Special Issue 1, S11-31.

Diewert, W. Erwin and Catherine J. Morrison, 1986, “Adjusting Outputs and Productivity
      Indexes for Changes in the Terms of Trade,” Economic Journal, 96, 659-679.

Diewert, W. Erwin and Terrance C. Wales, 1988, “A Normalized Quadratic Semiflexible
      Functional Form”, Journal of Econometrics 37, 327-42.

Feenstra, Robert C., Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer, and Haiyan Deng, 2009, “Estimating Real
       Production and Expenditures Across Countries: A Proposal for Improving the Penn
       World Tables,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 201-212.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer, 2011, “The Next Generation of the
       Penn World Table,” University of California, Davis and University of Groningen, in
       process.
                                               33


Feenstra, Robert C., Hong Ma and D.S. Prasada Rao , 2009, “Consistent Comparisons of Real
       Income Across Countries and Over Time,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13(S2), 169-193.

Geary, R.C., 1958, “A Note on the Comparison of Exchange Rates and Purchasing Power
       between Countries”, Journal of the Royal statistical Society, Series A (General), 121(1),
       97-99.

Gerschenkron, Alexander, 1951, A Dollar Index of Soviet Machinery Output, 192728 to 1937,
      Report R-197, Santa Monica: Rand Corporation.

Heston, Alan, 2007, “What Can be Learned About the Economics of China and India from the
       Results of Purchasing Power Comparisons?” Paper delivered to the Conference on India
       and China’s Role in International Trade and Finance and Global Economic governance,
       ICRIER, New Delhi, December 6-7, 2007.

Khamis, Salem H. 1970, “Properties and Conditions for the Existence of a New Type of Index
      Numbers”, Sankhya, Series B, 32, 81-98.

Khamis, Salem H. 1972, “A New System of index Numbers for National and International
      Purposes”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 135(1), 96–121.

Kohli, Ulrich R., 2004, “Real GDP, Real Domestic Income, and Terms-of-Trade Changes,”
       Journal of International Economics, 62(1), January, 83-106.

Maddison, Angus, 2007, “Measuring the Performance of Transition Economics: Some Lessons
      from Chinese Experience,” Keynote address to the Beijing Conference of IARIW and
      NBS, September 19.

Neary, J. Peter, 2004, “Rationalizing the Penn World Table: True multilateral indexes for
       international comparisons of real income“, American Economic Review, 94(5),
       December, 1411-1428.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1974, “Analytical Notes on International Real-Income Measures,”
      Economic Journal, 84:335, September, 595-608.

Sanyal, Kalyan K. and Ronald W. Jones, 1982, “The Theory of Trade in Middle Products,”
       American Economic Review, 72(1), March, 16-31.

World Bank, 2007, World Development Indicators, Washington, DC. (CD)

World Bank, 2008a, World Development Indicators, Washington, DC. (CD and online)

World Bank, 2008b, Global Purchasing Power Parities and Real Expenditures – 2005
      International Comparison Program, World Bank, Washington DC. URL: http://
      siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/icp-final.pdf; accessed 18 March, 2010.
                                                    34


         Table 1: Comparisons of Real Consumption and real GDP per Capita, 2005
                                 (USA = 1 except in final two columns)

                                                          Using AIDS expenditure
                               Consumption Indexes                                         e          o
                     Nominal                              function, and reference   RGDP       RGDP
                    consump.                                    prices from:       per-capita per-capita
                    per-capita Geary-                     Geary- Neary,                ($)        ($)
   Countries                          EKS CCD                              Diewert
                               Khamis                     Khamis GAIA
                        (1)      (2)   (3)     (4)          (5)      (6)     (7)       (8)        (9)


     Iceland          1.248       0.767   0.794   0.795    0.790     0.784      0.791    38,592      37,640
  United States       1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000    1.000     1.000      1.000    41,553      39,550
 United Kingdom       0.895       0.772   0.793   0.807    0.778     0.772      0.779    32,401      30,640
  Netherlands         0.756       0.696   0.720   0.736    0.697     0.689      0.699    33,626      31,065
     Canada           0.731       0.722   0.735   0.733    0.739     0.733      0.741    33,975      32,159
  South Korea         0.297       0.375   0.375   0.378    0.381     0.370      0.383    24,044      26,774
   Macedonia          0.076       0.192   0.192   0.195    0.193     0.184      0.196    7,374       8,240
      China           0.023       0.059   0.057   0.057    0.053     0.049      0.054    5,097       5,433
      India           0.014       0.048   0.046   0.047    0.046     0.042      0.047    2,423       2,479

With adjusted Chinese prices:
      China                       0.064   0.062   0.063    0.064     0.059      0.066    5,543        5,862
% Difference from
  China above                      9.0     8.8     9.5      21.1     21.0       20.9       8.8         7.9


Source: Authors’ calculations.
Notes: Column (1) gives the nominal consumption expenditure (obtained using exchange rates for
converting national currency data into US dollars) per capita in 2005, relative to the US. Column (2) gives
the Geary-Khamis calculation of real consumption. Columns (3)-(4) present flexible weight measures of
real consumption expenditure per capita, using respectively the EKS, and CCD methods, as defined in the
text in equations (4)-(5). Columns (5) to (7) show measures of real consumption based on the estimated
AIDS expenditure function, using different reference prices: column (5) uses the Geary-Khamis reference
prices; column (6) uses the GAIA reference prices; and column (7) uses every country’s prices as
reference and then takes the geometric mean of the results, as in Diewert (2009). Column (8) shows real
GDPe per capita on the expenditure-side, while column (9) shows GDPo per capita on the output-side. The
results in the second-last row use adjusted prices for China as described in Appendix A, and the
percentage in the final row is computed relative to the China estimate above.
                                                 35

                                 Table 2: Actual and Reference Prices


                                        Sample     United   Geary-                South
               Category                  Mean      States   Khamis       GAIA     Korea
Food and non-alcoholic beverages          1        1.100     1.319       1.134    1.627
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco           1        1.395     1.257       1.343    1.162
Clothing & footwear                       1        1.136     1.270       1.113    1.257
Gross rent, water, fuel and power         1        1.889     1.389       1.316    1.446
Household furnishings                     1        1.302     1.309       1.271    0.988
Medical and health services               1        2.995     1.494       1.554    1.047
Transport                                 1        0.950     1.231       1.291    1.023
Communication                             1        1.128     1.015       0.921    0.641
Recreation                                1        1.231     1.182       1.169    1.121
Education                                 1        3.412     1.395       1.595    1.602
Restaurants                               1        1.025     1.239       1.182    1.310
Other goods and services                  1        1.632     1.400       1.400    1.215
   b(p)                                   1        1.054     0.996       1.026    0.930




Source: Authors’ calculations.

Notes. Listed are the reference prices used in the calculations for Table 1 and Appendix Table
A1. Since all prices have been normalized by the sample mean (over 124 countries), the prices p
= 1 represent the sample mean. The second set of prices considered are those for the U.S. The
third set of reference prices considered are the GK prices computed as in equations (1)-(2), the
fourth set are the GAIA reference prices computed as in (11)-(12), and the final set of prices are
                                                                    i
for South Korea. The final row is computed using as b( p )   i pi      using the  estimates from

Appendix Table A2.
