                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE EFFECT OF PROVIDING BREAKFAST ON STUDENT PERFORMANCE:
              EVIDENCE FROM AN IN-CLASS BREAKFAST PROGRAM

                                         Scott A. Imberman
                                         Adriana D. Kugler

                                        Working Paper 17720
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17720


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We would like to thank Steven Craig, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Dietrich Vollrath, employees
of an anonymous large urban school district and participants at APPAM and the Stata Texas Empirical
Microeconomics Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. ©2011 by Scott Imberman and
Adriana Kugler. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs may be quoted without permission
provided proper citations are made. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Although Dr. Kugler is currently serving as the Chief Economist with the U.S. Department of Labor,
this paper was authored prior to her assuming that position and reflects her personal views and does
not purport to reflect the official views of the U.S. Department of Labor.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Scott A. Imberman and Adriana D. Kugler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Providing Breakfast on Student Performance: Evidence from an In-Class Breakfast
Program
Scott A. Imberman and Adriana D. Kugler
NBER Working Paper No. 17720
January 2012
JEL No. I10,I21

                                              ABSTRACT

In response to low take-up, many public schools have experimented with moving breakfast from the
cafeteria to the classroom. We examine whether such a program increases performance as measured
by standardized test scores, grades and attendance rates. We exploit quasi-random timing of program
implementation that allows for a difference-in-differences identification strategy. Our main identification
assumption is that schools where the program was introduced earlier would have evolved similarly
to those where the program was introduced later. We find that in-class breakfast increases both math
and reading achievement by about one-tenth of a standard deviation relative to providing breakfast
in the cafeteria. Moreover, we find that these effects are most pronounced for low performing, free-lunch
eligible, Hispanic, and low BMI students. We also find some improvements in attendance for high
achieving students but no impact on grades.


Scott A. Imberman
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
simberman@uh.edu

Adriana D. Kugler
Georgetown University
Georgetown Public Policy Institute
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17720
1. Introduction

        Malnutrition continues to be a problem in the U.S. due to both undernourishment and

obesity, especially among children from disadvantaged backgrounds. Food insecurity is also

more prevalent among single-parent and minority households. Moreover, food insecurity has

increased with the recent recession, so that nutritional problems are particularly worrisome today

(Nord, Coleman-Jensen, Andrews and Carlson, 2010). For example, it is estimated that between

12% and 35% of children in the US skip breakfast (Gardner, 2008).

        Given the inability of households to solve nutritional deficiencies on their own,2 it is not

surprising that the link between good nutrition and the capacity of children to learn has long been

a concern for policy makers in the United States. Publicly-provided programs to feed children in

schools date back to the Great Depression, when the Agricultural Adjustment Act was introduced

in 1935. In 1946, school provision of supplemental feeding was institutionalized through the

National School Lunch Program (NSLP). In 1966 the Child Nutrition Act added the School

Breakfast Program (SBP) as a two-year pilot project to assist “nutritionally needy” children, and

the program received permanent authorization in 1975.

        Unfortunately, participation in the SBP is low. At most 60% of students eligible for free

breakfast participate in the program (Dahl and Scholz, 2011). This could be due to

“time/scheduling conflicts, cafeteria space or the embarrassment associated with eating a free or

reduced-price breakfast” (Cullen, 2010). Further, while the intent is for SBP to increase breakfast

consumption, it is possible that children with access to a SBP may eat less at home. Waehrer

(2008) looks at time-diary data and finds that children in the School Breakfast Program actually

consume less on weekdays than weekends suggesting that the program may reduce consumption,


2
 This could be either because households face limited access to credit, or because of shortsighted behavior from the
part of parents and children.

                                                         2
although it is not clear what the students would have eaten on weekdays in the absence of the

program.

         Given low take-up of free and reduced-price meals and clinical evidence that breakfast

improves cognitive performance (Alaimo, Olson and Frongillo, 1999; Middleman, Emans, and

Cox. 1996; Wesnes, Pincock, Richardson, Helm, and Hails, 2003) a number of districts around

the country have undertaken school breakfast programs which reduce the time and effort costs to

students by moving the meals from cafeterias to the classrooms. School districts in Houston,

Dallas, Little Rock, Memphis, Florida’s Orange County, Maryland’s Prince George’s County,

and Chicago have all moved breakfast to the classrooms in the hope of giving students,

especially those from low-income families, a healthier start to their day. The idea is that having a

good meal at the beginning of the day reduces over-eating and obesity, and will increase kids’

alertness and their capacity to learn. However, it is also possible that students will “double up”

and eat breakfast both at home and at school, which could contribute to obesity. Further, there

are concerns that the time it takes to serve and eat the breakfast – usually around 20 minutes –

reduces instruction time.

         In this paper, we study the impact on students’ academic performance and attendance

from an “in-class breakfast” (ICB) program implemented in a large urban school district in the

Southwest United States (LUSD-SW).3 This program delivers breakfast directly to classrooms at

the start of the day. Providing breakfast in class avoids space and scheduling problems and

providing all kids free breakfast avoids embarrassment issues. LUSD first piloted the project in

33 schools and later expanded it to all elementary and middle schools starting on February 2nd,

2010 with the roll-out finishing in fall 2010. A nice feature of the roll-out for the purposes of our

3
  Researchers seeking access to the data for replication should contact the authors, at which point we will identify
the district for the requestors and provide instructions for how to submit a research proposal to the district’s research
department.

                                                           3
empirical analysis is that the timing of implementation had little to do with school

characteristics. While the roll-out was initially aimed such that schools with higher economically

disadvantaged rates started first, in practice it did not work out this way. 4 First, some schools had

rollout dates changed to accommodate logistical necessities (i.e. having schools in the same areas

start around the same time) or principals’ requests. Second, and perhaps more importantly, 65%

of elementary schools in LUSD have economic disadvantage rates of 90% or higher. As a

consequence, during the first 11 weeks of the program rollout, there is remarkably little variation

in terms of economically disadvantaged rates and other characteristics of the schools across

implementation dates. For example, the mean economic disadvantage rate in week 1 is 94.2 %

while the mean in week 11 is 92.0%. This indicates that schools that implemented the program

early differed little from later adopters along observable characteristics.5 More importantly given

our difference-in-differences identification strategy, early and late adopters have virtually no

differences in trends.

         Using schools that adopt during weeks 1 through 11, a time period that covers the testing

days for the 5th grade state exam in week 9, we assess the impact of providing breakfast in class

on achievement, grades and attendance using a difference-in-differences approach. We find that

achievement increased in schools that adopted ICB before testing compared to schools where

ICB was adopted after testing. In particular, the introduction of breakfast in the classroom

increased test scores by 0.1 standard deviations in both reading and math, which is half of the

effect of reducing class size from 22 to 15 students in the Tennessee Project STAR experiment



4
  A student is considered economically disadvantaged if she qualifies for free-lunch, reduced-price lunch or another
Federal or state anti-poverty program.
5
  A small portion of schools in LUSD have relatively low disadvantage rates. These schools mostly began their
programs after the 11th week of the roll-out. As a consequence schools that adopted in the 12th week and later differ
from those that adopted earlier. Hence, we only consider schools adopting during the first 11 weeks of the program
in our analysis.

                                                         4
(Krueger, 1999). Moreover, these effects were larger for students with low pre-program

achievement, those who qualified for free lunch, Hispanics, children with limited English

proficiency, and students with a low body-mass index (BMI). We also allow for the impact to

vary by length of exposure prior to testing. We find little evidence that impacts vary with

exposure-time. We also find little evidence that ICB affected grades. The lack of differential

impacts by exposure time and dearth of impacts on grades suggest that the program may be

helping students perform better on exams but may be less effective in increasing learning.

Nonetheless, our evidence only provides suggestive support for this theory as, due to short

implementation window, we cannot rule-out longer-term effects of exposure time and the lack of

grade impacts could reflect teachers adjusting their grading curves as students improve. Finally,

we find some improvements in attendance for high achieving students.

       We test the validity of our results in three ways. First we show that the timing of adoption

is mostly uncorrelated with school characteristics and changes in those characteristics

conditional on the school adopting in the first 11 weeks of implementation. Second, we estimate

placebo tests in the spirit of Angrist and Krueger (1999) that estimate the difference in difference

“impact” of adoption using only pre-ICB data. This checks for whether underlying trends may be

influencing our results. These tests provide little evidence of any such trending. Third, we test

whether there are difference-in-differences “impacts” on contemporaneous exogenous covariates

and find no significant effects.



2. Previous Literature

       There is an extensive literature on the link between nutrition and education in the

developing country context, but a more limited literature on the nutrition-schooling relationship



                                                 5
in developed countries. Studies for the developing world often estimate the correlation between

nutrition and health on schooling outcomes. The main problem with many of these papers is that

factors omitted from these regressions (e.g., parental schooling, family income) are likely

associated with both health and schooling of the children. For this reason, studies for Zimbabwe

and Pakistan use civil war, drought shocks and price shocks to generate as-good-as random

changes in nutritional status (Alderman, Behrman, Lavy and Menon, 2001; Alderman, Hoddinott

and Kinsey, 2006). Another study for the Philippines uses panel data and a structural model to

identify the effect of nutrition on academic achievement (Glewwe, Jacoby and King, 2001). Only

a few papers in the developing country context have been experimental in nature. The best well-

known experimental study is the one by Maluccio et al. (2009) for Guatemala which looks at an

early childhood nutritional intervention. This study finds that providing a highly nutritious food

supplement increased scores in reading comprehension and non-verbal cognitive ability

compared to the less nutritious drink, but there was no control group without a drink in the

experiment.6 In another paper Vermeersch and Kremer (2004) find that a meals program

introduced randomly in 25 pre-schools in Western Kenya increased test scores but only in

schools where teachers were relatively experienced prior to the program.

        By contrast to studies in the developing world, most research on the effects of nutrition

on learning in developed countries has been conducted by physicians and public health experts.7

The most credible studies for developed countries have involved experimental trials which

randomly assigned kids to receiving breakfast or no breakfast and the following week switch the

assignment. This means that each child acts as his/her own control. The best studies include

Pollitt, Leibel and Greenfield (1981) and Pollitt, Lewis, Garza and Shulman (1982) who

6
  A study for Jamaica by Walker et al. (2005) and a study for Peru by Cueto et al. (1999) also conduct randomized
trials that look at the very short run impacts of nutritional supplementation under voluntary participation.
7
  See Rampersaud, Pereira, Girard, Adams and Metzl (2005) for a review.

                                                       6
examined the impact of an overnight and morning fast in two experiments on 9 to 11-year-old

children. These studies show that treatment did not affect IQ test scores or results from a

continuous performance task examination. While the random assignment of individuals to

treatment indicates that these results can be interpreted in a causal manner, there are a number of

drawbacks to this approach. First, sample sizes are small. Second, participation in the program is

voluntary and thus those participating in the experiment are likely those who will benefit more

from it. Most importantly, these experiments look at very short-run effects. Malnutrition is a

cumulative process that does not develop from not eating for a day and these experiments

considered children who were well-nourished.

        Other studies that consider the medium-term effect of nutrition on schooling in the U.S.

use non-experimental data and for the most part do simple comparisons of schools participating

in the School Breakfast and Lunch programs to non-participating schools. While some of these

studies do not control for other school and student characteristics in the participating and non-

participating schools, others attempt to control for observable differences. However, even

controlling for observable differences may not be enough, since schools may self-select into

participating in the program on the basis of unobservable characteristics (e.g., local wealth

levels). Likewise, other studies compare children eligible for free/reduced price meals to those

not eligible, but these students differ on the basis of unobservable characteristics both at the

school and student levels.8 For example, a study by Meyers et al. (1989) finds that the

Massachussetts school breakfast program is associated with higher test scores and lower levels of

tardiness and absences, but this study does not control for the selection described above. Dunifon

and Kowaleski-Jones (2003) address potential selection into free/reduced price meal eligibility

8
  For example, Figlio and Winicki (2005) find that schools change the meals they serve on the basis of whether
students are testing on a given week and Anderson and Butcher (2006) find that schools under financial pressure
tend to adopt potentially unhealthy food policies.

                                                      7
by comparing children within the same family one of whom attends a school with a school meal

program while the other attends a school without a program. While there may still be the

problem that parents send the more needy children to a school with a school meal program while

sending the other child to a school without a program, this study reports that the likelihood of

split participation is not associated with child-specific factors (including health status or BMI).

Following this strategy, Dunifon and Kowleski-Jones (2003) find that participation in the NSLP

does not predict improved child outcomes. The best non-experimental study for the U.S. is a

study by Hinrichs (2010) who exploits differences in eligibility rules across cohorts and states for

free/reduced-price lunch. Hinrichs finds that those who participated in the program as children

experienced sizable and significant increases in educational attainment.9

        Our analysis is closest to Hinrichs (2010) in that we conduct a non-experimental analysis

exploiting the differential timing in the introduction of the breakfast program in schools in a

large urban school district in the Southwest United States to identify the effect of providing

breakfast on student performance, including grades and test scores. In addition, we examine the

impact on attendance.



3. The In-Class Breakfast Program

        The LUSD in-class breakfast program provides breakfast to students in their classrooms

during the first 15 – 20 minutes of the school-day. Prior to the program, all students were able to

get a free breakfast in the school cafeteria before the start of the school day. Students are given

an entrée that could be hot or cold (i.e. yogurt, chicken biscuit, pop-tart, mini pancakes, etc.)

usually with a snack item (i.e. fruit, blueberry muffin, graham crackers), a juice and milk. On

9
 A related line of research examines how school food and nutrition programs affect obesity (Anderson and Butcher.
2006; Hofferth and Curtin. 2005; Schanzenbach, 2009;) and other health outcomes (Bernstein, McLaughlin,
Crepinsek, and Daft, 2004; Bhattacharya, Currie and Haider, 2006).

                                                       8
average a student could consume up to 534 calories from the breakfast. This is comparable to the

meals offered in the cafeteria where a student could consume up to 520 calories on average.10

         Hence, while low take-up more generally can be due to stigma, this is unlikely to be the

case in LUSD. Thus, we interpret this movement of breakfast from the cafeteria to the classroom

as a reduction in the cost to the student of acquiring breakfast in terms of time and convenience

since he or she does not need to arrive at school early or walk to the cafeteria. This change in

costs may lead to an increase in calorie consumption on average. Unfortunately, we do not have

the data to test directly for whether students consume more calories. However, while it is feasible

that some students may not change their behavior, it is likely that serving breakfast in the

classroom will cause other students to consume more food overall.

         LUSD began providing breakfast in class in 2008-09 to a set of 33 pilot schools. LUSD

began the ICB program in response to low-uptake of the cafeteria breakfasts. A comparison of

the pilot schools to non-pilot schools in the district found that while 80% of students in the

former ate breakfast in school only 41% of the latter did so as well.11

         In 2009-10 LUSD started implementing the program in the non-pilot schools. All but a

handful of elementary schools started in that year, while the rest of the elementary schools and

secondary schools began ICB early in the 2010-11 school-year. Given this timing, we only assess

elementary schools in this study. The initial intention was to implement the program in new

schools each week starting with the schools with the highest rates of economically disadvantaged

students and ending with the lowest. However, in practice the implementation did not occur this



10
  Authors’ calculations from school menus and nutrition information.
11
   It is not obvious whether this is due to more students eating breakfast who weren’t before, since some of the new
in-school eaters may have been eating breakfast at home or the difference may reflect selection of schools into the
pilot program. Nonetheless, given that principals entered the pilot voluntarily it is likely they did so in response to
low in-school consumption, which would imply that this is an underestimate of the actual effect on take-up.
Unfortunately, we do not have access to consumption data and hence cannot independently confirm these figures.

                                                          9
way. Adoption dates were modified for a number of logistical reasons such as principal requests

for delays or to facilitate food deliveries. This combined with the fact that 65% of LUSD

elementary schools had economic disadvantage rates above 90% made schools that adopted

during the beginning of the 11 week period from February 2, 2010 to April 20, 201 remarkably

similar on observable characteristics to those that adopted towards the end of the period. Hence,

we argue that the implementation was quasi-random whereby treatment effects are identified in a

difference-in-differences framework; that is, we assume that adoption timing during the first 11

weeks of the roll-out is uncorrelated with trends in underlying school characteristics.

       Table 1 provides support for this assumption. In this table we provide some

characteristics of elementary schools that adopted ICB at different times. New schools

implement the program every week starting on the week of February 2, 2010 through September

21, 2010 with some gaps during testing periods and summer break. This table shows that

amongst schools that implemented the program from February 2, 2010 through April 20, 2010,

the week of adoption is uncorrelated with many observable dimensions, including percent of

students economically disadvantaged, black, Hispanic, with Limited English Proficiency,

average teacher experience and tenure, student-teacher ratio, and attendance in the 2008-2009

school year. Joint significance tests show that only only per-pupil expenditures and mean

achievement significantly differ by week of adoption, however the achievement differences

appear to be driven by schools that adopt in week 5. Indeed, dropping week 5 from the sample

reduces the F-statistics to insignificant values of 1.2 and 1.6 for math and reading, respectively.

Later we provide specifications excluding week 5 from our analysis and find that our results are

unaffected.




                                                10
        More importantly for our difference-in-differences identification strategy, Panel B of

Table 1 shows that the 99 schools where the program was introduced between February 2 and

April 20, 2010 do not differ in terms of changes between 2006-07 and 2008-09 in any of the

above mentioned characteristics. This suggests that initially the program was introduced in a

close to random manner, at least conditional on fixed school characteristics. Later, we further test

this assumption through estimates of impacts on exogenous covariates and placebo tests that look

for impact estimates using only pre-program data.



4. Estimation Strategy

        To implement our difference-in-differences strategy, we estimate the following

regression to look at the effects of the ICB program on student achievement:



                                                                                           (1)



where Yijt is student test scores, grades, or absenteeism for student i, in school j, at time t. Xijt

includes race, gender, and indicators for whether the student qualifies for free lunch, reduced

price lunch or is otherwise economically disadvantaged, grade fixed-effects and year fixed-

effects.12 The regression also controls for school characteristics, Zjt, such as the percent of

students of each race/ethnicity in the school, economically disadvantaged, of limited English

proficiency, in special education, in bilingual education, in each grade level, or referred to an

alternative disciplinary program. Moreover, we will include school fixed effects, ψj, to control




12
  A student is considered otherwise disadvantaged if he or she does not qualify for free or reduced-price lunch but
does qualify for other Federal or state anti-poverty programs.

                                                        11
for time-invariant unobservable characteristics of the schools, such as the quality of the teachers

and principal.

        This specification makes our analysis a “difference-in-differences” model where changes

in outcomes before and after program implementation for earlier adopters are compared to

changes in outcomes for schools that adopt late in the process. The difference-in-differences

impact of the program is captured by the estimate for Postt × ICBj which is an interaction of a

dummy for being in a period after the introduction of the program, Postt, with an indicator of

whether the school participated in the program up until that point, ICBj (i.e., an indicator for

whether the ICB was implemented in weeks 1 through 8). For test scores, 5th grade students took

the state accountability exams in reading and math on April 6 and 7. Hence, for these students,

we will estimate equation (1) by comparing schools where ICB started prior to April 6 to those

where it started afterwards but before April 27.13 Since it is unclear whether schools that

implement during the week of April 6 provide the program to 5th grade students due to the

testing, we drop all schools that adopt during this week (9) from all of our analyses.

        The difference-in-differences framework described above only requires that trends for

early adopters do not differ from trends for late adopters. Hence, we argue that the

implementation is quasi-random in the sense that it is unrelated to underlying trends. Below, we

provide evidence that indicates the program implementation satisfies this assumption.

        The difference-in-differences analysis can be extended to include the duration of

exposure to the in-class breakfast program, ICB_Durationjt, or intensity of treatment as follows:



                                                                                              (2)


13
   Since 3rd and 4th graders took the exam on the week of April 27th, we cannot estimate this model for these
students.

                                                     12
After controlling for student characteristics and school characteristics, we may expect for

students in schools that have participated longer in the ICB program to have improved nutrition

and to have better achievement. On the other hand, it is possible any benefits accrue merely from

a “day of testing” effect whereby the extra calories boost concentration on the exam but do little

to improve general learning. We will also provide estimates from a more flexible version of

model (2) as follows



                       ∑                                                             (3)



where w is the week of implementation and ICB_Week is an indicator for a school adopting

during week w. This version of the model allows us to track the impact estimates from week to

week as the program is implemented. Finally, since the availability of breakfast is unlikely to

affect all students equally, and in particular is likely to have a bigger impact on low-SES

students, we provide analyses that split the sample by economic status, ethnicity, gender, LEP

status and prior achievement, which will allow us to test whether the impact of the ICB program

varies for different types of students. Further, we are able to test for differences in impacts by

students’ BMI for a subset of schools in 2008-09 and 2009-10. This is important, as ex-ante we

would expect breakfast to have a larger impact on undernourished students, for which we use

low BMI as a proxy. Note that in the BMI regressions, since we only have two years of data we

do not include school fixed-effects.

       Since grades and attendance accrue continually, we use modified versions of equations

(1) and (2) for these outcomes. Since there are four grading periods and six attendance periods


                                               13
during the school-year, in these cases we include grade level-period fixed-effects instead of year

fixed-effects as we have both within-year and across-grade variation. This accounts for

differences across grades in each time period as well as differences across time periods due to,

for example, students becoming restless as the Holidays approach or becoming more likely to

skip school as the school-year ends. We consider a school to be treated if it adopts ICB at any

point during the grading/attendance period. However, this may be a poor measure of exposure as

a student who is exposed to ICB for the full period may be affected more than one who is

exposed only for part of the period. Thus our focus is on the duration model in equation (2) but

we also estimate the following model:



                                                                                            (4)



where FullyTreatedjt is an indicator set equal to one if the school is treated for all weeks of

period t while PartiallyTreatedjt equals one if the school was treated for some, but not all, weeks

of period t. Both of these values are set to zero in any period prior to implementation.



5. Data Description

       Our data comes from student records in a large urban school district in the Southwest US

(LUSD-SW). The district is one of the largest in the country with over 200,000 students. Given

that the program implementation only overlapped with the testing for elementary students, we

focus on students in grades 1 to 5. Testing data covers the 2002-03 through 2009-10 academic

years, however we start our analysis with 2003-04 in order to allow for the inclusion of lagged

achievement in our test-score regressions. For our other outcomes – grades and attendance – the


                                                 14
data we have is more limited, with only 2008-09 and 2009-10 available for grades and 2009-10

for attendance rates. Further, our data on body mass index is only available in 2008-09 and 2009-

10.

         Testing data comes from the state accountability exams in math and reading. These

exams are “high stakes” in that the scores determine whether the students are permitted to

advance to the next grade as well as the school’s accountability rating and whether the school

meets “Adequate Yearly Progress” under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. Students can

take the exam multiple times until they pass. Unfortunately, we do not know whether a given

exam score is from the first or a later administration. Hence, we use the student’s minimum score

in a subject in a given year as their achievement score under the assumption that, since students

who fail tend to get extensive coaching for retakes, the lowest score is most likely from the

student’s first sitting. We then use these scores and standardize them within grade and year

across the district.14

         In addition to achievement the data provides some other student outcomes. In particular

we assess the impact of the breakfast program on attendance rates within each six week

attendance period in 2009-10 and the student’s mean grade across all subjects in each nine week

grading period in 2008-09 and 2009-10.15 Finally, we have information on student demographics

including race, gender, economic status, limited English proficiency, at-risk status, gifted status,

and special education, along with BMI data for a subset of schools in 2008-09 and 2009-10.16


14
   While it is more common to use scale scores in the standardization, unfortunately the state changed the scaling
procedure in 2009-10 from a horizontal to a vertical scaling regime making the scale scores in that year
incomparable to prior years. Hence, we rely on raw scores for our standardizations.
15
   While it would be interesting to see the impact of the breakfast program on behavior, unfortunately our measure
of disciplinary incidents – the number of in-school suspensions or more severe punishments a student receives – is
too infrequent in elementary student populations to identify effects.
16
   A student is considered at-risk if he or she is low-achieving, has previously been retained, is pregnant or a parent,
is LEP, has been placed in alternative education or juvenile detention, is on parole or probation, is homeless, or has
previously dropped out of school.

                                                          15
       Table 2 provides summary statistics of students in 2009-10. We limit the sample to the 88

schools that started ICB between February 2 and April 27, 2011 excluding schools that adopt

during the week of fifth grade testing (week 9) as it is unclear whether fifth grade students in

these schools become treated before or after testing. We then separate our data into three samples

for each of the outcome measures we assess – achievement, grades and attendance. As described

above, we are limited to fifth grade students for achievement while our data covers grades 1 to 5

for attendance and grades. Nonetheless, the student characteristics are relatively similar across

the samples. LUSD is a heavily minority district with 87% of students being Hispanic or black,

but our subsample schools are more heavily minority as only 3% of students are not black or

Hispanic. This is not surprising, given that our subsample is limited to schools with high

economic disadvantage rates, as is evidenced in the next row showing that 94% of students are

disadvantaged. Further, a large majority of students are Hispanic rather than black. The schools

also have high rates of limited English proficiency. In total, we have 6,353 students and 85

schools in 2009-10 in the achievement sample, 37,309 students in 88 schools in the grades

sample and 38,425 students in 88 schools in the attendance sample. Our total estimation sample

covers 2003-04 through 2009-10 for achievement, 2008-09 through 2009-10 for grades and

2009-10 only for attendance. They include approximately 40,300 student-year observations for

achievement regressions, 286,100 student-grading period observations for grades regressions and

225,900 student-attendance period observations for attendance regressions.




                                               16
6. Effects of In-Class Breakfast on Achievement, Grades and Absenteeism

6.1. Effects on Student Achievement

       Table 3 shows the results of regressions using equations (1) and (2) for test scores. Panels

A.I and B.I show results from the basic difference-in-differences regressions for math and

reading, respectively. Column (1) shows that, on average, the impact of ICP on math and reading

is to increase test scores by 0.1 standard deviations in both exams. This is a substantial effect.

For comparison, the results are equal to half the impact of reducing class sizes from 22 to 15

students found in the Project STAR experiment (Krueger, 1999). In panels A.II and B.II, we

provide estimates that allow the impacts to vary by week of adoption. This specification is useful

in determining whether the impacts are due to actual learning gains by students or if the

breakfasts are simply increasing students’ test-taking performance. If the former is true, then we

would expect to see larger achievement impacts for students in early adopting schools than for

late adopters. Nonetheless, the estimates in panels A.II and B.II suggest little difference by

exposure to treatment. The point estimates on the weeks of exposure interactions with being in

the post ICB period are negative, insignificant and close to zero. In Figure 1 we provide graphs

that show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals using equation (3) as the regression

model. This figure shows whether any differences by exposure time can be discerned using a less

restrictive model. Nonetheless, there is little indication of variation by weeks of exposure.

Although somewhat noisy, the week-by-week estimates appear to be centered on 0.1 standard

deviations in both subjects throughout the implementation period and show little indication of

trending. Thus, the estimates shown here along with those in panels A.II and B.II suggest that the

impacts are due to improvements in exam performance but not necessarily from learning itself.17


17
   Figlio and Winicki (2005) show that schools recognize the potential for extra consumption to improve
achievement and thus increase calorie counts of in-school meals during testing weeks.

                                                  17
Later we provide evidence on course grades that corroborates this. Nonetheless, we caution that

the implementation period is only two-months long. Further, a substantial portion of instruction

during this period is focused on test preparation specifically. Hence, it is possible that there are

learning effects, but they are only detectable over longer time periods.

       In rows (2) through (8) of Table 3 we provide estimates that split the samples by the once

lagged achievement levels for each student, first by whether the student is above or below the

median achievement score and then by the student’s achievement quintile. The results indicate

that the achievement effects found in Column (1) are primarily coming from students who were

low achievers prior to program implementation. For those students who score below the median

in the previous year the effects sizes are 0.14 and 0.13 in math and reading, respectively. On the

other hand, students who have above median prior achievement have smaller effect sizes of 0.07

and 0.08 in math and reading, respectively with the former being statistically insignificant.

Nonetheless, we note that the below and above median estimates do not statistically significantly

differ from each other, so we take these results as suggestive rather than conclusive. Similarly,

Columns (4) through (8) provide estimates separated by quintiles in which the point estimates for

lower quintiles are generally higher than for the upper quintiles. Finally, we also provide

estimates that interact treatment status with exposure time for these models in panels A.II and

B.II. As with the pooled estimates, there is little to indicate differences by week of adoption.

Further, in Figure 2 we repeat the analysis shown in Figure 1 but split the samples by whether

the students are above or below median achievers. This figure indicates that the impacts differ

little by time of exposure regardless of the students’ achievement levels.

       In Table 4 we provide results that examine whether there are heterogeneous effects of

ICB on different groups of students. Columns (1) and (2) show no differences between boys and



                                                18
girls in the effects of the ICB on math and reading test scores. However, when we further split

the sample by whether the students are high or low achievers in Columns (3) through (6), the

estimates indicate that, while boys on both sides of the achievement distribution are affected

similarly, the impacts on girls are heavily concentrated among low achievers. By contrast, the

effects on various racial/ethnic groups are clearly different. Columns (7)-(9) show that the ICB

increased test scores for Hispanics by 0.14 and 0.15 of a standard deviation in math and reading

but had no significant impact on blacks. This is interesting as it indicates that Hispanics were

probably more likely to adjust their consumption patterns in response to the breakfast program

than black students. Unfortunately, we can only speculate as to the reasons for this racial

differential. One possibility is that black students in LUSD are less affected by stigma effects and

hence were already eating in the cafeteria prior to program implementation. Another possibility

is that LUSD black students are more likely to eat breakfast at home than Hispanic students.18

For white students, there are too few observations for reasonable precision in the estimates.

Finally, Columns (10) and (11) show that, not surprisingly given the results for Hispanics,

students with limited English proficiency also benefit more than non-LEP students.19

         In Columns (12) and (13) we examine differences in economic status. Unfortunately,

since we have so few students in the sample who are not economically disadvantaged we cannot

analyze differences along this dimension. Instead we split the sample between those eligible and

not eligible for free meals. This effectively separates the sample by those students from families

with incomes below 130% of the Federal poverty line (eligible) and those above that income

18
   Another potential explanation is that Hispanics are more likely to be underweight and hence have a higher
treatment effect. This is unlikely given that in the BMI sample, 8% of Hispanics have low BMI compared to 12% of
blacks. Nonetheless, to test this we estimate models using the BMI sample that control for BMI on each of the ethnic
subsamples. The results are nearly identical regardless of whether BMI is controlled for, further indicating that this
is unlikely to be the explanation. Results are available by request.
19
    We also investigate differences within sub-groups by high and low achievers. Unlike the gender results, there is
little evidence of differences by achievement for the other estimates provided in Table 4. These results are provided
in Online Appendix Table 4.

                                                         19
level (not eligible). The results suggest ICB program has a bigger effect on math test scores for

those who are eligible but there are no differences in reading test scores.

        Finally, in Columns (14) through (17) we look at whether impacts differ by body mass

index. The BMI levels for each student come from height and weight taken during physical

fitness tests at the end of the 2008-09 school-year. Unfortunately, the BMI data is only available

for a subset of 5th grade schools.20 Further, since we only have one pre and one post-adoption

period for this analysis we do not include school fixed-effects.

        Since the relationship between BMI and obesity differ by age for children we classify the

students into four categories based on the Centers for Disease Control’s BMI-for-age values and

the student’s age in months. The four categories are low BMI (children are below the 25th

percentile of weight during the CDC base year), medium weight (25th to 84th percentile),

overweight (85 to 94th percentile) and obese (≥ 95th percentile). Note that the first two categories

are not the same as those used by the CDC which are underweight (< 10th percentile) and healthy

weight (10th to 84th percentile). We make this change since we have very few observations that

would be classified as underweight.

        The results are suggestive that in-class breakfast has a larger positive impact on children

with low BMI. In particular, we find that math scores are marginally significantly higher for

these students. However, while the point estimate is large at 0.26 standard deviations, the small

sample size makes it very noisy. For reading the result is similar but statistically insignificant.

For all other weight categories the estimates are much smaller and statistically insignificant.

        In Tables 5 and 6 we provide two tests of the validity of our difference-in-differences

identification strategy. First, in Table 5 we examine the possibility that schools that adopted prior

20
  There is a small relationship between the likelihood of a school having BMI data available and being an early
adopter. In particular, schools that adopt prior to week 10 are 8 percentage points more likely to have BMI data
available than those that adopt in weeks 10 or 11. This relationship is significant at the 10% level.

                                                      20
to the 9th week had pre-existing trends. To test for these trends we conduct a placebo test where

we estimate equations (1) and (2) on the sample prior to 2009-10 and label 2007-08 and 2008-09

as the post-period. If there are pre-existing trends then we should expect to see a significant

“impact” on achievement for schools that adopt prior to testing in the 2007-08 to 2008-09 period

relative to the 2003-04 through 2006-07 period. To further buttress our strategy, we remove

school fixed-effects and controls from the regressions. Results with these included are similar

and provided in Online Appendix Table 2. The estimates in Table 5 show little to suggest the

existence of pre-trends. In all cases – full sample, split by above/below median, and split by

quintile – the point estimates on the Post*Treated and Post*Exposure Time variables are

statistically insignificant.

        Another concern is that if the timing of program implementation is related to changes in

the characteristics of students in the adopting schools or if the program changed the composition

of the students who tested, our results could be biased. Hence, in Table 6 we provide estimates of

the difference-in-differences “impacts” on observable characteristics. Since program adoption is

a school-wide event, we aggregate the variables to school-wide means in panel A and 5th grade

means in panel B. Nonetheless, student-level analyses show very similar results and are provided

in Online Appendix Table 3.21 Panel A of Table 6 shows that earlier adoption of the program had

no statistically significant effects on students’ gender, race, economic disadvantage, LEP status,

at-risk status, gifted status, special education status, and most importantly mean lagged reading

or math scores. In Panel B, we show the same results emerge if we limit to 5th grade students,

with the exception of a marginally significant estimate for LEP.




21
  The appendix table also shows that there are no significant impacts on the likelihood of being in a given lagged
achievement quintile.

                                                       21
        It is instructive to note here that the main effects for being a school treated prior to week

10 do show some small but significant differences in student characteristics. In particular,

schools that adopt in weeks 1 through 8 have 3 percentage points more economically

disadvantaged students, achievement scores approximately one tenth of a standard deviation

lower, lower gifted rates and higher special education rates. This is the primary reason why we

argue that the adoption timing is quasi-random rather than entirely random and hence we rely on

a difference-in-differences strategy rather than a simple OLS comparison. Nonetheless, the

important take-away from this table is that there is little evidence that the changes in

achievement found in Table 3 are correlated with contemporaneous changes in student

characteristics.

        In Table 7, we provide a set of specification checks for our baseline treatment effect

estimates. In row (1) we estimate models with lagged achievement omitted. In row (2) we

exclude schools that implement the program in week 5 since in Table 1 it appears that week 5

schools have higher 2008-09 achievement scores. In row (3) we exclude schools that implement

in week 2 since in panel B of Table 1 we see some indication that these schools have larger

changes in achievement prior to adoption. In row (4) we limit the sample only to 2007-08 and

later years. In row (5) we provide estimates without school fixed effects. In all of these cases, the

point estimates remain very robust for reading. For math the estimates become insignificant in

some specifications. Nonetheless, the point estimates remain positive in all cases and do not fall

below 0.06 standard deviations. Lastly, in row (6) we provide exposure time estimates for

students in 4th grade. Since the exam for 4th grade students occurs after week 11 we cannot

estimate overall treatment effects. Nonetheless, we can use the variation in time of exposure to

see if these estimates are consistent with our estimates for 5th grade students. Indeed, that is what



                                                 22
we find, as there appears to be no relationship between time of exposure to ICB and

achievement.



6.2. Effects on Absenteeism and Grades

           Since the advocates of moving breakfast to the classroom often argue that this kind of

program helps to reduce tardiness and absenteeism we also look at attendance rates.22 Unlike the

testing regressions, in these analyses along with the assessments of grades we have access to data

for grades 1 through 5 and hence we can see if any impacts arise for younger students. Note that

these estimation models do not contain lagged dependent variables. Further, the attendance

results are limited only to the 2009-10 school-year since we do not have attendance rates by

attendance period in prior years. Hence, we use differences in timing of implementation across

attendance periods within 2009-10 – ICB was implemented during attendance periods 4, 5 and 6

– to identify treatment effects.

           The results for attendance are provided in Table 8. We estimate three types of models.

The first is a corollary to equation (1) where we include an indicator for whether ICB is in place

at any point during period t. In Panel II, we modify the analysis to allow for separate estimates

for being fully or partially treated as described in Section 4. Finally, in Panel III we estimate

models based on equation (2) where the treatment effect is allowed to vary by weeks of

exposure.

           In general, we find only weak evidence of impacts on absenteeism. When using the full

sample in Column (1) we see no significant effect of ICB exposure on attendance rates in any of

the three models. When we split by high and low achievers in Columns (2) and (3) we do find

some evidence of improvements for high achievers as those who were fully exposed to the
22
     Unfortunately, we do not have tardiness data.

                                                     23
program for the entire attendance period saw improvements of 0.25 percentage points or about

one-half of a day in a 180 day school year.23 In Panel III, we find that an additional week of

exposure increases attendance amongst high achievers by 0.07 percentage points. Nonetheless,

there is no effect on low achievers. Finally, in Columns (4) to (8) we split the sample by grade

level and find little evidence of differential effects by grade level.

            Table 9 provides results for average course grades. Once again our data is more limited in

years of coverage as the grades data is only available from 2008-09 through 2009-10.

Nonetheless, these data provide us eight grading periods over the two years with ICB being

implemented during the 3rd and 4th grading period of 2009-10. Using models that mirror those in

Table 8, the results suggest there is little impact of the program on grades. In all three models

there are no statistically significant estimates overall, split by achievement level, and split by

grade level. One possible explanation for the lack of impact on grades despite the impact on

achievement is that since grades have a relative component, teachers may simply adjust their

grades to the new, higher performance of the students. On the other hand, the lack of effects here

are consistent with finding no exposure time gradient on achievement in that they may reflect the

program impacting test performance but not overall learning.



7. Conclusion

            Concerns about food insecurity and malnutrition amongst students have led education

officials to seek out ways to improve nutrition in schools. One increasingly popular strategy is to

provide free breakfast to students in the classroom so that students do not need to get to school

early to acquire breakfast from the cafeteria. Such programs also have the potential to increase

breakfast consumption over cafeteria-based programs as they reduce the potential for stigma
23
     This analysis is limited to grades 4 and 5 since testing begins in grade 3.

                                                             24
associated with students going to the cafeteria for breakfast being identified by other students as

low-income.

         In this paper, we assess the impact of moving breakfast services from the cafeteria to the

classroom on student achievement, attendance and grades. Since such a program reduces the

time and effort costs to students from consuming breakfast, it is likely that these programs

increase consumption. We use data from a large urban school district in the Southwest United

States (LUSD) that phased-in an in-class breakfast (ICB) program quasi-randomly over the

course of two months in 2010. Since the phase-in period overlaps with 5th grade achievement

testing, we are able to identify the impact of the program on math and reading achievement.

Using a difference-in-differences strategy we find that providing free breakfast in the classroom

increases math and reading achievement by 0.1 standard deviations relative to providing free

breakfast in the cafeteria. These effects almost entirely come from Hispanic students, with black

students showing little impact. Further, the effects are concentrated in students with low prior

achievement. We also find suggestive evidence that the benefits are concentrated in students with

low body mass indices.

         Since we cannot identify which students switch from not eating breakfast to eating

breakfast, one should interpret this intention-to-treat effect as a lower-bound estimate of the

actual treatment effect of consuming more food prior to school. To get an idea of the treatment

effect, we can use results from a non-randomized pilot study by the school district that found

schools that implemented ICB had twice the consumption rate of schools that did not participate

in the pilot. At face value this indicates treatment effects are likely on the order of 0.2 standard

deviations, however this estimate should be used with caution due to the non-randomness of the

pilot.



                                                 25
       We also look at whether impact estimates vary by length of exposure. If the breakfast

program increases learning then we would expect to see schools that adopt earlier to have larger

impacts than those that adopt later. Our results show little evidence of differences by adoption

timing. This suggests that the estimates may reflect “day of testing” effects whereby achievement

is improved by extra consumption on testing days (Figlio and Winicki, 2005), although we

caution that since the implementation period is short-term we cannot rule out that exposure time

effects would emerge over longer time periods.

       Finally, we also look at whether the breakfast program affects attendance rates and

grades. While we find some evidence that attendance improves amongst high achieving students,

we find little evidence of any impacts on grades. This provides further evidence that the

achievement gains might be due to better test performance rather than learning gains.



References


Alderman, Harold, Jere R. Behrman, Victor Lavy and Rekha Menon. 2001. “Child Health and
School Enrollment: A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Human Resources, 36(1): 185-205.

Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott and Bill Kinsey. 2006. “Long Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition.” Oxford Economic Papers, 58(3): 450-474.

Alaimo, Katherine, Christine Olson and Edward Frongillo. 1999. “Food Insufficiency and
American School-Aged Children’s Cognitive, Academic and Psychosocial Development,”
Pediatrics, 108(1): 44-53.

Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger. 1999. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,” Handbook
of Labor Economics, 3A: 1277-1366.

Anderson, Patricia and Kristin Butcher. 2006. “Reading, Writing, and Refreshments: Are School
Finances Contributing to Children’s Obesity?” Journal of Human Resources, 41: 467-494.

Bernstein, Lawrence, Joan McLaughlin, Mary Kay Crepinsek, and Lyann Daft. 2004.
“Evaluation of the School Breakfast Program Pilot Project: Final Report” Nutrition Assistance
Program Report Series, No. CN-04-SBP. Alexandra, VA: US Department of Agriculture.

                                                 26
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Janet Currie and Steven Haider. 2006. “Breakfast of Champions? The
School Breakfast program and the Nutrition of Children and Families,” Journal of Human
Resources, 41(3): 445-466.

Cullen, Karen. 2010. “HISD Breakfast Program Aids Student Achievement.” Houston
Chronicle, February 17.

Dahl, Molly W. and John Karl Scholz. 2011. “The National School Lunch Program and School
Breakfast Program: Evidence on Participation and Noncompliance.” University of Wisconsin,
mimeo.

Dunifon, Rachel and Lori Kowaleski-Jones. 2003. “The Influences of Participation in the
National School Lunch Program and Food Insecurity on Child Well-Being,” Social Service
Review, 77(1): 72-92.

Figlio, David and Joshua Winicki. 2005. “Food for Thought: the Effects of School
Accountability Plans on School Nutrition,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3): 381-394.

Glewwe, Paul, Hanan Jacoby and Elizabeth King. 2001. “Early Childhood Nutrition and
Academic Achievement: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics, 81(3): 345-
368.

Hinrichs, Peter. 2010. “The Effects of the National School Lunch Program on Education and
Health,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 29(3): 479-505.

Hofferth, Sandra and Sally Curtin. 2005. “Poverty, Food Programs and Childhood Obesity,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24: 703-726.

Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532.

Maluccio, John A., John Hoddinott, Jere R. Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes R.
Quisumbing and Aryeh D. Stein. 2009. “The Impact of Improving Nutrition During Early
Childhood on Eduaction among Guatamalan Adults.” Economic Journal 119(537): 734-763.

Meyers, Alan, Amy Sampson, Micahel Weitzman, Beatrice Rogers, and Herb Kayne. 1989.
“School Breakfast Program and School Performance,” American Journal of Diseases of
Children, 143(10): 1234-1239.

Middleman, A.B., S.J. Emans, and J. Cox. 1996. “Nutritional Vit B12 Deficiency and Folate
Deficiency in an Adolescent Patient Presenting with Anemia, Weight Loss, and Poor School
Performance,” Journal of Adolescent Health 19(1): 76-79.

Nord, Mark, Alisha Coleman-Jensen, Margaret Andrews and Steven Carlson. 2010. “Household
Food Security in the United States, 2009.” USDA Economic Research Report No. 108.

                                           27
Pollitt, Ernesto, Rudolph L. Leibel and Daryl Greenfield. 1981. “Brief Fasting, Stress and
Cognition in Children.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 34: 1526-1533.

Pollitt, Ernesto, Nita L. Lewis, Cutberto Garza and Robert J. Shulman. 1982. “Fasting and
Cognitive Function.” Journal of Psychiatric Research 17(2): 169-174.

Rampersaud, Gail C., Mark A. Pereira, Beverly L. Girard, Judi Adams, and Jordan D. Metzl.
2005. “Breakfast Habits, Nutritional Status, Body Weight and Academic Performance in
Children and Adolescents.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 105(5): 743-760.

Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2009. “Do School Lunches Contribute to Childhood Obesity?”
Journal of Human Resources, 44: 684-709.

Vermeersch, Christel and Michael Kremer. 2004. “School Meals, Educational Achievement and
School Competition: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 3523.

Waehrer, Geetha M. 2008. “The School Breakfast Program and Breakfast Consumption.”
Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper No. 1360-08.

Wesnes, Keith, Claire Pincock, David Richardson, Gareth Helm, and Simon Hails. 2003.
“Breakfast Reduces Declines in Attention and Memory over the Morning in Schoolchildren,”
Appetite, 41: 329-331.




                                           28
 Figure 1: Impact of In-Class Breakfast on Achievement By Week of
                           Implementation


                                            Math
   .3
   .2
   .1
         0
   -.1
   -.2




             0             2                  4                6                     8
                          Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation

                                      Estimate              95% CI



                                          Reading
    .3
    .2
    .1
         0
   -.1




             0             2                  4                6                     8
                          Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation

                                      Estimate              95% CI




Graphs show point estimates and confidence intervals from regressions of program impact on
achievement where the impact estimates are allowed to vary by week of implementation.
                                     Figure 2: Impact of In-Class Breakfast on Achievement
                                      By Prior Achievement and Week of Implementation

                          Math - Below Median                                                                                                                         Math - Above Median




                                                                                                                                            .3
  .4




                                      Math Achievement (Std. Deviations)




                                                                                                                                            .2
  .2




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                                                                  0
        0




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                                                                                                                            -.2
  -.2




            0        2                  4                6                                                                              8               0        2                  4                6       8
                    Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation                                                                                                   Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation

                       Estimate                                                                                 Below Median - 95% CI                                      Estimate             95% CI



                        Reading - Below Median                                                                                                                       Reading - Above Median
   .4




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                           Math Achievement (Std. Deviations)




                                                                                                                                              .2
   .2




                                                                                                                                              .1
        0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                              -.1
  -.2




            0        2                  4                6                                                                              8                   0     2                  4                6      8
                    Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation                                                                                                    Week of In-Class Breakfast Implementation

                       Estimate                                                                                 Below Median - 95% CI                                       Estimate            95% CI




Graphs show point estimates and confidence intervals from regressions of program impact on achievement where the impact estimates are
allowed to vary by week of implementation. Samples are split for each exam by whether the student is above or below the median score on the
2008-09 achievement exam.
                                                               Table 1: Means of Elementary School Characteristics by Week of Implementation of In-Class Breakfast

                                                                                                                                               Avg.        Student-
                                                                       # of        % Econ                                                                               Attendance     Per-Pupil     Mean Math        Mean Reading
Week      Start Date                 Important Events                                             % Black         % Hisp          % LEP     Teacher Exp    Teacher
                                                                     Schools       Disadv                                                                                  Rate          Exp         Achievement      Achievement
                                                                                                                                              (years)       Ratio
                                                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)             (10)
                                                                                                           A. Levels in 2008-09
1         2/2/2010                                                       9           94.2           23.4            73.7           52.6        11.6          16.9           96.5          6787           -0.16             -0.21
2         2/9/2010                                                      10           94.7           32.2            66.3           40.8        10.1          16.7           96.6          7195           -0.07             -0.10
3         2/16/2010            End of 4th Attendance Period              5           96.7           31.8            67.6           44.8        11.3          16.7           97.3          7003              0               0.02
5         3/2/2010                                                      12           95.2           22.9            74.5           48.5        11.1          16.2           96.7          7031          -0.23**           -0.21**
6         3/9/2010               End of 3rd Grading Cycle               13           94.9           33.5            65.1           43.6         10            16            97.3          7636           -0.07             -0.09
7         3/23/2010                                                     10           94.7           34.3             64            40.4        12.5          16.1           96.8          7091           -0.03             -0.08
8         3/30/2010                                                     10           94.5           36.0            62.7           41.7        12.1          15.2           97.2          7185            0.01             -0.00
                               5th Grade Testing, End of 5th
9         4/6/2010                                                      10           90.1           29.9            68.7           44.5        9.3**         16.8          97.2           6588            0.10             0.06
                                    Attendance Period
10        4/13/2010                                                     10           92.9           18.1            78.3           52.4       11.9**         15.8           97.2          6933           0.04              -0.05
11        4/20/2010                                                     10           92.0           28.0            65.6           50.9        11.8          16.9*          97.1          6625           -0.02             -0.02
          4/27/2010               3rd & 4th Grade Testing
Joint F-Test for Weeks 2 - 11 (F-statistics; Week 1 Omitted Category)                 0.7           0.4             0.3            0.5          1.3           1.4           1.2          2.1**           2.1**            2.2**
12        5/4/2010                                                       9          88.2**          15.6           78.1            48.4        12.7          16.6          97.4         6974*             0.11             0.07
13        5/11/2010                                                     10          70.1***        37.3**         44.0***         29.7**       13.4         15.7**        96.5***        7100            -0.01             0.09
14        5/17/2010                                                     10          57.1**         17.0**          50.3            30.1        11.3         16.5*         97.1**        6415**            0.13             0.18
15        9/14/2010                                                     10          22.6***         9.1*          25.8***         12.3***      14.0*         17.3          97.3          6300           0.50***          0.53***
16        9/21/2010                                                      1             -              -              -               -           -             -             -             -
                                                                                              B. Changes From 2006-07 Through 2008-09
1         2/2/2010                                                       9            0.5           -2.0             1.7            4.5        0.39          -0.38         0.07            928           -0.05             -0.10
2         2/9/2010                                                      10            1.8           -1.2             0.6            1.9        -0.19         -0.31         -0.02          1306           0.12*            0.09**
3         2/16/2010            End of 4th Attendance Period              5            0.1           -0.9             1.0            4.0        0.83          -0.35        0.52**          1095           -0.03             -0.02
5         3/2/2010                                                      12            1.3           -0.7             1.0            2.9        0.77          0.06          0.36           1131           -0.02             -0.01
6         3/9/2010               End of 3rd Grading Cycle               13            0.5           0.0              0.2            1.8        0.73          0.05          0.49           1155           0.04              0.02
7         3/23/2010                                                     10            1.9           -1.4             2.0            3.7        -0.14        -0.95*         0.33            930           0.15              0.10
8         3/30/2010                                                     10            2.0           -3.3             4.4            5.3        0.13          -0.88         0.44           1034           -0.02             -0.04
                               5th Grade Testing, End of 5th            10
9         4/6/2010
                                    Attendance Period                                 -0.3          -0.9             1.6            2.4        -0.53         -0.06          0.21          846             0.05             0.01
10        4/13/2010                                                   10              1.4           -0.2             0.3            3.4        0.76*         -0.48          0.35          942             0.10             0.02
11        4/20/2010                                                   10              2.1           -1.9             1.8            2.8        0.43          -0.00          0.33          964             0.04             0.04
          4/27/2010               3rd & 4th Grade Testing
Joint F-Test for Weeks 2 - 11 (F-statistics; Week 1 Omitted Category)                0.6            0.9           1.2          0.7             0.8          0.8            1.1            0.8             0.9               0.6
12         5/4/2010                                                      9          -0.9**          -0.8          1.4           3.3            0.06         0.12           0.23          1224             0.02             -0.03
13         5/11/2010                                                    10          2.5**           0.0           2.7           1.9            0.91         0.23           0.40          1084            -0.04              0.06
14         5/17/2010                                                    10           -0.1           -0.7          0.5           2.5            0.16         0.11           0.11           891             0.05              0.12
15         9/14/2010                                                    10           -3.1           -2.0          0..7          1.4            0.81         0.02           0.02          1057            -0.01              0.03
16         9/21/2010                                                     1             -              -            -             -               -            -              -             -
*, **, *** denote significant difference from prior week's schools at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Economic disadvantage refers to students who qualify for free meals, reduced-price meals, or other Federal or state low-
income assistance programs.
                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics in 2009-10
A. 5th Grade Tested Students Only      B. All Students in Grades 1 - 5      C. All Students in Grades 1 - 5
          (Test Sample)                       (Grades Sample)                   (Attendance Sample)
Female                     0.49      Female                     0.48     Female                      0.48
                          (0.50)                               (0.50)                               (0.50)
Black                      0.23      Black                      0.23     Black                       0.23
                          (0.42)                               (0.42)                               (0.42)
White                      0.02      White                      0.01     White                       0.02
                          (0.12)                               (0.12)                               (0.12)
Hispanic                   0.74      Hispanic                   0.74     Hispanic                    0.73
                          (0.44)                               (0.44)                               (0.44)
Economically               0.94      Economically               0.94     Economically                0.94
Disadvantaged             (0.24)     Disadvantaged             (0.23)    Disadvantaged              (0.23)
LEP                        0.40      LEP                        0.54     LEP                         0.53
                          (0.49)                               (0.50)                               (0.50)
At Risk                    0.67      At Risk                    0.74     At Risk                     0.74
                          (0.47)                               (0.44)                               (0.44)
Gifted                     0.15      Gifted                     0.13     Gifted                      0.13
                          (0.35)                               (0.34)                               (0.34)
Special Ed                 0.09      Special Ed                 0.07     Special Ed                  0.07
                          (0.29)                               (0.26)                               (0.26)
2008-09 Math†              -0.01     2008-09 Math†              -0.05    2008-09 Math†               -0.06
                          (0.94)                               (0.97)                               (0.98)
2008-09 Reading†           -0.06     2008-09 Reading†           -0.08    2008-09 Reading†            -0.08
                          (0.95)                               (0.97)                               (0.97)
2009-10 Math               -0.04     Mean Grade                83.1      Mean Absence Rate           3.16
                          (1.01)                               (7.2)     (%)                        (5.22)
2009-10 Reading            -0.10
                          (1.01)
Observations              6353       Observations            145,203     Observations             230,550
(Student)                            (Student-Time                       (Student-Time
                                     Period; 4 Periods)                  Period; 6 Periods)
# of Students             6,353      # of Students            37,309     # of Students             38,425
# of Schools               85        # of Schools               88       # of Schools                88
† Prior year reading and math have 5908 observations in panel A, 50306 and 50377 observations,
respectively for panel B and 77316 and 77424 observations, respectively for panel C. Scores only available
for grades 4 - 5.
Standard deviations in parentheses
          Table 3 - Effect of In-Class Breakfast on 5th Grade Achievement - Including School Fixed Effects and Controls
                                   Full Sample     By Above/Below                     By Lagged Achievement Quintiles
                                                   Median Lagged
                                                    Achievement

                                                  Below        Above       Bottom      Second        Third       Fourth        Top
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                               A. Math
I. Reduced-Form Treatment Effect
                   Post*Treated      0.104**      0.144**       0.070       0.159      0.170**       0.036      0.114*        0.066
                                     (0.047)      (0.064)      (0.047)     (0.098)     (0.066)      (0.062)     (0.061)      (0.047)
                   Observations      40,317       21,096       19,221       7,708       8,921        8,863       8,132        6,693
II. Treatment Effect & Exposure Time
                   Post*Treated       0.120       0.220**       0.031      0.312**      0.145        0.100       0.026        0.077
                                     (0.087)      (0.111)      (0.075)     (0.150)     (0.128)      (0.100)     (0.087)      (0.075)
  Post*Exposure Time (Weeks)          -0.003       -0.015       0.008       -0.029      0.005        -0.013      0.018        -0.002
                                     (0.013)      (0.015)      (0.011)     (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.010)
                   Observations      40,317       21,096       19,221       7,708       8,921        8,863       8,132        6,693
                                                             B. Reading
I. Reduced-Form Treatment Effect
                   Post*Treated     0.106***     0.129***     0.083**      0.161*      0.101**     0.103**       0.082        0.071
                                     (0.032)      (0.045)     (0.036)      (0.096)     (0.041)     (0.042)      (0.056)      (0.046)
                   Observations      40,379       21,408       18,971       7,956       8,929        8,944       8,082        6,468
II. Treatment Effect & Exposure Time
                   Post*Treated      0.133*       0.180*        0.077      0.304*       0.105      0.176***      0.023        0.029
                                     (0.069)      (0.096)      (0.063)     (0.168)     (0.086)      (0.067)     (0.078)      (0.082)
  Post*Exposure Time (Weeks)          -0.005       -0.010       0.001       -0.027      -0.001       -0.014      0.012        0.008
                                     (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.009)     (0.028)     (0.014)      (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.013)
                   Observations      40,379       21,408       18,971       7,956       8,929        8,944       8,082        6,468
Data covers the 2003-04 through 2009-10 academic years. Achievement scores are standardized within grade and year. Due to a
change in the scaling procedure in 2009-10 we standarize using raw scores. "Treated" is an indicator for whether a school starts
ICB prior to the testing week. Student level covariates include student's race/ethnicity, gender, and economic status along with
year and grade level dummies. School level covariates include percent of students who are white, black, Hispanic, Native
American, Asian, economically disadvantaged, LEP, in vocational education, in special education, gifted, in bilingual education, in
each grade level, referred to an alternative disciplinary program, and school fixed-effects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                         Table 4: Effect of In-Class Breakfast on 5th Grade Achievement - By Student Characteristics
                                   Gender                                          Gender and Prior Achievement                                                      Ethnicity
                         Male                  Female                        Male                               Female                             Black             Hispanic          White
                                                                Below Median     Above Median       Below Median     Above Median
                                                                   Lagged           Lagged             Lagged           Lagged
                                                                Achievement       Achievement        Achievement      Achievement
                          (1)                    (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)                          (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                                                                   A. Math
   Post*Treated         0.107*                 0.100**               0.117              0.099*               0.163**            0.039              0.019             0.138***           0.098
                        (0.056)                (0.048)              (0.070)             (0.059)              (0.075)           (0.050)            (0.065)             (0.051)          (0.312)
   Observations         19,971                 20,346               10,288              9,683                 10,808           9,538               9,424              29,594            651
                                                                                                  B. Reading
   Post*Treated        0.107***             0.106***                0.092*             0.105**               0.182***           0.052              -0.051            0.152***           0.202
                        (0.040)              (0.038)                (0.052)            (0.050)                (0.061)          (0.044)            (0.055)             (0.035)          (0.279)
   Observations         20,007                 20,372               10,613              9,394                 10,795           9,577               9,446              29,631            654
                                                                                                                                                       †
                                  LEP Status                                Free Lunch                                              Body Mass Index
                       Not Lep                  LEP               Not Eligible         Eligible          Low Weight        Medium Weight        Overweight            Obese
                                                                                                        < 25 Percentile   25 - 84 Percentile 85 - 94 Percentile   ≥ 95 Percentile
                         (10)                   (11)                  (12)               (13)                (14)                (15)               (16)               (17)
                                                                                                   A. Math
 Post*Treated            0.050                 0.171**               0.055             0.135**               0.260*             -0.062             -0.044              0.063
                        (0.048)                (0.080)              (0.054)            (0.055)               (0.136)           (0.068)            (0.108)             (0.087)
 Observations           25,089                 15,228               12,918              27,399                 753             3,160               1,614               2,471
                                                                                                  B. Reading
 Post*Treated          0.070**                 0.155**              0.109**            0.102**                0.230             0.036              0.036               0.070
                       (0.034)                 (0.068)              (0.041)            (0.042)               (0.154)           (0.083)            (0.059)             (0.073)
 Observations           25,129                 15,250               12,944              27,435                 755             3,164               1,614               2,473
† BMI data only includes a subset of schools in 2008-09 and 2009-10.
Data covers the 2003-04 through 2009-10 academic years. Achievement scores are standardized within grade and year. Due to a change in the scaling procedure in 2009-10 we
standarize using raw scores. "Treated" is an indicator for whether a school starts ICB prior to the testing week. Student level covariates include student's race/ethnicity, gender,
and economic status along with year and grade level dummies. School level covariates include percent of students who are white, black, Hispanic, Native American, Asian,
economically disadvantaged, LEP, in vocational education, in special education, gifted, in bilingual education, in each grade level, referred to an alternative disciplinary
program, and school fixed-effects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
      Table 5: Achievement Placebo Test - Sample Limited to 2008-09 and Earlier and Set 2007-08 and 2008-09 as "Post" Period
                                                  No Controls or Fixed Effects
                                    Full Sample       By Above/Below                      By Lagged Achievement Quintiles
                                                      Median Lagged
                                                       Achievement

                                                     Below       Above        Bottom       Second        Third       Fourth         Top
                                         (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                 A. Math
I. Reduced-Form Treatment Effect
                    Post*Treated        0.006         0.056       -0.015       0.089        -0.007       0.054       -0.031         -0.009
                                       (0.043)       (0.064)     (0.045)      (0.095)      (0.071)      (0.059)      (0.055)       (0.044)
                          Treated       -0.025        0.011       0.027        -0.020       0.056        0.030        0.002         0.024
                                       (0.055)       (0.054)     (0.047)      (0.057)      (0.059)      (0.061)      (0.042)       (0.049)
                    Observations       34,506        17,946      16,463        6,537        7,595        7,585        6,974        5,718
II. Treatment Effect & Exposure Time
                    Post*Treated        -0.031        -0.015      -0.007       0.056        -0.106       -0.047      -0.046         0.054
                                       (0.063)       (0.104)     (0.066)      (0.168)      (0.099)      (0.095)      (0.078)       (0.068)
   Post*Exposure Time (Weeks)           0.007         0.010       -0.001       0.002        0.018        0.018        0.003         -0.011
                                       (0.009)       (0.015)     (0.010)      (0.026)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.010)
                          Treated       -0.014        -0.007      0.016        -0.042       0.046        0.004        0.014         -0.028
                                       (0.074)       (0.067)     (0.059)      (0.081)      (0.073)      (0.072)      (0.056)       (0.069)
         Exposure Time (Weeks)          -0.002        0.004       0.002        0.005        0.002        0.004       -0.003         0.010
                                       (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.008)       (0.010)
                    Observations       34,506        17,945      16,463        6,536        7,595        7,585        6,974        5,718
                                                                B. Reading
I. Reduced-Form Treatment Effect
                    Post*Treated        0.023         0.061       -0.001       0.060        0.034        0.080        0.000         -0.033
                                       (0.053)       (0.067)     (0.052)      (0.096)      (0.072)      (0.068)      (0.058)       (0.053)
                          Treated       -0.029        0.003       0.021        -0.019       0.035        0.019        0.000         0.025
                                       (0.056)       (0.055)     (0.047)      (0.055)      (0.060)      (0.059)      (0.043)       (0.049)
                    Observations       34,568        18,128      16,343        6,685        7,586        7,631        6,966        5,603
II. Treatment Effect & Exposure Time
                    Post*Treated        0.070         0.113       0.090        0.198        0.022        0.108        0.113         0.062
                                       (0.075)       (0.109)     (0.080)      (0.155)      (0.110)      (0.101)      (0.085)       (0.093)
   Post*Exposure Time (Weeks)           -0.009        -0.010      -0.017       -0.025       0.002        -0.005      -0.021*        -0.019
                                       (0.010)       (0.014)     (0.011)      (0.022)      (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.014)
                          Treated       -0.018        -0.034      -0.002       -0.072       0.003        -0.010      -0.005         -0.030
                                       (0.074)       (0.068)     (0.061)      (0.080)      (0.074)      (0.073)      (0.058)       (0.069)
         Exposure Time (Weeks)          -0.002        0.007       0.005        0.010        0.006        0.006        0.001         0.011
                                       (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.008)       (0.010)
                    Observations       34,568        18,128      16,343        6,685        7,586        7,631        6,966        5,603
Data covers the 2003-04 through 2007-08 academic years. Achievement scores are standardized within grade and year. Due to a change
in the scaling procedure in 2009-10 we standarize using raw scores. The "Post" indicator is set equal to one in 2007-08. "Treated" is an
indicator for whether a school starts ICB prior to the testing week. Schools treated in week 9 are dropped as this is the 5th grade testing
week and some schools may have postponed the start of ICB for 5th grade students. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                  Table 6: Tests of Impacts on School Level Exogenous Covariates
                          Female         Black       White      Hispanic    Economic         LEP        At Risk       Gifted      Special     Lagged       Lagged
                                                                           Disadvantage                                             Ed         Math        Reading



                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)          (11)
                                                                  A. Mean for All Grades in School
        Post*Treated       0.011         -0.006      0.002        0.001        0.003        -0.014       -0.001        -0.008      -0.007      -0.031        -0.031
                          (0.010)       (0.011)     (0.002)      (0.012)      (0.008)      (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.012)     (0.009)     (0.063)       (0.050)
              Treated      -0.007        0.084       -0.006       -0.047     0.031***       -0.057       -0.012     -0.048***     0.023**     -0.095*       -0.085*
                          (0.006)       (0.079)     (0.005)      (0.077)      (0.011)      (0.054)      (0.030)      (0.015)      (0.010)     (0.048)       (0.047)
        Observations        612           612         612         612           612          612          612           612         612         607           607
                                                                     B. Mean for 5th Grade Only
        Post*Treated       0.006         -0.011      0.004        0.004        0.006       -0.055*       -0.006        -0.024      0.000       -0.070        -0.030
                          (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.004)      (0.017)      (0.014)      (0.030)      (0.028)       (0.018)     (0.011)     (0.059)       (0.052)
              Treated      -0.003        0.087       -0.008       -0.052     0.032***       -0.023       0.027      -0.052***     0.026**     -0.094**      -0.084*
                          (0.007)       (0.081)     (0.006)      (0.078)      (0.011)      (0.053)      (0.027)      (0.018)      (0.012)      (0.046)      (0.046)
        Observations        599           599         599         599           599          599          599           599         599         599           599
Data covers the 2003-04 through 2009-10 academic years. Achievement scores are standardized within grade and year. Due to a change in the scaling procedure in
2009-10 we standarize using raw scores. "Treated" is an indicator for whether a school starts ICB prior to the testing week. Schools treated in week 9 are dropped as
this is the 5th grade testing week and some schools may have postponed the start of ICB for 5th grade students. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.
                       Table 7 - Specification Checks
                                               Math              Reading
1) No Lagged Achievement
      Post*Treated                             0.078             0.085*
                                              (0.060)            (0.046)
      Observations                            44,730             44,811
2) Exclude Week 5
      Post*Treated                            0.095*             0.097**
                                              (0.050)            (0.037)
      Observations                            34,048              34,105
3) Exclude Week 2
      Post*Treated                           0.097**             0.097**
                                             (0.047)             (0.037)
      Observations                            36,202              34,105
4) Limit to 2007-08 and Later
      Post*Treated                             0.062             0.092**
                                              (0.052)            (0.040)
      Observations                            17,236              17,298
5) No School Fixed Effects
      Post*Treated                             0.082             0.091**
                                              (0.050)            (0.037)
      Observations                            40,317              40,379
6) Exposure Time Effect on 4th Grade
      Post*Exposure Time (Weeks)                 -0.002               0.003
                                                (0.007)             (0.007)
       Observations                             43,033               43,139
Data covers the 2003-04 through 2009-10 academic years. Achievement
scores are standardized within grade and year. Due to a change in the scaling
procedure in 2009-10 we standarize using raw scores. "Treated" is an
indicator for whether a school starts ICB prior to the testing week. Student
level covariates include student's race/ethnicity, gender, and economic status
along with year and grade level dummies. School level covariates include
percent of students who are white, black, Hispanic, Native American, Asian,
economically disadvantaged, LEP, in vocational education, in special
education, gifted, in bilingual education, in each grade level, referred to an
alternative disciplinary program, and school fixed-effects. *, **, and ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                Table 8: Effect of In-Class Breakfast on Attendance Rate - Grades 1 to 5 with School Fixed-Effects
                                Full Sample    By Above/Below Median Prior Year                                         By Grade
                                                      Math Achievement
                                                    (4th & 5th Grade Only)
                                                   Below             Above                  1st            2nd             3rd             4th             5th
                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
I. Any Treatment
 Treated                           0.031             -0.009              0.071             0.018          -0.043          0.076           0.038           0.083
                                  (0.074)           (0.097)             (0.084)           (0.132)        (0.104)         (0.115)         (0.115)         (0.103)
II. Full or Partial Treatment
  Fully Treated                    0.071             0.002              0.246*             -0.035         -0.020          0.156           0.036           0.258
                                  (0.142)           (0.161)             (0.141)           (0.226)        (0.198)         (0.208)         (0.199)         (0.158)
  Partially Treated                0.031             -0.009              0.067             0.019          -0.044          0.075           0.038           0.082
                                  (0.074)           (0.097)             (0.084)           (0.131)        (0.103)         (0.114)         (0.114)         (0.103)
III. Treatment and Weeks of Exposure in Reporting Period
   Treated                         -0.052            0.048               -0.151            0.088          -0.128          -0.129          0.080           -0.168
                                  (0.089)           (0.144)             (0.119)           (0.164)        (0.146)         (0.147)         (0.152)         (0.162)
   Weeks of Exposure               0.025             -0.018            0.068**             -0.021         0.026           0.063           -0.013         0.078*
                                  (0.025)           (0.033)            (0.030)            (0.044)        (0.041)         (0.042)         (0.038)         (0.040)
Observations                     225,901            40,755              35,020            49,091          46,301         45,773          45,127          39,609
Data covers six reporting periods in 2009-10. Attendance rate is calculated as the number of days present divided by the number of days enrolled during a
reporting period. In-class breakfast (ICB) phases in during periods 4, 5 and 6. "Treated" is an indicator set to one during any period when a student's school of
record - defined by school attended in October - has at least one week of ICB. "Fully Treated" equals one if the school has all weeks in a period with ICB while
"Partially Treated" equals one if the school has at least one but not all weeks in a period with ICB. "Weeks of Exposure" denote the number of weeks during a
reporting period for which a student's school has ICB. Covariates include student's race/ethnicity, gender, and economic status along with reporting period and
grade level dummies. School level covariates are omitted as they are absorbed by school fixed effects. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
level, respectively.
                                  Table 9: Effect of In-Class Breakfast on Grades - Grades 1 to 5 with School Fixed-Effects
                                Full Sample    By Above/Below Median Prior                                        By Grade
                                                  Year Math Achievement
                                                  (4th & 5th Grades Only)
                                                  Below           Above               1st            2nd             3rd             4th             5th
                                    (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
I. Any Treatment
 Treated                           0.000           0.005             -0.004          -0.017          0.004          0.031           -0.019          -0.011
                                  (0.031)         (0.053)           (0.044)         (0.065)         (0.065)        (0.062)         (0.065)         (0.064)
II. Full or Partial Treatment
  Fully Treated                    0.025           0.061             -0.020          0.023           0.016          0.081           0.006           -0.022
                                  (0.056)         (0.093)           (0.081)         (0.115)         (0.114)        (0.100)         (0.123)         (0.120)
  Partially Treated                -0.010          -0.018            0.002           -0.034          -0.002         0.010           -0.028          -0.007
                                  (0.024)         (0.046)           (0.037)         (0.050)         (0.050)        (0.052)         (0.051)         (0.049)
III. Treatment and Weeks of Exposure in Grading Period
   Treated                         0.038           0.070             0.097           0.024           -0.018         0.096           0.033           0.030
                                  (0.052)         (0.110)           (0.090)         (0.114)         (0.097)        (0.098)         (0.126)         (0.101)
   Weeks of Exposure               -0.006          -0.011            -0.016          -0.007          0.003          -0.010          -0.008          -0.007
                                  (0.006)         (0.012)           (0.010)         (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.014)         (0.011)
Observations                     286,105           51,040           44,807          62,408          59,004          58,713         55,718          50,262
Data covers eight grading periods in 2008-09 and 2009-10. Grades are calculated as the mean numerical grade (on a scale of 50 to 100) over all courses. In-
class breakfast (ICB) phases in during periods 7 and 8. "Treated" is an indicator set to one during any period when a student's school of record - defined by
school attended in October - has at least one week of ICB. "Fully Treated" equals one if the school has all weeks in a period with ICB while "Partially
Treated" equals one if the school has at least one but not all weeks in a period with ICB. "Weeks of Exposure" denote the number of weeks during a grading
period for which a student's school has ICB. Covariates include student's race/ethnicity, gender, and economic status along with grading period and grade
level dummies. School level covariates include percent of students who are white, black, Hispanic, Native American, Asian, economically disadvantaged,
LEP, in vocational education, in special education, gifted, in bilingual education, in each grade level, referred to an alternative disciplinary program, and
school fixed-effects. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
