                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INCONSISTENT REGULATORS:
                                 EVIDENCE FROM BANKING

                                           Sumit Agarwal
                                            David Lucca
                                             Amit Seru
                                          Francesco Trebbi

                                        Working Paper 17736
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17736


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




The authors would like to thank John Cochrane and Randy Kroszner for detailed comments. We also
thank Gadi Barlevy, Paul Beaudry, Matilde Bombardini, Richard Crump, Doug Diamond, Gene Fama,
Mark Flannery, Gary Gorton, Bev Hirtle, Cathy Lemieux, Thomas Lemieux, Anna Paulson, Raghuram
Rajan, Uday Rajan, Rich Rosen, Jesse Shapiro, Robert Vishny, and Luigi Zingales, as well as seminar
participants at Chicago Booth Finance, Chicago Booth Microeconomics, the Chicago Fed, NY Fed,
SFU, and UBC for useful discussions. Caitlin Kearns, Tanya Mann, and Justin McPhee provided outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Sumit Agarwal, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inconsistent Regulators: Evidence From Banking
Sumit Agarwal, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 17736
January 2012, Revised January 2012
JEL No. G21,G28

                                              ABSTRACT

US state chartered commercial banks are supervised alternately by state and federal regulators. Each
regulator supervises a given bank for a fixed time period according to a predetermined rotation schedule.
We use unique data to examine differences between federal and state regulators for these banks. Federal
regulators are significantly less lenient, downgrading supervisory ratings about twice as frequently
as state supervisors. Under federal regulators, banks report higher nonperforming loans, more delinquent
loans, higher regulatory capital ratios, and lower ROA. There is a higher frequency of bank failures
and problem-bank rates in states with more lenient supervision relative to the federal benchmark. Some
states are more lenient than others. Regulatory capture by industry constituents and supervisory staff
characteristics can explain some of these differences. These findings suggest that inconsistent oversight
can hamper the effectiveness of regulation by delaying corrective actions and by inducing costly variability
in operations of regulated entities.


Sumit Agarwal                                        Amit Seru
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                      Booth School of Business
230 South LaSalle Street                             University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60604                                    5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
ushakri@yahoo.com                                    Chicago, IL 60637
                                                     and NBER
David Lucca                                          amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street                                    Francesco Trebbi
New York, NY 10045                                   University of British Columbia
david.lucca@ny.frb.org                               1873 East Mall
                                                     Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
                                                     Canada
                                                     and NBER
                                                     ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
1.   Introduction


At least since Pigou (1938), economists have been interested in effective regulatory design. A
critical element of this design involves assessing how regulatory institutions themselves affect
the implementation of regulations. This is a complex question, as it often entails understanding
the interactions among several regulatory agencies with overlapping jurisdictions, as well as the
degree to which they are consistent in implementing the rules. Several anecdotes suggest that
inconsistent oversight by regulators could hinder regulatory effectiveness, none clearer than the
demise of Washington Mutual Bank (WaMu), a $300 billion thrift and the sixth largest US bank
at the time of its failure.1 According to a formal congressional investigation, WaMu’s failure –
the largest bank failure in US history – was, to a large extent, due to delayed corrective action
that resulted from inconsistent oversight by its regulators, the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).2 Despite the relevance of this issue, little
systematic evidence exists on whether there is differential implementation of regulation by
regulators – in banking or other industries – its drivers, or its consequences. We attempt to fill
this gap by analyzing supervisory decisions of US banking regulators.

The current regulatory structure in US banking provides a convenient laboratory for studying the
issue of regulatory inconsistency because it involves dual supervision of institutions – i.e.,
supervision by both state and federal regulators. Using a natural experiment to circumvent the
issue of banks self-selecting into different regulatory environments, we provide evidence of
inconsistent implementation of identical rules by federal and state regulators. This inconsistency
arises due to differences in the institutional design and incentives of these regulators.
Furthermore, we show that this inconsistency may be costly, as it induces variability in bank
operations, and that it may hamper the effectiveness of regulation by delaying corrective action.

Inconsistent implementation of regulation by state and federal regulators relates broadly to the
debate on effectiveness of dual regulatory structure that has taken place in several industries,
including banking (see Scott 1977; Dixon and Weiser 2006). The fallout from the recent
financial crisis has triggered massive regulatory reform in banking (see Brunnermeier et al.
(2009)). However, most of these reforms have targeted activities that should be regulated, while
the discussion on reforming the current dual structure of supervision in banking has been less
active. This paucity of discussion is not due to the lack of arguments for and against the current

1
  More anecdotes on ineffective regulation due to inconsistent supervision by US state and federal banking
regulators are available in Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs (1994). There are also abundant
examples of regulatory impediments due to inconsistencies between state and federal regulators in other industries
(see for example Lane (2004) for securities regulation, Dixon and Weiser (2006) for telecommunication regulation
and Esworthy (2008) for regulations on pollution control).
2
  Absent a deal between the FDIC and JP Morgan Chase to take over WaMu’s assets, this failure would have
exhausted the entire Deposit Insurance Fund. More detail on the tussle between the OTS and FDIC in the run up to
WaMu’s failure in September 2008 is available in the Office of Inspector General (2010) and the congressional
investigation report (Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2011)).
                                                         1
regulatory structure.3 On the one hand, proponents argue that informational advantage of state
supervisors coupled with broader perspective of federal supervisors enhances the nature of
decision making. In addition, having competing supervisors allows for lower political
interference, giving banks the choice of picking the less “tyrannical” regulator and a more
efficient allocation in the sense of Tiebout (1956). On the other hand, critics suggest that such a
complex supervisory structure may create coordination and informational problems between
entities. It may also produce regulatory inconsistencies and result in a “race to the bottom” in
terms of regulatory laxity. Lack of empirical evidence validating or refuting these claims has
implied that the debate on the effectiveness of the current regulatory structure has been muted
and largely informed by anecdotes.

The lack of empirical evidence stems from two main difficulties. First, it is hard to find
comparable metrics of behavior across the myriad of dimensions affected by different regulators
overseeing different firms, in particular complex entities such as banks. To overcome this issue,
we rely on the easy-to-compare results of safety and soundness on-site examinations by
regulators, which are crucial micro-prudential supervisory tools. These examinations culminate
in the assignment of a CAMELS rating, which summarizes the conditions of the bank on a
numerical scale. Second, and perhaps more challenging, it is difficult to tell if a bank picked the
supervisor more suited to actions it intended to undertake or the regulator itself changed the
actions taken by a bank. More precisely, a bank’s regulatory setting is not random, rather it is
determined endogenously through a charter choice, and thus, driven by observable and
unobservable bank characteristics.

Our identification strategy exploits a legally determined rotation policy that assigns federal and
state supervisors to the same banks at exogenously predetermined time intervals. This allows us
to circumvent the issue of banks sorting into different regulatory settings. The policy on
alternating examinations was introduced in the Riegle Act of 1994 and subsequent regulatory
provisions with the goal of reducing administrative requirements for insured depository
institutions (that is, eliminating the burden of facing both federal and state examination in the
same year). The law assigns state chartered commercial banks to fixed 12-month or 18-month
rotations between state and federal supervisors. In particular, the rotation involves state
regulators and the FDIC for non-member banks (NMBs) and state regulators and the Federal
Reserve (Fed) for state member banks of the Federal Reserve System (SMBs). SMB and NMB
entities combined cover a substantial portion of the US banking industry, about 30 percent in
terms of total assets and 80 percent in terms of the number of commercial banks.4



3
 See House Committee on Banking and Currency.(1965), Scott (1977), Butler and Macey (1987).
4
 Unfortunately, this excludes interesting subsamples, such as national banks, primarily overseen by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and thrifts, overseen by the Office of Thrift Supervision until 2011:Q1, and
currently by the OCC. We discuss the applicability of our results to this set of banks in Section 6.
                                                         2
The central contribution of this paper lies in its empirical design and it is best understood by this
simple example. Consider a bank (B) that can be supervised by either a state regulator (S) or by a
federal regulator (Fed). An ideal experiment assessing differences in supervisory decisions
would assign B to both S and Fed simultaneously and consequently track differences in their
actions. Our empirical design mimics this ideal experiment closely. In particular, S and Fed are
alternatively assigned to B every t periods, with t predetermined by our policy instrument and not
chosen by B. This allows us to compare supervisory decisions within the same bank and estimate
causal effects as if we were evaluating the effect of S and Fed on B concurrently. Given that the
assignment of regulators is governed by a predetermined policy instrument, we are able to track
not only the nature of supervisory decisions of S and Fed regarding B, but also the consequences
of these decisions on bank B’s actual operations.

In our main tests we use unique data to assess the difference in supervisory activities of federal
and state regulators. These activities involve examining depository institutions to evaluate safety
and soundness conditions. The process culminates in a compliance report for each bank, whose
assessment is summarized by a CAMELS rating, an acronym for its six components: capital
adequacy, asset quality, management and administration, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to
market risk. We identify a systematic effect of supervisor identity on these ratings. Federal
supervisors are significantly more likely to downgrade CAMELS ratings for the same bank
relative to state supervisors (and, in the case of the Federal Reserve, they are also more cautious
in upgrading these ratings). These effects are larger for Fed-state supervised SMBs when
compared with FDIC-state supervised NMBs. In addition, the tougher stance by federal
regulators is subsequently mimicked by their state counterparts, which do not appear to
systematically overturn federal decisions. These results are quantitatively large, as federal
supervisors appear twice as likely to downgrade relative to state supervisors. We also examine
which of the subcomponents of the rating are responsible for these effects and find that the
effects are present for all subcomponents.

Next, we examine if banks respond to the heightened threat of a downgrade stemming from a
federal supervisor by changing their operations. We find evidence of substantial changes in
banking operations following federal supervision. In particular, banks report higher capital ratios,
a drop in their profitability, and a worsening of their asset quality, as measured by the ratio of
delinquent and nonperforming loans, in presence of federal regulators. We interpret these results
as reflective of the supervisory authority being used by federal regulators in making a bank take
corrective actions to address the problems highlighted in the examination. Interestingly, several
of these effects are also detectible as the federal supervisory cycle, whose timing is pre-
determined, approaches. This evidence suggests that banks also undertake "window dressing" in
anticipation of tougher federal regulators. These results are consistent with an earlier literature on
the informational value of bank examinations in inducing corrective adjustments of a bank’s


                                                  3
books (Berger and Davies, 1998; Gunther and Moore, 2003) and complement it by showing that
these effects are evident in a cleanly identified empirical setting.

We further examine whether the more lenient supervision behavior displayed by state regulators
is costly. We find that states with more lenient state regulators relative to their federal
counterparts also have higher bank failure rates and problem-bank rates (i.e., rates of banks close
to failing) in our sample period. Although, it is difficult to assess whether a less lenient
supervisory stance is good or bad, this analysis does suggest that there are adverse consequences
of state regulators’ leniency. When evaluating the downside of stringency, we do not find
support for the hypothesis that tougher regulators constrain supply of new loans.

We end our analysis by showing that there is substantial regional heterogeneity in the leniency of
state regulators relative to their federal counterparts and by examining reasons behind these
differences. One reason for a softer stance by state supervisors could be that they may be
“captured” by the constituents they oversee. In particular, since banks only pay assessment fees
to state regulators (Blair and Kushmeider (2006)), it is possible that state supervisors maintain a
more lenient stance to ensure that banks do not shift out of a given state in search of another state
with even softer state regulators. We find some suggestive evidence supporting this conjecture.
The federal-state difference in supervisory downgrades increases with the size of the bank that is
being supervised. This should be expected, as state supervisors may care more about bigger
banks since assessment fees are proportional to bank size. We also find evidence that supervisory
staff characteristics may explain some cross-state differences. Although our evidence is far from
conclusive, we view it as a reasonable first attempt at systematically investigating and
quantitatively assessing the sources of heterogeneity across federal and state regulators.

Overall, while the paper falls short of providing a definitive answer as to whether the US dual
supervisory system is optimal, to our knowledge it is the only paper that clearly documents
inconsistent implementation of the same set of rules by different regulators within this system.
This is a consequential finding, since inconsistencies between regulators can delay corrective
regulatory actions (e.g., the case of WaMu) and induce variability in bank operations. Moreover,
inconsistent implementation may potentially reduce the transparency of bank balance-sheets for
agents in the economy who are unaware of the source of this variability, as the exact alternation
schedule of regulators for each bank is not known to the public. As shown in Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap (2008), lack of timeliness of corrective banking actions as well as opaque balance-
sheet information can be costly and can adversely impact real allocations. Importantly, these
adverse effects are present in our sample regardless of whether the inconsistency between federal
and state regulators is a result of deliberate design or an unplanned feature of the current
regulatory structure. In other words, delays in taking corrective action and reduction in




                                                 4
transparency of balance-sheets can be costly whether, loosely speaking, a possible "bad cop/good
cop" implicit arrangement between federal and state regulators we uncover is intended or not.5

Our work is broadly related to several strands of the economics and finance literature. First, it is
most directly related to work on regulatory design. The issue of the design of regulation spans
from its early public interest roots to the Chicago theory of Stigler (1971) and Peltzman (1976),
who argued that regulation is often captured by the industry it is meant to regulate and is
designed primarily for insiders’ benefit, to the rent seeking theory of regulation (e.g. Shleifer and
Vishny (1999).6 Most of this work (including in the context of banking) debates the pros and
cons of different regulatory structures, but provides surprisingly little systematic empirical
evidence. Our work contributes to this literature by highlighting systematic regulatory
inconsistencies and tracing their consequences – that is, their effects on banks' behavior.

Second, and more relevant to the issue of regulatory inconsistencies, this paper speaks to a
relatively established literature (mostly concerning industrial organization) that focuses on
regulatory consistency and regulatory uncertainty.7 Not unlike our paper, this literature also
studies some sources of regulatory inconsistencies (e.g. elected versus appointed regulators
(Besley and Coate (2003)) as well as their consequences (e.g. differential firm productivity).

Third, this paper is connected to studies on regulatory arbitrage (Rosen, 2003; Rosen, 2005;
Rezende, 2011) that suggests that banks actively shop for regulators who are likely to be softer
on them through different channels such as charter changes, mergers with other banks,
supervisory ratings, or changing their location of incorporation. Other work in this area (Kane,
2000; Calomiris, 2006) also discusses changes in regulatory standards (constituting a "race to the
bottom") due to competition between regulators (on account of "regulator shopping" by those
regulated). In general, this arbitraging behavior by banks may induce a potentially sizeable
selection bias in examining the effects of regulatory actions. Our empirical design circumvents
this issue and provides causal estimates of the influence of regulators.8

5
  The Riegle Act was predominantly motivated by red tape reduction, in no part of its text does it appear focused on
the creation of a deliberate optimal mix of more and less lenient regulators. Our personal discussion of the matter
with several supervision and regulation experts also appears to strongly support the view that this is not an
aforethought feature of the regulatory structure. In addition, to the best of these practitioners’ knowledge, although
inconsistent implementation conforms to their priors, no specific gain (e.g. extra information conceded by the bank)
is commonly recognized as originating from such out-of-step behavior of the federal and state regulators.
6
  The public interest roots go back as far as Pigou (1938). For a comprehensive review of the public interest theory
see Laffont and Tirole (1993), which also focuses on a modern take on regulation, encompassing the role of
asymmetric information. Also related is the work on banking regulation by Dewatripont and Tirole (1994); Boot and
Thakor (1993); and Hellman, Murdock and Stiglitz (2000) among the others. The issue of centralized versus
decentralized regulation, often discussing state versus federal regulation in the US context, has received theoretical
attention in Martimort (1999), Laffont and Martimort (1999), and Laffont and Pouyet (2004) among the others.
7
  See Brennan and Schwartz (1982a, b); Viscusi (1983); Prager (1989); and Teisberg (1993).
8
  The literature on regulatory shopping and a race to the bottom extends beyond banking. For instance, there is
literature on international trade that provides evidence that firms shop for the least stringent regulator. Similarly,
there is a growing literature on shopping of rating agencies by issuers of mortgage backed securities (e.g., Bolton,
Frexias and Shapiro, 2011).
                                                          5
Finally, our work complements the empirical literature on the effects of banking regulation and
supervision. Such work encompasses studies on the role of regulation and supervision in well-
established banking and financial sectors of developed economies (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996;
Berger and Hannan, 1998; Kroszner and Strahan, 1999), as well as in developing financial
sectors across the globe.9

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the structure of US
banking supervision and the data. Then, in Section 3, we highlight our empirical strategy. Next,
in Section 4, we report our main results and robustness checks. In Section 5, we explore the
likely sources of the differences in regulatory behavior reported. We discuss the wider
applicability of our findings in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes.

2.   US Banking Regulation, Alternating Supervision, and Data

2.1 An Overview of US Banking Regulation
The US banking industry has evolved into a complex and fragmented system that reflects
America's historical tension between centralizing and decentralizing political forces. Since the
National Bank Act of 1863, commercial banks have had to deal with a dual supervisory system,
under which they are chartered and supervised both by federal and state-level entities.10 This
system has often been praised by policymakers as playing a key role in financial innovation, as
federal and state regulating bodies compete with one another and thus trim unnecessary rules
(Scott, 1977). In addition, commentators have argued that state regulators can leverage their local
knowledge to improve their supervisory decisions. At the same time several policy makers and
commentators have criticized the dual system for the resulting fragmentation of the banking
sector and for the risk of a “competition for laxity” generated among bank regulators (for
example Fed Chairman Arthur Burns, 1974). This latter issue has been actively debated in the
past –most recently around the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999– and has again resurfaced in
the aftermath of the 2008-09 crisis (see Senator Dodd’s speech in Senate Banking Committee
hearing in September, 2009).

In the current system banks can choose between a state and national charter. With a state charter,
they can also decide whether or not to be members of the Federal Reserve System. The three
different types of commercial bank charters correspond to three different primary federal
regulators: the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), instituted in 1863; the Federal

9
  The literature on the latter is vast. See Beck et al. (2000); Barth et al. (2004) among the others.
10
   Prior to 1863 state commercial banking was the primary form of banking. Commercial banks are the predominant
form of depository institutions in the United States and are the focus of this paper. The other two main classes of
depository institutions are savings banks (also known as thrifts because they historically offered only savings
accounts), which generally specialize in real estate lending and credit unions which are cooperative financial
institutions. Among other types of depository institutions in the United States are the following: Edge corporations,
branches and the branches and agencies of foreign banks.
                                                          6
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), instituted in 1933; and the Federal Reserve System
(Fed), instituted in 1913. Federally chartered banks, also known as national banks (NA) are
primarily supervised (and chartered) by the OCC. State banks are supervised by their chartering
state banking departments, in conjunction with the Federal Reserve, if they are members of the
Federal Reserve System (as we stated before, these banks are called state-member banks, SMBs).
Otherwise, state banks are supervised by their respective chartering state banking departments
along with the FDIC, since these banks are not a member of the Federal Reserve System (i.e.,
these banks are referred to as non-member banks, NMBs as we explained earlier). In general, the
regulator that is in charge of regulating and supervising an entity is also a function of its line of
business. Figure 1 depicts the structure of supervision and regulation for US commercial banks
and thrifts.

Until recently different charters implied notable differences in permissible activities as well as
regulatory requirements. For example, through the early 1980s non-member banks were not
subject to reserve requirements (according to the Depository Institutions Deregulation and
Monetary Control Act of 1980), their lending limits could differ significantly across states, their
ability to branch interstate differed, and the list of activities (e.g. providing insurance) that they
were permitted was quite diverse. However, over the years, many of the differences across
requirements and charters have disappeared as regulatory and charters have converged. Many
commentators believe that the main drivers of charter choice now are direct regulatory costs and
the bank’s perception of the regulator’s accessibility.11 Small banks tend to prefer state charters,
as applications are streamlined and supervisory fees are lower (Blair and Kushmeider (2006)).
Larger banks, especially those that aim at branching inter-state, tend to prefer national charters
(see, e.g., Bierce (2007)).12 As of the first quarter of 2011, about 1,350 NAs accounted for 70
percent of all commercial bank assets; about 800 SMBs accounted for about 15 percent of all
banks assets, and around 4,200 NMBs accounted for the remaining 15 percent of all assets.

Banking micro-prudential supervision in the United States relies on two main pillars: off- and
on-site monitoring. Off-site monitoring requires all depository institutions to file quarterly
“Reports of Condition and Income”, or Call Reports. Regulators use Call Reports to monitor a
bank’s financial conditions between on-site examinations. On-site “safety and soundness”
examinations are used to verify the content of Call Reports and to gather additional in-depth
information regarding the safety and soundness of the supervised entity as well as its compliance
with regulations. In an on-site examination, supervisors read additional documents from the
bank, review and evaluate its loan portfolio, and meet with the bank’s management. Supervisors

11
   Office of Inspector General (2002). For a cautionary tale concerning the OTS "accessibility" see Cyran (2009) and
Office of Inspector General (2010). In our sample for analysis, state banking departments often mention higher
"accessibility" among the main advantages of a state charter versus a national one. (See for example.
http://www.banking.state.tx.us/corp/charter/benefits.htm )
12
   See Rosen (2003) for possible determinants of charter changes. Blair and Kushmeider (2006) discuss the funding
of supervisors.
                                                         7
comment on areas that must be improved; and depending on the bank’s condition, they also
discuss with management the need for informal or formal supervisory actions. Informal actions
are established through a commitment from the bank to solve the deficiencies identified in the
form of a memorandum of understanding or a bank board resolution. Formal actions are more
severe. They include cease-and-desist orders, suspensions or removals of banks’ senior
management, and terminations of insurance.

These examinations culminate in the assignment by a team of examiners of a CAMELS rating,
which, summarizes the conditions of the bank (broken down into six components—for capital
adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk). Ratings
for each of the six components and the final rating are on a 1 to 5 scale, with the lower numbers
indicating fewer/and or lesser regulatory concerns. Banks with a rating of 1 or 2 are considered
to present few (if any) significant regulatory concerns, whereas those with 3, 4, and 5 ratings
present moderate to extreme levels of regulatory concerns.

Not only are these ratings the central summary measure of banking supervision that is easily
comparable, they are also relevant for several important policy decisions. In particular,
CAMELS are used to determine decisions such as how high to set insurance premiums on
deposit insurance by the FDIC, whether to lend credit to financial institutions by the Fed (lender
of last resort), whether to make licensing, branching and merger approvals, and whether to allow
banks to participate in government programs, like Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and
small business lending programs.

2.2 Alternating US Banking Supervision: Policy and Coverage
Since the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 federal bank
supervisors are required to conduct on-site examinations every 12 months, unless their assets fall
below a minimum threshold, in which case the exams are conducted every 18 months. This
threshold has changed over time and since 2007 stands at $500 million for SMBs and NMBs
(FRB (2008) and FDIC (2002)).13 Federal supervisors had begun coordinating with state banking
departments so that they could share examination results since the 1980s. Section 349 of the
Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 required the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) to issue guidelines for determining the
acceptability of state examination reports as substitutes for federal examinations.

The aim of these rules was to reduce the regulatory burden on state chartered banks under dual
supervision system, by substituting a federal examination with a state examination. The rules
were issued in Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (1995) and the Federal
Reserve Board and the FDIC made a formal nationwide state/federal supervisory agreement with
the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), a national organization of participating state
13
     See the US Code Title 12, §1820 (d. 3) for an explicit codification.
                                                             8
bank regulators.14 Since the issuance of Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
(1995), acceptable state reports became eligible substitutes for federal reports; that is, after the
FFIEC rules were issued, federal and state regulators could take turns every 12 months (or 18
months for smaller banks) examining state chartered banks.

As noted previously, the FFIEC rules established that each federal regulator independently
determines whether to accept the state examination results based on the type of reports produced
by the state examiners, as well as measures of minimum state banking department budgets and
the state banking department’s accreditation by the CSBS. The FDIC/Fed cooperative
agreements cover the vast majority of states. As of 1995, both federal agencies separately had
already entered into informal and formal arrangements, or working agreements, with most state
banking departments, determining the types of banks that would be examined on an alternating
independent basis or on a joint examination basis, among other matters.15 While our results are
quite insensitive to the choice of the starting period after the FFIEC guidelines of 1995 were
issued, we do lack a precise date on which the policy starts operating. We conservatively allow
for a one year breaking-in period and begin our analysis as of 1996:Q1 to ensure that
idiosyncrasies in initial program implementation would disappear (e.g., the federal regulators
could have preferred to let stronger banks start the rotation program first, allowing less robust
institutions to join the rotation program later on). By 1996:Q1 rotations of supervisors across the
vast majority of states are pervasive in the data. Our sample ends in 2011:Q1.

Alternating examinations are not available for a subsample of banks. Only banks that at the most
recent examination were assessed to have a composite CAMELS rating of either 1 or 2 are part
of the alternating program. Only SMBs with an asset size of less than $10 billion are part of the
program. In our sample of analysis, we focus on SMBs satisfying these criteria, since only for
such banks is the supervisory rotation policy predetermined. The FDIC conducts alternating
independent exams only for NMBs with an asset size of less than $250 million, representing
more than 80 percent of all NMBs. Bank examinations of larger NMBs are run on a joint basis
with the state examiner—in such cases, a mix of state and FDIC examiners participates in the on-
site visits. However, even in the case of joint NMB examinations, only one agency is the “lead
agency” in assigning the CAMELS. We include such joint examinations in our sample, but our
results are unaffected when excluding NMBs above $250 million.




14
   These rules are summarized in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2002) and Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (2008)—two manuals for commercial bank examinations.
15
   Formal agreement dates by states are staggered over our sample period. According to Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (2004), all state banking departments with the exception of seven had signed formal cooperative
agreements by 2004, with the number falling to four by 2007. In 2004, the state banking departments without formal
agreements with federal regulators were in Alaska, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
and South Carolina. See http://www.csbs.org/development/accreditation/Pages/default.aspx . See also Rezende
(2010) for a discussion.
                                                        9
We further filter the sample by excluding: targeted examinations as well as exams where all
subcomponents of the CAMELS rating are not scored or available. We also exclude concurrent
examinations because of their exceptional nature relative to the routine safety and soundness
examinations which are our focus. Even when meeting all the preceding criteria for inclusion in
our alternating supervision sample, we observe a small fraction (about 10 percent) of banks that
do not display any rotation during our sample period. These banks with no signs of supervision
rotation do not show up systematically within the sample—and they are spread out across states
and over time. These banks appear to be mostly certain types of depository institutions with
peculiar purposes (e.g. Industrial Loan Companies (ILCs)) or de novo banks. Since these banks
do not satisfy our condition for identification that requires exogenous rotation of regulators, we
exclude them from our sample. We note, however, that our results are unaffected by including
these specific banks in our analysis.

2.3 Data and Descriptive Statistics on Rotation
We use a unique dataset, the National Information Center of the Federal Reserve System,
covering the time period from 1996 through 2010, of all on-site examination of safety and
soundness conducted by banking regulators. The data contain detailed information about
financial information of depository institutions, regulated and select non-regulated institutions, as
well as other institutions that have a regulatory or reporting relationship with the Federal Reserve
System. The key data for the purposes of this study are unique bank identifiers, the examiner
identity (e.g. FDIC, Fed, States, OCC, and Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)), the exam date,
and most importantly the composite CAMELS rating and its components. In contrast to several
papers that have explored the determinants of supervisory ratings at the bank holding level (e.g.
Berger, Davies and Flannery, 1998), we employ the ratings at the level of the commercial bank,
which is the entity level at which we observe the examiner rotations.

We merge this information with balance sheet measures of bank profitability, profitability and
asset quality from Call Reports. Our main Call Reports variables are: Tier1 risk-based capital
ratio, leverage ratio (Tier1 capital as a share of total risk-unweighted assets), return on assets,
share of non-performing loans to total loans, and the delinquency rate of the loan portfolio.
Delinquent loans include loans 30+ days past due and loans in nonaccrual status, and
nonperforming loans are 90+ delinquent and loans in nonaccrual status. In some of our analysis
we will also dissect delinquency and nonperforming loans for various asset classes in a bank’s
portfolio (e.g., commercial real estate, residential real estate, and commercial and industrial
loans).

Importantly for our analysis, we define a supervisory cycle as the time between when a regulator
conducts its on-site examination and when the alternate regulator examines the bank, with the
time period lasting either 12 or 18 months depending on the bank’s asset size (as discussed in
Section 2.2). In our regressions, we use this definition to assess the relationship between changes

                                                 10
in supervisor identity and CAMELS ratings as well as bank variables. Because the CAMELS
rating does not change between exams, doing so captures how supervisory rating changes across
different regulators. Bank balance sheet variables, instead, can vary each quarter. This implies
that using our definition of supervisory cycle in this analysis compares the average effect on a
variable across quarters following a federal or a state examination. We revert to this issue in
Section 4.2.

Summary statistics for our sample of rotating banks as of 1996:Q1 appear in Table 1. We present
the descriptive statistics on CAMELS ratings, as well as bank balance-sheet measures such as
delinquencies, non-performing loans, and ROA for both SMBs and NMBs split up by whether
they were assigned to federal or state regulators at the start of our sample. These statistics
provide sample moments that will be useful for interpreting the magnitude of our regression
coefficients.

We provide the length of duration between supervisory rotations in Table 2. A vast majority of
banks display supervisory rotations between two and eight quarters. This description matches
well the regulatory restriction of four-quarter to six-quarter rotations discussed earlier. In
particular, NMBs are subject to less frequent examinations and rotations, about one every 18
months. This is in line with the guidelines discussed earlier since NMBs tend to be smaller banks
(mean assets size of NMBs in our sample in 1996:Q1 is $95 million). Being larger, SMBs are
subject to standard 12-month rotations in most cases (mean assets size of SMBs in our sample in
1996:Q1 is $160 million). We investigate the reasons for shorter rotation spells and find that they
are mostly accounted for by institutions that exit our sample because of the large wave of bank
mergers that occurred over the past 15 years. The relaxation of intrastate and interstate branching
regulation (culminating in the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994) and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of
1999 were primary facilitators of this M&A wave, a trend that we find is unrelated to the timing
of the supervisory rotation cycle.16

Regulation spells may also be shorter because of banks switching charters or relocating their
operations (Rosen (2005)). These instances are fairly limited in the data, and similar to M&A
activity, we find relocations and charter switches to be unrelated to the timing or identity of the
supervisor in rotation cycles. We also occasionally find idiosyncratic cases of longer rotation
cycles, but their exclusion does not affect our results in any substantive way. Discussions with
senior executives in supervision and regulation suggested that most of these idiosyncrasies might
be due to staffing issues, both at the state and federal level.17 Often a longer-than-expected

16
   Prior research has investigated the reasons for this trend and found it to be reflective of the weakening of small
bank special interests vis-à-vis large banks in light of the introduction of new technologies in lending and deposit-
taking. For a complete discussion see Kroszner and Strahan (1999).
17
   Examples included instances when the examiner assigned to a specific bank was on leave or vacation at the
predetermined exam time and when the assigned examiner was still involved with on-site examinations at another
institution.
                                                          11
rotation time with one regulator would be offset by a subsequent shorter rotation time with the
alternating regulator; this tendency to rebalance the rotation times would be in line with
regulatory restrictions. Figure 2 reports the kernel densities of the rotation spells graphically,
illustrating compliance to the rotation profiles required by law for SMBs and NMBs. Our
interviews with experts in banking supervision and regulation confirmed a strict implementation
of the rotation policy that is consistent with this pattern.

Finally, Table 1 also allows us to investigate the nature of assignment of banks to state versus
federal regulators at the inception of the rotation policy. It reports t-tests for differences in means
across federally and state regulated banks involved in the rotation process as of the first quarter
of 1996. Broadly, we find that banks assigned to state regulators versus federal look similar in
the cross-section at inception. We fail to reject equality of means in the vast majority of the
controlling variables. Occasionally, Table 1 reports some differences along certain dimensions,
indicating potential deviations from pure random assignment. In the SMB sample, we reject the
equality of means for ROA alone; in the NMB sample we reject the null of equality of means for
nonperforming loans, delinquency rates, and leverage. These cross-sectional differences are,
however, quantitatively small. Figures 3 and 4 plot the kernel densities for characteristics of
banks assigned to federal and state supervisors as of 1996:Q1 and confirm this to be the case –
the difference in the two densities are barely noticeable along any dimension. We find similar
evidence after exploring successive dates right after 1996:Q1 as well. No variable displays
systematic consistent breaks across banks assigned to federal versus state regulators. We do not
report these results for brevity's sake. As we will elaborate in the next section, our identification
strategy relies on predetermined within-bank variation of regulators and not on which regulator
was assigned at the inception of the rotation policy. Nevertheless, the quasi-randomized nature of
assignment of initial supervisors across banks lends further support to our empirical design.

3.   Identification Strategy

We now present our empirical model and describe our identification strategy. To keep the
identification as transparent as possible, consider a regulatory outcome variable of interest Yit
(e.g. the composite CAMELS rating) to be linearly determined by a vector of characteristics of
bank i at quarter t, Bit, and by the characteristics of the supervisor Sit at quarter t according to the
following equation:

                                                                 ,

where we include bank-specific fixed effects  and quarter fixed effects . Let us consider
within-bank/within-quarter deviations from averages to partial out the fixed effects. Representing
these within deviations with lower-case variables and dropping bank-quarter indexes, we focus
on the following equation:

                                                  12
                                                 ,                                                              (1)

where  plays the role of classical measurement error deviations. In general, vector s may include
regulator-specific characteristics, such as the competence of its team of examiners, the structure
of its budget, the role of assessment fees and the degree of political pressure on the regulator.
However, for simplicity's sake, let us assume that s is scalar, indicating the change in the identity
of the regulator.

Vector b may include variables endogenously set by the bank and can be split into observables,
b1, such as changes in the bank's ROA, capital ratios and liquidity levels, or changes in the
structure of the market the bank operates in, and unobservable shocks, b2, such as shifts in the
management’s composition. Let us further assume           |      0 to maintain the exposition
strictly focused on the selection problem.

We can rewrite equation (1) as:

                                                                .                                               (2)

Importantly, note that in equation (2) the unobserved error component becomes                                           .
As we will argue, the structure of the error term can create bias in identification of  and     if
banks self-select into regulatory settings. The nature of the problem is very similar to matching
bias in empirical contract theory, as for instance studied by Ackerberg and Botticini (2002).18 In
empirical matching models that achieve identification, one needs to account for the principal-
agent matching equation, which in this context translates into modeling a regulator-bank
selection equation.

To illustrate the bias due to self-selection by banks, let us assume that the decision of choosing
supervisor s by bank with characteristics b is linear:

                                           ,                                                                    (3)

where u represents the idiosyncratic variation in the selection of a specific regulator. Equation
(3) approximates how banks sort into specific regulatory environments depending on the type of
the supervisor (Rosen(2005)). An example of equation (3) would be the choice by Countrywide
Financial Corp. to become a thrift in 2007. As discussed in the Financial Crisis Inquiry


18
  A main difference in our paper is our focus on selection issues arising both in changes and in levels, as opposed to
selection arising in levels only. This excludes the possibility of using panel variation as a source of identification in
our setting, while it is occasionally employed in matching models. See Ackerberg and Botticini (2002) for a
discussion.
                                                           13
Commission Report(2011, p. 174), Countrywide moved under OTS oversight because of the
increased scrutiny on property appraisals under OCC and adverse views on Option ARMs voiced
by the Fed (both the OCC and the Fed were Countrywide’s previous regulators).

Equation (3) is also the source of the selection bias that would arise in the standard fixed-effects
panel estimation of the parameter vector of interest [1,] in (2). That is, by regressing y on b1
and s, both coefficients would be biased and inconsistently estimated due to       ,       0.

In our empirical setup, the identification is based on the availability of a policy p guaranteeing
that, within a set of SMBs and NMBs with rotating regulators, equation (3) does not hold.
Instead, the assignment of a new regulator is predetermined by the policy rule:

                                          ,                                                 (4)

where the following orthogonality condition holds:

                            |      0                              .                         (5)

The error term, , accounts for idiosyncratic shocks that may introduce variation in the
implementation of the rotation policy, as discussed in the case of Figure 2. These include random
events such as conflicting meeting schedules or other factors that lead to temporary
unavailability of examiners. Our sample conditioning in (5) requires that we only examine
depository institutions for which the regulator’s identity is predetermined. Conditional on the
bank being a SMB or NMB, under (4) and (5) fixed-effects panel estimation of the parameter
vector of interest [1,] in (2) is unbiased and consistently estimated.

In principle, under (4) and (5), it is also possible to identify the effect of supervisor s on
subsequent bank behavior b1 itself:

                                              ,                                             (6)

where represents idiosyncratic error deviations in bank behavior. More precisely,  can be
consistently estimated, since (4) breaks the simultaneity of b and s implied by (3). Section 4.2
discusses in detail the effect of s on the bank’s response outcomes.

In Section 4.1 we will exploit only within-bank information and rely on the predetermined nature
of the assignment rule p to obtain consistent estimates of the total effect of changing a regulator.
The total effect includes both the direct structural parameter  in equation (2) and any indirect
effect that regulation has on CAMELS rating by altering bank behavior (illustrated by equation


                                                  14
(6) for instance). To see this clearly, replace (6) in (2). The reduced-form regression we estimate
is equivalent to:

                                                                                             (7)

Here, the total effect of changing a regulator is    and it is consistently estimated in our setting.
The advantage of estimating equation (7) rather than equation (2) is that it captures in a single
estimate all the channels through which s matters for CAMELS rating: the direct effect and the
indirect effect    . More importantly, relative to estimating equation (2), estimating equation (7)
does not suffer from potential misspecification problems due to the possible omission of relevant
elements of the vector .

4.   Empirical Results

4.1 Differences in Supervisory Ratings
In this section, we exploit the predetermined assignment of regulators to SMBs and NMBs to
assess the effect of a supervisor’s identity on the rating obtained by a depository institution. We
start by investigating the nature of the differences in CAMELS ratings that state and federal
regulators assign by estimating equation (7).

Table 3 reports the results for our sample of SMB institutions, supervised alternately by Fed and
state regulators. Table 4 follows a similar structure and reports results for our sample of NMB
institutions, supervised alternately by FDIC and state regulators. We present results for both the
composite CAMELS rating and for each of its six subcomponents. This allows us to detect
possible deviations across the various dimensions scored, since state supervisors might
emphasize different safety and soundness components relative to their federal counterparts. All
our standard errors are clustered at the state level in order to correct for both between-bank-
within-state and within-bank serial correlation in the error term.

Column (1) in Tables 3 and 4 presents the results for composite CAMELS ratings in a fixed-
effects regression and shows that a dummy variable for the presence of a federal regulator as the
lead agency supervising the bank is positive and statistically significant. These results appear
extremely consistent and homogenous across CAMELS rating components, as shown in
Columns (2) through (7) of both tables, and suggest that federal regulators systematically assign
higher CAMELS ratings to a bank. Recall that higher CAMELS scores indicate worse
assessments of the bank, implying that federal regulators are unambiguously tougher than state
regulators across all safety and soundness components. We conduct several robustness tests, but
our results remain stable (e.g., dropping the 5 percent tails of the distribution of banks along
dimensions such as Tier1 capital ratios (reported in Appendix Table 1) and asset size
(unreported).


                                                 15
To gauge the economic magnitudes of our findings in the panel regressions presented in Tables 3
and 4 we need to account for the high persistence of the CAMELS ratings. CAMELS ratings do
not vary frequently for a bank and rating changes most likely incorporate substantial information.
One sensible approach is to compare our within-bank coefficient estimates around the rotation
with the within-bank standard deviation of the CAMELS rating (or its components) provided in
the tables. As can be observed from Column (1) in both the tables, the effects are very large. In
particular, the effect of a switch from a state regulator to the Fed is about a third of the within-
SMB standard deviation. Similarly, the switch from a state regulator to the FDIC results in about
a fifth of the within-NMB standard deviation. The impact of switching to a federal regulator is
the largest for the Management and the Sensitivity to risk components of the CAMELS rating.

Another (more intuitive) way of displaying the magnitudes of the results in Tables 3 and 4 is to
analyze simple raw frequencies of changes in CAMELS ratings around the rotation. In other
words, conditional on observing a change in the CAMELS rating—in essentially all cases equal
to one notch in magnitude in our data—we can ask which agency is more likely to downgrade
(i.e., reporting a CAMELS increase) or upgrade (i.e., reporting a CAMELS drop). The results of
this simple tabulation exercise are reported in Table 5 for both SMBs and NMBs. The difference
between state and federal regulators is striking. Both Fed and FDIC are about twice as more
likely than their state counterparts to downgrade a commercial bank. For SMBs, 76 percent of
the downgrades originate from the Fed and only 24 percent from the state regulator. For NMBs,
65 percent of the downgrades originate from the FDIC and only 35 percent from the state
regulator. Notably, the Fed is also less likely to upgrade relative to the average state regulator
(only 43 percent of SMB upgrades are Fed-originated), although the FDIC is more likely to
upgrade than the state regulator (58 percent of NMB upgrades are FDIC-originated). Hence,
while the Fed appears unambiguously more stringent than its average state counterpart, the FDIC
displays more stringency in downgrading only.

In addition, state regulators do not appear to completely counteract federal regulators' activity.
The frequency of federal regulators' downgrades is substantially higher than the frequency of
state regulators' upgrades. Raw frequencies indicate that state regulators' assessments appear to
mostly stabilize around federal regulators' assessments instead. Finally, federal regulators
consistently display: a) a similar degree of stringency across all subcomponents of the CAMELS
ratings, as reported in Appendix Table 2; b) no differential behavior for banks that eventually
end up in the problem bank list (defined as banks with CAMELS ratings of 4 or 5); and c) no
evident difference in stringency as a function of the final CAMELS rating (not reported for
brevity's sake).19

19
  Appendix Table 3 reports the same decomposition of CAMELS rating increases (bank downgrades) and
CAMELS rating increases (bank upgrades) as Table 5, but limited to banks that end up in the future as problem
banks. State regulators are only slightly more likely to downgrade a problem bank (29 percent for SMB, 38 percent
for NMB) relative to what they do in the case of the average bank in Table 5 (24 percent for SMB, 35 percent for
NMB) vis-à-vis federal regulators.
                                                        16
We confirm that the results of simple tabulations in Table 5 are statistically significant and
robust by employing specifications that condition on bank and quarter fixed effects. Table 6
presents results from a linear probability model where the dependent variable is 1 for a
CAMELS rating decrease and 0 otherwise in columns (1) and (2) and the dependent variable is 1
for a CAMELS rating increase and 0 otherwise in columns (3) and (4). The higher propensity of
a downgrade to originate from a federal regulator is robust to the inclusion of bank and quarter
fixed effects and very precisely estimated. With the admitted caveat of a large frequency of zeros
in these regressions (due to the serial correlation in the CAMELS ratings discussion earlier),
magnitudes in these specifications suggest effects of the order of 10-25 percent within-bank
standard deviations. In contrast, the propensities to upgrade are an order of magnitude smaller.

A final caveat is in order. Regressions involving regulatory outcomes, such as the CAMELS
rating regressions presented in this section, could potentially suffer from the omission of
dynamic interactions between regulators. Our estimates could be affected by the omission of
expectations of federal regulators about subsequent behavior of state regulators. For instance,
federal regulators could decide to preemptively downgrade the rating in expectation of a more
lenient future cycle under state regulators, even if conditions do not warrant it yet. No direct
evidence of dynamic interaction appeared obvious in our extensive checks in the data. For
example, a downgrade by a federal regulator did not appear to predict either an upgrade or a
downgrade by the state supervisor in charge of the following examination cycle. While our
choice of exclusion of future/alternative regulators’ characteristics from equation (1) was based
on such evidence, it is, however, important to discuss the likely econometric issues arising from
such an omission. Under a more general statistical model where these dynamic effects were at
play, the structural parameter vector of interest [1,] in (2) would be consistently recoverable
from the data only if information on the exact nature of the dynamic interaction across regulators
became available. Nonetheless, absent such information, the estimated coefficients on b1 and s
would still represent consistent reduced-form equilibrium effects of bank behavior and the
supervisor’s identity. We limit ourselves to such an interpretation here.

4.2 Do Supervisors Affect Bank Behavior?
Are changes in the identity of a regulator detectable along explicit dimensions of bank behavior?
In this section, we investigate banks’ short-term response to the heightened threat of a
downgrade stemming from a federal supervisor documented previously. This is an important step
in the assessment of the potential real economic consequences of regulatory idiosyncrasies on
overseen entities. We employ information from Call Reports to formally test this proposition
along three main dimensions of bank operations: regulatory capital, profitability, and asset
quality.




                                               17
More specifically, we employ within-bank variation to assess whether the Fed and FDIC
effectively impose more stringent capital and liquidity conditions on depository institutions than
the average state supervisor. Our specification mirrors equation (7) with now the dependent
being bank balance sheet variables rather than CAMELS ratings. As discussed above, it is
important to reiterate that we define a supervisory cycle as the time between when a regulator
conducts its on-site examination and when the alternate regulator examines the bank. This allows
us to track actions undertaken by banks following the examination. Since bank variables can
potentially change every quarter, our specification now compares the average effect on a variable
across quarters following a federal or a state examination.

One may reasonably conjecture that, in addition to imposing stricter ratings, federal regulators
may impose more stringent capital allocations, i.e., higher capital imposition (such as higher
Tier1 RBCR) and better governance, i.e., explicit booking of past delinquent and nonperforming
loans, all at the expense of returns (i.e., resulting in lower ROA).20 The data support the view that
bank behavior is affected in ways consistent with this conjecture.

Panel A in Table 7 reports empirical evidence for the SMB sample and Panel B for the NMB
sample. The rotation from a state regulator to a federal regulator (Fed or FDIC) unambiguously
produces an increase in Tier1 RBCR and the regulatory leverage ratio (defined as Tier1 capital
divided by total risk-unweighted assets in Call Reports), a drop in ROA, and an increase in
delinquent and nonperforming loans booked by the depository institution. All coefficients of
interests are precisely estimated, with the exception of delinquency rates in the NMB sample.
Given the short-term nature of the changes due to the length of the rotations, the economic
magnitudes of these estimates are reasonable with effects ranging between 3 percent and 8
percent of a within-bank standard deviation per extra quarter of federal regulator oversight.

We further analyze the nature of bank asset portfolio and components of ROA that are affected
by the stricter governance imposed by federal regulators. In particular, in Appendix Table 4 we
analyze the nature of delinquencies and non-performing loans when we break the loan portfolio
of banks into real estate loans – commercial and residential – and commercial and industrial
loans (C&I). We find that the change in delinquency and non-performing loans documented in
Table 4 is mainly driven by a change in real estate loans (both commercial and residential), while
there is only limited variation in C&I loan quality around rotations. In addition, we also examine
the components of ROA that contribute to its change in Table 7. We find that increases in the
provision for loan loss and non-interest expenses largely contribute to this change.21 We interpret

20
   Capital ratios can be influenced through changes in the allowance for loan and lease losses. There is a large
literature that documents bank discretion in booking losses on its loan portfolio and the factors that influence such
behavior. For instance, see Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008) for Japanese banks and Kane (1989) and Kroszner
and Strahan (1996) for US banks.
21
   Salaries are the main component of non-interest expense. An increase of salaries expenses is consistent with the
bank taking corrective actions on its risk assessment by hiring new and/or more skilled staff.
                                                         18
these results as reflective of federal regulators using their supervisory authority (through formal
or informal actions as discussed in Section 2.1) to make banks take corrective actions for the
problems highlighted in their examinations.

There is an important remark to be made about the quantitative interpretation of these bank
behavior results. Effects in Table 7 should be considered downward-biased estimates of the
direct effect of federal regulators on bank behavior. The reason is the nearly-deterministic nature
of the rotation rule, which allows banks to preemptively respond to changes in S.

More formally, equation (6) which describes the effect of a supervisor on bank behavior needs to
also account for the expectation of future rotations. To show the exact nature of the problem, we
present a simple formalization where only the identity of the current regulator and the identity of
the regulator in the following examination cycle matters. In particular, let us assume:

                                          ,                                        (6’)

where the prime represents the next rotation period when the new regulator takes over. This
clearly imposes a dynamic structure not captured by (6). Making use of the condition 1    ,
the behavioral response by the bank becomes:

                                               .

In the simple dynamic setting (6’), regressing observed bank behavioral variables b1 on the
current regulator’s identity s will likely produce biased estimates of the structural parameter of
interest . Intuitively, anticipation of the future rotation cycles may dampen the response of a
bank to the regulator currently supervising it.

One alternative to solve this estimation problem would be to rely on strong structural
assumptions of the type (6’) and consistently estimate the structural parameters ( and  in this
case) while assuming the model is correct. It is difficult, however, to find explicit guidance on
the exact nature of the dynamic response of a bank to future supervision, making results from
this exercise model-dependent. An alternative, more reliable, approach is to limit the
interpretation of the estimated coefficient on s in equation (6) to the reduced-form equilibrium
effect of the underlying dynamic model and to recognize that we are focusing on a reduced-form
effect, such as -, and not on  directly. Importantly, given the predetermined nature of s, such
reduced-form coefficients remain consistently estimated even in presence of anticipatory effects.

In Table 8 we further highlight this point econometrically by running a close equivalent to
specification (6’). This specification includes a dummy indicator equal to 1 if the lead agency in
the (current) quarter t is federal and 0 otherwise (similar to Table 7 Panel A and Panel B). More

                                                   19
importantly, these specifications also include two additional indicator variables: one that takes a
value 1 if a federal supervisor replaces the current state supervisor at quarter t+1 (0 otherwise)
and another that takes a value 1 if a federal supervisor replaces the current state supervisor at t+2
(0 otherwise). If the coefficients on these additional dummies display the identical sign as the
effect of having a federal supervisor in the current quarter, one may conclude that there is
evidence of anticipatory action on the part of the bank. To understand why, suppose that at time
t=0 a bank expects to be required to increase its Tier1 capital by a federal regulator scheduled to
examine it on site two quarters after. Since raising Tier1 capital on a short notice may be costly,
the bank is likely to attempt to raise it ahead of the regulatory switch, which would help make
the bank’s adjustment to the new regulator go more smoothly. This may induce the bank to
increase its Tier1 capital not only at period t= 2, when the new regulator actually comes in, but
possibly also at t= 1 and t= 0, even if the current regulator has no particular concerns about
Tier1.

Panel A and Panel B of Table 8 display the dynamics of anticipating changes on account of a
switch from state supervision to federal supervision by SMBs and NMBs, respectively.
Anticipatory motives are evident in Tier1 RBCR, leverage ratio, and non-performing loans and
delinquencies among SMBs expecting Fed to supervise them in next cycle or two; additionally,
such motives appear in ROA of SMBs and NMBs scheduled for federal supervision.22

4.3 Is Lenient Supervision Costly?
This section presents a first attempt at assessing whether more lenient behavior displayed by
state regulators – their lower willingness to initiate downgrades across banks in our sample (and
higher willingness to initiate upgrades for SMBs) – can be interpreted as a desirable feature.

On the one hand, excessive regulatory strictness may stifle innovation of the banking sector,
thereby hampering growth of the corporate sector, as some have argued. On the other hand,
excessive regulatory leniency may be the telltale sign of regulatory capture and lead to excessive
risk-taking, as others have contended (see Scott (1977) for a discussion of both views). Both
arguments have been reiterated in the debate around regulatory failures during the build-up to the
2008–09 financial crisis. However, to our knowledge there is no empirical evidence
systematically evaluating either of these claims. Here we take a step in this direction and provide
a tentative assessment of the issue.

We start by examining the correlation between the strictness of federal regulators relative to their
state counterparts–henceforth, the ‘federal-state spread’–and an outcome that is considered
unambiguously negative within financial markets: bank failures. Such failures hamper the proper
functioning of the financial system and can stall real economic activity (Calomiris and Gorton,

22
 Notice that this econometric approach is not needed when studying CAMELS ratings. The reason is that
CAMELS ratings can only change in the quarter of the on-site examination conducted by the new regulator.
                                                       20
1991).23 Notice that it is not obvious whether the relative leniency of a state regulator would
manifest itself in a higher failure or problem-bank rate in that state. On the one hand, even if
state regulators are lenient, corrective actions by federal regulators –if implemented– should
improve the health of a bank and reduce its chances of failure. On the other hand, it might be the
case that state regulatory laxity slows down corrective actions by the Fed or FDIC, thereby
increasing the chances of a bank failing in that state.

We use data on bank failure rates and problem-bank (i.e., banks close to failing) rates over our
sample period to conduct our analysis.24 To streamline the presentation of the results and gain
statistical power, we pool federal regulators together in this and the following sections.25 Panel A
of Table 9 presents the results using the baseline specification of Table 3 and 4 and using the
composite CAMELS rating as the dependent variable. The federal agency indicator in Table 9 is
interacted with whether or not the state is above or below the cross-state median in terms of bank
failure rate (column 1) and problem-bank rate (column 2). The coefficients suggest that, for
banks in our sample, federal regulators always imposes higher CAMELS ratings than the state
regulator (hence, the state is more lenient on average), but the federal regulator does this even
more so in states with high bank-failure rates and high problem-bank rates. The null hypothesis
that there are no differences in coefficients across the two groups is rejected statistically in chi-
square tests for both bank failure rate (p=0.001) and problem-bank rate (p=0.014).

We find qualitatively similar results in Panel B of Table 9 where we estimate a cross-sectional
regression of bank-failure rates in a given state on the federal-state spread for the CAMELS
rating that is estimated over the entire sample period. In column (1), we report the results for all
the states in our sample. The federal-state spread is positively associated with the bank-failure
rate in that state. In other words, states where bank-failure rates are high are also those where
state regulators appear less willing to apply strict ratings relative to their federal counterparts.
The economic magnitudes suggested by the coefficients are large – a one standard deviation
movement in the federal-state spread (0.07) is associated with about 40 percent increase in the
bank failure rates relative to the mean rate across states. In column (2), we restrict our sample to
states with more than 20 banks to improve the precision of our estimated federal-state spread.
The results become both quantitatively and statistically stronger. For the sake of completeness,
we also conduct the cross-sectional analysis using the problem-bank rate as the dependent
variable and find results that are qualitatively similar (unreported for brevity's sake).


23
   While bank failures are an important element in banking supervision and frequently discussed in the context of
banking crises, policymakers are also interested in ensuring that credit is allocated efficiently in the economy. For
instance, if policymakers wanted, they could eliminate banking failures through a very high reserve requirement;
however, this would substantially affect credit allocation.
24
   Problem banks are identified using the criterion employed by regulators; i.e., banks that have composite CAMELS
ratings of 4 and 5, as defined in the FDIC problem bank list.
25
   There are also legal constraints we face in trying to explore the heterogeneity of effects across different federal
agencies.
                                                         21
Our final point in this section involves considering potential benefits forgone by reducing
regulatory leniency. One prominent cost that might result from excessive regulatory stringency
could be a reduction in the credit supply in the economy. This question can be assessed within
the setting presented in Section 4.2. Table 10 presents estimates of the impact of supervisor
identity on a bank’s growth of new loans in the short run. The estimated effects are both
quantitatively and statistically insignificant. These findings suggest that vis-à-vis state regulators,
more-stringent federal regulators do not appear to limit credit supply.

We note here that, while the results in this section are novel, the evidence is partially suggestive.
Our results on bank failure and problem-bank rates do not benefit from the identification strategy
of Section 3, while our results on credit supply do. Admittedly, interpreting the bank failure and
problem-bank rates results causally would require strong assumptions on how the federal-state
spreads are assigned across states.

4.4 Additional Results and Robustness
In this subsection we present additional results by extending some of our findings and providing
robustness checks. For brevity we limit the analysis to composite CAMELS ratings.

Market Discipline: Public versus Private Banks
A recurring discussion among economists and policymakers alike revolves around whether
complementarities exist between market discipline and regulation (Brunnermeier et al., 2009). In
our context, one could expect that publicly traded companies –with more stringent requirements
of information disclosure and formal external governance and scrutiny– would be more likely to
part from the regulatory idiosyncrasies found earlier.

We investigate this issue and present our results in Table 11. We use a specification similar to
that used in Panel A of Table 9 with the difference being that here we interact the federal agency
indicator with dummies for whether the bank is publicly traded or privately held. Our results
suggest that the difference in the federal-state spreads for CAMELS ratings is significantly
smaller for publicly traded entities than for private banks. Notwithstanding the inherent
complexity of publicly traded banks, which are more likely to be large and intricate entities,
there appear to be a convergence in assessments of both state and federal regulators for publicly
traded banks. While we recognize that a plethora of omitted variables could potentially be
driving these results, it is interesting to note that such convergence arises precisely in the
presence of market-generated knowledge. This finding is broadly consistent with Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003), who find that a supervisory strategy that empowers private
monitoring of bank lending is more effective compared with supervision by official agencies
alone.




                                                  22
Pre and Post Financial Crisis
Table 12 focuses on the structural change in US banking supervision occurring around the recent
financial crisis. The financial turmoil brought an unprecedented amount of attention to the role of
federal regulators, especially the Fed and the FDIC. In Table 12 we are able to rebut the
hypothesis that the results discussed in Section 4.1 may be entirely driven by the recent crisis,
during which both the Fed and FDIC acquired much more activist roles in both nonsupervisory
and supervisory areas. We check for changes in the behavior of federal regulators by comparing
the federal-state spreads during the crisis with the spreads during the period before it. Table 12
presents specifications similar to those in Table 11, with the difference being that we interact the
federal agency indicator with dummies for the pre-crisis (2000-06) and crisis periods (2007-09).
The difference in the federal-state spreads for CAMELS ratings is significantly smaller in the
pre-crisis period, but remains positive and highly statistically significant across both sample
periods. We can only speculate about the sources of the stronger divergence in composite
CAMELS ratings assigned by federal versus state regulators during the crisis; however, the fact
that greater attention was paid to the actions of federal regulators appears a reasonable
explanation for the divergence.

Regional Heterogeneity
We now investigate the extent of regional heterogeneity in the federal-state spreads. Our goal is
to exclude the possibility that our results may be driven by a specific subset of states or by a
specific regional district of the prudential supervisor.26 To evaluate heterogeneity across states,
we propose a simple extension of the specification (7) that permits a different dummy for the
federal regulator depending on the specific state that bank i belongs to. In essence, instead of a
single federal-state dummy Sit, which compares federal regulators with the average state
regulator, we estimate 50 different federal-state contrasts. This allows us to assess whether the
federal regulators appear tougher than state regulators across the vast majority of states or if a
small subset of states with state regulators that are more lenient than federal regulators is driving
our results. Figure 5 reports the coefficients on the state dummy variables interactions for the
federal regulators with their 5 percent confidence intervals. In this figure we plot a dashed line
which illustrates the average state behavior under a specification analogous to column (1) of
Tables 3 and 4. To make the interactions meaningful we only report states with more than 10
banks. Figure 5 displays precisely estimated effects that are overwhelmingly above zero –i.e. the
federal regulators systematically assign higher CAMELS than specific states' regulators. Notice,
however, that certain states appear less lenient than others and some even tougher than federal
regulators (below zero).

We also examined the heterogeneity within federal regulators by following an analogous
procedure. The specification in this case compared each federal regulator in its different regional

26
  Both Fed and FDIC prudential supervision activities are in fact organized by geographical divisions—specifically,
by 12 regional Federal Reserve Districts and eight FDIC Regions.
                                                        23
districts against the “average” state regulator in that regional jurisdiction. We do not report these
results for brevity’s sake, but we note here that no particular regional district appears to be
driving our results.

5.    Why the Difference among Regulators?

Our findings so far have highlighted substantial differences both in the behavior of state versus
federal regulators and in the behavior of banks as a result of the rotation of prudential
supervisors. However, we have not presented any evidence suggesting what the likely sources of
this heterogeneity are. In this section, we investigate this issue.

One reason for a softer stance by state supervisors could be that they are captured by the
constituents they supervise. Since Stigler (1971) and Peltzman (1976), economists have argued
that constituents being regulated exert pressure on their regulators for their benefit by applying
influence. In the context of banking, it is well documented that a majority of states finance their
prudential supervision efforts through the use of assessment fees proportional to bank assets
(Blair and Kushmeider (2006)). As a result, large banks hold a disproportionate weight in the
existence of state supervision, since they represent the largest revenue source for the state
regulator itself.27 In addition, because relocation and charter-switch costs are largely fixed, large
banks are also more likely to escape state regulator controls, vis-à-vis smaller banks.
Incidentally, this assessment fee structure is not just a feature of state banking regulators, but
also of federal ones, such as the OCC and the (former) OTS. The Fed and the FDIC, however,
are federal regulators not funded through assessment fees and they receive no payment from
member or nonmember banks for their on-site examinations. It may be the case that, although
states might be exposed to political capture, the Fed and the FDIC might be immune to such
pressure from state constituents.

We explore this conjecture by assessing whether the importance of large banks for regulatory
survival of some state regulators may induce these regulators to be more lenient. The results of
our analysis are presented in Table 13. We follow a stringent approach and use within-bank
variation - this limits the power of our analysis because of the fact that large banks tend to
remain large (and generally bank size is very persistent). Specifically, we estimate our baseline
specification (7) including a control for the bank being in the top quartile of the size distribution
in the state and an interaction of the size percentile with the federal regulator dummy. As before,
we find that state regulators are more lenient than federal regulators. However, we also find that
state regulators tend to be even more lenient when dealing with larger banks. The coefficient on
the interaction is statistically significant and positive and about one third of the average

27
   It is important to note that even if state regulators charge for exams, such resources may not be necessarily
earmarked for bank supervision and may accrue to a general fund. This does not exclude that state regulators may
still care about the size and relevance of the entities overseen, for instance to justify budgetary and personnel
appropriations.
                                                        24
difference in CAMELS ratings between federal and state regulators. These results suggest to us
that state regulators may be showing some preferential treatment toward the large banks in their
jurisdiction (relative to the small ones).

Finally, states differ in their banking regulatory philosophy, the characteristics of resources who
implement the regulation, and the type of goals they set for their state bank charters. Indeed, this
variety in approach is often cited as a major advantage of the US dual banking system (American
Bankers Association (2009)). We assess here whether this variety plays a role in explaining
regulatory behavior. We focus on how the federal-state spread for CAMELS rating is related to
some of the measurable characteristics of the state supervisory system, using data from the
biannual Profile of State Bank Supervisor (Conference of State Bank Supervisors) for years
1996, 1998, 2000, 2002 and 2004. We concentrate on three aspects of each state's supervisory
system: (a) the percentage of the budget spent in staff training; (b) the ratio of the number of
commercial bank examiners to number of SMB and NMB in the state; and (c) the percentage of
commercial bank examiners with more than five years of experience.28 In our analysis we follow
the specification similar to that of Table 11, with the difference that the federal agency indicator
is interacted with dummy variables that identify whether a given state regulator is below or
above the cross-state median for each of these variables.

Table 14 reports the results. Relative to the federal regulator, state regulators with lower
expenditure on staff training display more-lenient behavior when it comes to downgrading
CAMELS rating of banks. While this difference is potentially interesting, the evidence lacks
statistical power. The null hypothesis of no differences in coefficients across the two groups
cannot be rejected at the 10 percent level. As shown in the last set of tests in this table, we also
find that states with a higher number of examiners per bank and a higher share of experienced
examiners appear more lenient relative to their federal regulator. Both these effects are
statistically significant at the 10 percent confidence level. These findings are interesting because
having more examiners per bank and having a greater share of higher tenured examiners should
reflect better resources for supervising banks. However, having more examiners per bank and a
more tenured staff may also imply higher chances of being captured by the regulated entities.
This may occur because examiners are likely to specialize when there are more examiners
interacting with a few banks. In addition, future career opportunities at regulated entities are
more likely for examiners with higher tenure.



6.   How broadly applicable are these findings?



28
  Each measure is computed using data for each year and then averaged. Data on the percentage of the budget spent
on staff training is only available in 2002 and 2004. Information on the number (and tenure) of the examiners is
missing for 2004.
                                                       25
In this section, we examine the correlation between supervisor identity and CAMELS ratings and
its subcomponents across all federal regulators in a broader universe of banks, including national
banks and thrifts, over the same time period. The objective of this analysis is two-fold. First, the
comparison of the behavior of federal regulators (Fed and FDIC) with that of state regulators in
the larger sample relative to this comparison in the rotation sample allows us to discuss the size
of the bias that bank sorting creates in any empirical analysis that ignores this issue. As discussed
before, this sorting occurs since banks actively shop for regulators who are likely to be softer on
them through different channels such as supervisory ratings (see Rezende, 2011). Second, this
exercise will also allow us to make some assessments of how broadly applicable our findings
might be for all US commercial banks.


Table 15 includes all depository institutions in the Fed’s NIC universe and examines the
correlation between CAMELS rating changes and the supervisor identity of all regulators. Since
banks in this sample differ dramatically both in terms of observables (e.g., ROA, Tier-1 capital
ratio, leverage) and unobservables (e.g., factors that prompt self-selection into a charter), it is
hard to make direct comparisons across regulators. Nevertheless, in this naïve analysis, we can
still condition on bank balance sheet variables that capture its health such as its ROA, Tier 1
capital ratio, and its asset size. In the pooled OLS regression of column (1) we focus on Fed and
FDIC coefficients, which, as in Tables 3 and 4, are contrasts against the average state regulatory
behavior (the excluded category). The estimated coefficients appear quantitatively and
statistically larger than what is estimated in column (1) of Tables 3 and 4 for the Fed and FDIC,
respectively. The likely reason for this upward bias is that banks sorting into SMB or NMB
status do so for an advantage, which may well include state regulator leniency. If banks looking
for leniency on the part of state regulators are also the ones most likely to trigger severe scrutiny
on the part of federal regulators (as a quest for leniency may indicate worse conditions), then this
can explain the increase in the Fed/state and FDIC/state spreads when such selection is not
accounted for.

In columns (2) through (4), we exploit within-quarter and within-bank variation to make the
pooled analysis progressively more comparable to the one conducted in Tables 3 and 4. As is
evident from the results, state regulators tend to be more lenient relative to all federal regulators
with the exception of the OTS. In particular, note that the federal regulators we analyzed earlier
(the Fed and FDIC) still appear to be tougher than state regulators. By column (4), which
includes both bank and quarter fixed effects, the magnitudes of the estimates of the strictness of
the Fed and FDIC relative to state regulators are similar to those found in Section 4.1. This
suggests that, while self-selection is an important issue in the pooled cross-sectional sample,
conditioning on unobserved time-invariant components is sufficient to isolate the treatment
effect of supervisor identity. The similarity across the estimates in column (1) of Tables 3 and 4
and column (4) of Table 15 suggests that the unobservables driving sorting might not be time-
varying, but fixed. We believe this is a relevant contribution to the literature on regulatory

                                                 26
shopping and bank sorting. Inclusion of bank and quarter fixed effects appears a sufficient
correction to account for regulatory shopping. Importantly, this assessment is only possible
because of the availability of our earlier results employing a well-identified causal benchmark.

7.   Conclusion and Discussion

The main contribution of this paper lies in an assessment of the structure of US dual banking
supervision by examining the nature and consequences of supervisory decisions. This is a hard
empirical endeavor largely due to the difficulty in separating regulatory arbitrage by banks from
the real influence of bank supervisors. Self-selection by banks is not just a theoretical possibility.
This issue has been prevalent in the policy and academic debate (e.g., see Rezende, 2011).We
circumvent this challenge by exploiting a legally determined rotation policy that assigns federal
and state supervisors to same banks at predetermined time intervals. We find that federal
regulators are significantly less lenient, downgrading supervisory ratings about twice as
frequently as state supervisors. As a consequence of these actions, under federal regulators,
banks report higher non-performing loans, more delinquent loans, higher regulatory capital
ratios, and lower ROA.

While the paper falls short of providing a definitive answer as to whether the US dual
supervisory system is optimal, to our knowledge, it clearly documents inconsistent
implementation of the same set of rules by different regulators within this system. This is a
consequential finding since inconsistencies between regulators can delay corrective regulatory
actions. Our results also indicate that leniency by state regulators may also be costly since it
induces variability in bank operations. Moreover, this may potentially reduce the transparency of
bank balance-sheets for agents in the economy who are unaware of the source of this variability.

Our paper speaks to the debate on supervision and regulation of banks prompted by the recent
financial crisis. The 2008-09 crisis has made it clear that regulating and supervising complex and
interconnected financial institutions requires significant coordination across regulators. An
opposing view is the notion that dual supervision enhances the nature of decision making since it
allows for state supervisors, who use local knowledge, to compete with federal supervisors, who
rely on broader perspective. Our findings on inconsistent oversight and on bank failures cast
serious doubt on this view and instead suggest a re-evaluation of the exact nature of benefits of
the US dual supervision system.

As we contemplate the regulatory reforms currently being proposed, it is vital to consider the
structure of regulation that they may engender. Federal Reserve Chairmen (Bernanke, 2010;
Greenspan, 1997) have argued that supervisory activities provide significant information useful
to carry out monetary policy decisions (also see Goodhart 2001 for Fed's role as a lender of last
resort or the FDIC's role in setting premia on deposit insurance). That said, some critics want

                                                 27
federal regulators removed from day-to-day regulatory and supervisory authority, since their
“other responsibilities” might adversely impact their supervisory decisions. Our results suggest
that, while other roles may make federal regulators more lenient in absolute terms, their
supervisory decisions appear significantly less lenient relative to their current state regulatory
counterparts.

Finally, this paper also speaks to other regulated industries such as insurance. While currently
regulated solely at the state level, Congress has on several occasions introduced proposals for a
“federal charter” for insurance companies.29 The notion is that it would “help streamline and
modernize the antiquated and patchwork system of state insurance regulation” and would parallel
the current dual banking supervisory system.30 We see our results on heterogeneous regulatory
oversight –with more stringent federal regulators– as informative on the potential consequences
of such reforms.




29
   In the 110th Congress H.R. 3200, US Representatives Melissa Bean (D-IL) and Ed Royce (R-CA) presented
National Insurance Act of 2007 advocating an optional federal charter for insurance companies. Senator John
Sununu (R-NH) and Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD) had previously co-sponsored the National Insurance Act of 2006
with a similar goal.
30
   See: http://www.royce.house.gov/News/DocumentSingle.aspx?DocumentID=87642
                                                     28
                                        References

Ackerberg, Daniel and Maristella Botticini, 2002. “Endogenous Matching and the Empirical
Determinants of Contract Form”. Journal of Political Economy 110(3), pp. 564-91.

American Bankers Association, 2009. “Charter Shopping? Not Likely”, mimeo ABA.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2004, “Bank Regulation and Supervision: What
Works Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.

Beck, Thorsten, Loayza, N. and Ross Levine (2000), “Financial intermediation and growth:
causality and causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31–77.

Beck, Thorsten, Demirguic-Kunt Asli and Ross Levine (2003), ''Bank Supervision and Corporate
Finance'', The World Bank Working Paper

Berger, Allen N., and Timothy H. Hannan, 1998, “The efficiency cost of market power in the
banking industry: A test of the ‘quiet life’ and related hypotheses,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 80, No. 3, August, pp. 454–465.

Berger, Allen N. and Sally M. Davies. 1998. “The Informational Content of Bank Examinations”
Journal of Financial Services Research Vol. 14 no. 2, 117-144.

Berger, Allen N., Sally M. Davies, and M. J. Flannery. 1998. “Comparing Market and
Supervisory Assessment of Bank Performance: Who Knows What When?” Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper no. 1998-32.

Besley, Tim and Stephen Coate, 2003. “Elected Versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and
Evidence” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(9), pp 1176-1206.

Bierce, M. 2007. “Charter Smarter”. SNL De Novo Digest. (April)

Blair, C., and R. Kushmeider. 2006. “Challenges to the Dual Banking System: The Funding of
Bank Supervision”. FDIC Banking Review, 18, 1–20.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1996. SR Letter 96-33, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2008. Commercial Bank Examination
Manual, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.

Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas and Joel Shapiro, 2011, “The Credit Ratings Game,”
forthcoming, Journal of Finance.




                                             29
Boot, A.W.A., Thakor, A.V., 1993. “Self-interested bank regulation”. American Economic
Review 83, 206–211.

Brennan Michael J. and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 1982a “Consistent Regulatory Policy under
Uncertainty” The Bell Journal of Economics Vol. 13, No. 2 (Autumn), pp. 506-521

Brennan Michael J. and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 1982b “Regulation and Corporate Investment
Policy” Journal of Finance Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 289-300

Brunnermeier, Markus, Andrew Crockett, Charles Goodhart, Avi Persaud and Hyun Shin, 2009.
The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation, 11th Geneva Report on the World
Economy.

Burns, Arthur 1974. “Maintaining the Soundness of Our Banking System”, American Bankers
Association Convention, Honolulu, Hawaii (pp. 18-19. Oct. 21, 1974).

Butler, Henry N., Macey, Jonathan R 1987. “Myth of Competition in the Dual Banking System”
73 Cornell Law Review 677

Caballero, Ricardo, Takeo Hoshi and Kashyap, Anil. 2008 “Zombie Lending and Depressed
Restructuring in Japan” American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 5, pp. 1943-1977

Calomiris, Charles and Gorton, Gary 1991, "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and
Bank Regulation", NBER Publication on Financial Markets and Financial Crises, University of
Chicago Press

Calomiris, Charles W., 2006, “The Regulatory Record of the Greenspan Fed,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 96, No. 2, May, pp. 170‐173.

Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. 1994. “The Need for Major Consolidation
and Overhaul of the Bank Regulatory Agencies into New and Independent Banking Structure.”
Hearings before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. U.S. Senate, 103rd
Cong., XX Session, March 1,2,3,4 and 9.

House Committee on Banking and Currency.(1965) “Consolidation of Bank Examining and
Supervisory Functions: Hearings on HR 107 and HR 6885 Before the Subcommittee on Bank
Supervision and Insurance of the House Committee on Banking and Currency.” US House, 89th
Congress

Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. 2010. “Wall Street and the
Financial Crisis: Anatomy of a Financial Collapse.” Report prepared by the U.S. Senate
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Section IV C. (4), “OTS Turf War Against FDIC,”
p. 196.

Conference of State Bank Supervisors, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004 “Profile of State Chartered
Banking,”

                                             30
Cyran, Robert. 2009. "Downfall of a Regulator." New York Times (9 April): p. B2

Dewatripont, M., Tirole, J., 1994. The Prudential Regulation of Banks. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity” Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 401-419.

Dixon, Kyle and Philip Weiser, 2006, “A Digital Age Communications Act Paradigm for
Federal-State Relations”, Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law 4, pp 321-
364.

Esworthy, Robert, 2008, "Federal Pollution Control Laws: How Are They Enforced?",
Congressional Research Services Report, November 26, 2008.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2002, Manual of Examination Policies, February,
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Washington, DC.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2004, “FDIC’s Reliance on State Safety and Soundness
Examinations,” March 26, Audit Report No. 04-013, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
Washington, DC.

Flannery, Mark J., 1983, “Can State Bank Examinations Data Replace FDIC Examination
Visits?,” Journal of Bank Research, Vol. 13, No. 4, winter, pp. 312-316.

Gunther, Jeffrey and Robert R Moore, 2003, “Loss underreporting and the auditing role of bank
exams” Journal of Financial Intermediation Vol. 12, no. 2, 153-177.

Hellman, T., K. Murdock, and J. Stiglitz. 2000. “Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and
Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American Economic Review Vol.
90(1), pp. 147-165.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan, 1996. “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branch Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 3, August, pp. 639-70.

Kane, Edward J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess. How Did it Happen?, The Urban Institute
Press: Washington DC.

Kane, Edward J., 2000. “Ethical Foundations of Financial Regulation,” Journal of Financial
Services Research, Vol. 12, No. 1, August, pp. 51-74.

Kroszner, Randall and Philip Strahan, 1996. “Regulatory incentives and the thrift crisis:
dividends, mutual-to-stock conversions, and financial distress” Journal of Finance 51, 1285-
1319.




                                              31
Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan, 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 114, No. 4, November, pp. 1437-1467.

Laffont Jean-Jacques and D. Martimort, 1999. “Separation of regulators against collusive
behavior”. RAND Journal of Economics, 30, 2, pp. 232–262.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Pouyet, J., 2004. “The Subsidiarity Bias in Regulation” Journal of Public
Economics, 88, 1-2, pp. 255–283.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
Regulation. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Lane C., “Halting the March Toward Preemption: Resolving Conflicts Between State and
Federal Securities Regulators”, New England Law Review 39, pp 317-350

Martimort, D. 1999. “Renegotiation design with multiple regulators”. Journal of Economic
Theory, 88, 2, pp. 261–293.

Obama, Barack, 2009, “Remarks on Financial Regulation on Wall Street,” Federal Hall, New
York, NY, September 14, http://projects.washingtonpost.com/obama‐speeches/speech/68/.

Offices of Inspector General 2002. “Joint Examination of the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council”. Banking Agency Offices of Inspector General, Washington, DC.
Available at http://www.fdicoig.gov/evaluations/02-003E.pdf

Office of Inspector General 2010. “Evaluation of Federal Regulatory Oversight of Washington
Mutual Bank”. Banking Agency Offices of Inspector General, Washington, DC. Available at
http://www.fdicoig.gov/reports10/10-002EV.pdf

Peltzman, S., 1976, “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 19, pp. 211–240.

Pigou, Arthur C. 1938, The Economics of Welfare, 4th ed. London: Macmillan and Co.

Prager Robin A. 1989 “The Effects of Regulatory Policies on the Cost of Debt for Electric
Utilities: An Empirical Investigation” The Journal of Business, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 33-53

Rezende, Marcelo, 2010. “How Do Joint Supervisors Examine Financial Institutions? The Case
of State Banks” Paolo Baffi Centre Research Paper No. 2010-68.

Rezende, Marcelo, 2011. “The Effects of Bank Regulator Switching on Supervisory Ratings”
Working Paper.

Rosen, Richard J., 2003. “Is Three a Crowd? Competition Among Regulators in Banking,”
Journal of Money Credit and Banking, Vol. 35, No. 6 , pp. 967–998.

                                              32
Rosen, Richard J., 2005. “Switching primary federal regulators: Is it beneficial for U.S. banks?,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, 3Q. pp. 16-33.

Scott, Kenneth E. 1977. “The Dual Banking System: A Model of Competition in Regulation”,
Stanford Law Review 1(13), pp. 1-50.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny 1999. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and
their Cures. Harvard University Press.

Stigler, G., 1971. “The Economic Theory of Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics, 2, pp. 3-21.

Teisberg, Elizabeth Olmsted 1993. “Capital Investment Strategies under Uncertain Regulation”
RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 24, No. 4 (Winter), pp. 591-604

Tiebout, C., 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
64, pp. 416–424.

U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. 2011. “Final Report of the National Commission on
the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States”

Viscusi W. Kip 1983. “Frameworks for Analyzing the Effects of Risk and Environmental
Regulations on Productivity” American Economic Review Vol. 73, No. 4, pp. 793-80




                                               33
                        Table 1: Summary Statistics of State Member Banks and Non-state Member Banks

                                                                              SMBs
                                                 Rotating SMB, starting FED       Rotating SMB, starting STATE
 Bank variables, 1996:Q1                          N       Mean          SD          N       Mean          SD                     t-stat
 Non performing to loans                         437       0.849      0.894        360       1.018       1.202                  (-2.27)
 Delinquency rate                                437       2.425      1.753        360       2.838       2.254                  (-2.90)
 ROA                                             438       0.307      0.134        360       0.304       0.139                   (0.30)
 % growth in loans                               436       1.809      5.805        356       1.736       5.895                   (0.17)
 Leverage ratio                                  437       9.643      2.706        360      10.062       2.803                   (-2.1)
 Tier1 RBCR                                      437      15.791      7.447        358      16.681       7.838                  (-1.63)
 CAMELS rating                                   438      1.550       0.498        360       1.558       0.497                  (-0.23)
                                                                            NMBs
                                                Rotating NMB, starting FDIC    Rotating NMB, starting STATE
 Bank variables, 1996:Q1                         N        Mean         SD         N      Mean          SD                        t-stat
 Non performing to loans                        1695      1.059       1.284      1202     1.081       1.329                     (-0.44)
 Delinquency rate                               1695      2.935       2.360      1202     3.039       2.488                     (-1.14)
 ROA                                            1696      0.313       0.143      1204     0.329       0.146                     (-2.94)
 % growth in loans                              1695      0.859       5.166      1198     0.808       5.511                     (0.25)
 Leverage ratio                                 1696     10.553       3.322      1199    10.751       3.465                     (-1.55)
 Tier1 RBCR                                     1692     17.289       8.291      1198    17.604       8.435                     (-0.99)
 CAMELS rating                                  1698      1.732       0.443      1204    1.701        0.458                     (1.83)

Notes: The table presents the summary statistics. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators
at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent
exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. The last column reports the t-statistics of a test of difference in the means.




                                                                       34
                 Table 2: Time between Supervisor rotations for SMB and NMB

                   Regulatory                 FRB-STATE SMB                    FDIC-STATE NMB
                period (quarters)            # banks  Percent                  # banks  Percent
                          1                       3     0.29                      0      0.00
                          2                      22     2.11                      3       0.06
                          3                      48     4.61                      29     0.54
                          4                     210    20.15                     206     3.87
                          5                     370    35.51                     980     18.39
                          6                     256    24.57                    2,167    40.66
                          7                      73     7.01                    1,196    22.44
                          8                      26      2.5                     346     6.49
                          9                      16     1.54                     159      2.98
                          10                      7     0.67                      80     1.50
                          11                      7     0.67                      35     0.66
                          12                      1      0.1                      37      0.69
                         >12                      3     0.29                      91      1.71

                        Total                  1,042                            5,329

Notes: The table shows the time between supervisor rotations for the banks in our sample. Our sample restricts the
data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove
observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the
State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                       35
                      Table 3: Impact of Supervisor Identity on CAMELS Ratings and its components for SMB

                                          (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)
                                      Combined          Capital          Asset       Management         Earnings       Liquidity     Sensitivity
                                      CAMELS            rating          rating         rating            rating         rating         rating
             Within-bank mean            1.680           1.490           1.510          1.768             1.900          1.578          1.721
               Within-bank SD            0.295           0.290           0.396          0.331             0.435          0.300          0.288
          Lead agency = FRB            0.096***        0.038***        0.077***       0.135***          0.099***       0.061***       0.096***
                                        [0.011]         [0.012]         [0.020]        [0.012]           [0.014]        [0.009]        [0.018]
          Cluster                        State           State            State          State             State          State          State
          Fixed effects                 Quarter         Quarter         Quarter        Quarter           Quarter        Quarter        Quarter
                                       Bank ID         Bank ID         Bank ID        Bank ID           Bank ID        Bank ID        Bank ID
          Observations                   38110           38107           38110          38108             38108          38108          32479
          Adjusted R-squared             0.551           0.528           0.449          0.493             0.580          0.529          0.473
          # of banks                     1042            1042            1042           1042              1042            1042           976
          # of clusters                    41              41              41             41                41             41             41

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of the FRB being the lead regulatory agency on CAMELS rating and its
subcomponents. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove
observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier
banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. *
significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                                            36
                      Table 4: Impact of Supervisor Identity on CAMELS Ratings and its components for NMB

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)
                                      Combined         Capital         Asset        Management         Earnings       Liquidity     Sensitivity
                                      CAMELS           rating         rating          rating            rating         rating         rating
              Within-bank mean           1.686          1.508          1.587           1.784             1.862          1.547          1.640
                Within-bank SD           0.389          0.363          0.500           0.426             0.490          0.347          0.319
           Lead agency = FDIC          0.072***       0.059***       0.072***        0.088***          0.063***       0.037***       0.051***
                                        [0.007]        [0.010]        [0.012]         [0.009]           [0.011]        [0.008]        [0.007]
           Cluster                       State          State          State           State             State          State          State
           Fixed effects                Quarter        Quarter        Quarter         Quarter           Quarter        Quarter        Quarter
                                       Bank ID        Bank ID        Bank ID         Bank ID           Bank ID        Bank ID        Bank ID
           Observations                 240576         240572         240572          240572            240572         240572         211836
           Adjusted R-squared            0.496          0.489          0.427           0.466             0.485          0.505          0.474
           # of banks                    5329           5329           5329            5329              5329           5329           5310
           # of clusters                   48             48             48              48                48             48             48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of the FRB being the lead regulatory agency on CAMELS rating and its
subcomponents Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove
observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier
banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. *
significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                                            37
            Table 5: Tabulation of composite CAMELS upgrades and downgrades

                                            SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating
                                     Drop in CAMELS      Increase in CAMELS
                                     Freq.     Percent    Freq.      Percent
                     FRB              284       42.84      741        76.08
                     STATE            379       57.16      233        23.92
                     Total            663        100       974         100

                                     Mean           SD            Mean           SD

                     ∆CAMELS         -1.017        0.139           1.093        0.318

                                            NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating
                                      Drop in CAMELS      Increase in CAMELS
                                     Freq.      Percent    Freq.      Percent
                     FDIC            2,737       57.63     3,393       65.05
                     STATE           2,012       42.37     1,823       34.95
                     Total           4,749        100      5,216        100

                                     Mean           SD            Mean           SD

                     ∆CAMELS         -1.109        0.364           1.125        0.377

Notes: The table reports the summary statistics of the upgrades and downgrades by both the FDIC/State and
FRB/State, conditional on observing change in composite CAMELS ratings. Our sample restricts the data to state
and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove
observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the
State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                      38
 Table 6: Impact of supervisor identity on composite CAMELS upgrades and downgrades

                                              =1 if CAMELS                     =1 if CAMELS
                                                   Drops                           increases
                                              (1)          (2)                 (3)          (4)
                 Within-bank mean           0.017        0.021                0.026        0.022
                   Within-bank SD           0.085        0.112                0.118        0.114
               Lead agency = FRB          -0.008***                         0.023***
                                           [0.002]                           [0.002]
               Lead agency = FDIC                        0.003                           0.010***
                                                        [0.002]                           [0.001]
                                            FRB-         FDIC-                FRB-        FDIC-
               Switch type                 STATE       STATE                 STATE        STATE
               Entity type                   SMB         NMB                  SMB          NMB
               Cluster                       State        State               State        State
               Fixed effects               Quarter      Quarter              Quarter      Quarter
                                           Bank ID     Bank ID              Bank ID      Bank ID
               Observations                 38110       240576                38110       240576
               Adjusted R-squared           0.001        0.009                0.011        0.005
               # of banks                    1042         5329                1042         5329
               # of clusters                  41           48                   41           48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the impact of the FRB or the FDIC being
the lead regulatory agency when the composite CAMELS ratings increase or decrease. Columns 1 and 2 report the
results for CAMELS increases and columns 3 and 4 report the results for CAMELS decreases. Our sample restricts
the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also
remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams
by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors
are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.
Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                         39
                      Table 7: Impact of Supervisor Identity on Bank Variables

                                                   Panel A: SMBs
                                   (1)             (2)           (3)                   (4)                 (5)
                                  Tier1         Leverage     Return on            NPL to total        Delinquency
                                 RBCR             ratio        assets                loans                rate
      Within-bank mean           14.911           9.683        0.258                  1.011              2.395
        Within-bank SD            2.408           1.198        0.141                  0.790              1.322
   Lead agency = FRB            0.201***        0.072***     -0.005***             0.054***            0.054***
                                 [0.046]         [0.022]      [0.002]               [0.011]             [0.015]
   Cluster                        State           State         State                 State               State
   Fixed effects                 Quarter         Quarter      Quarter               Quarter             Quarter
                                Bank ID         Bank ID       Bank ID              Bank ID              Bank ID
   Observations                   37932           38018        37926                 38068               38097
   Adjusted R-squared             0.794           0.743        0.390                  0.378              0.472
   # of banks                     1040            1040          1041                  1042                1042
   # of clusters                    41              41           41                     41                 41

                                                   Panel B: NMBs
                                   (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)                   (5)
                                 Tier1         Leverage     Return on            NPL to total         Delinquency
                                RBCR             ratio         assets               loans                 rate
     Within-bank mean           16.048          10.355         0.259                1.132                2.633
       Within-bank SD            2.785           1.395         0.163                1.006                1.608
  Lead agency = FDIC            0.058**         0.044**      -0.004***            0.023***               0.022
                                [0.029]         [0.019]       [0.002]              [0.007]              [0.014]
  Cluster                        State           State          State               State                 State
  Fixed effects                 Quarter         Quarter       Quarter              Quarter              Quarter
                                Bank ID        Bank ID        Bank ID             Bank ID               Bank ID
  Observations                  239423          239598        238949               239436               240093
  Adjusted R-squared             0.794           0.750         0.373                0.356                0.438
  # of banks                     5323            5325           5329                5318                  5329
  # of clusters                    48              48            48                   48                   48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal agencies being the
lead regulatory agency on the balance sheet variables of the banks. Panel A presents results for Fed (SMBs) and
Panel B presents results for FDIC (NMBs). Column 1 looks at the Tier 1 RBCR, column 2 looks at the Leverage
ratio, column 3 looks at the ROA, column 4 looks at Non-performing loans, and column 5 looks at delinquency
rates. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once
since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent
exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. We include quarter and bank
fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. *
significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                           40
       Table 8: Impact of Supervisor Identity on Bank Variables (Dynamic Effects)

                                      Panel A: SMBs
                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)
                             Tier1    Leverage    Return on   NPL to total   Delinquency
                            RBCR         ratio       assets      loans           rate
        Within-bank mean    14.911      9.683        0.258        1.011         2.395
          Within-bank SD     2.408      1.198        0.141        0.790         1.322
Lead agency = FRB, t       0.242***   0.092***    -0.009***    0.074***       0.062***
                            [0.051]    [0.026]      [0.002]     [0.015]        [0.019]
Lead agency = STATE, t-1    0.107*      0.042*    -0.015***    0.065***         0.020
                            [0.054]    [0.024]      [0.002]     [0.019]        [0.026]
Lead agency = STATE, t-2     0.105     0.062**      -0.007*     0.036**         0.019
                            [0.071]    [0.029]      [0.003]     [0.017]        [0.027]
Cluster                      State       State        State       State          State
Fixed effects               Quarter    Quarter      Quarter     Quarter        Quarter
                           Bank ID     Bank ID     Bank ID     Bank ID         Bank ID
Observations                 37932      38018        37926       38068          38097
Adjusted R-squared           0.794      0.743        0.391        0.378         0.472
# of banks                   1040        1040        1041         1042           1042
# of clusters                  41         41           41           41            41




                                           41
         Table 8: Impact of Supervisor Identity on Bank Variables (Dynamic Effects)
                                          (contd.)

                                                   Panel B: NMBs
                                         (1)            (2)          (3)                     (4)                 (5)
                                       Tier1        Leverage    Return on               NPL to total        Delinquency
                                      RBCR             ratio       assets                  loans                rate
          Within-bank mean            16.048         10.355        0.259                    1.132              2.633
            Within-bank SD             2.785          1.395        0.163                    1.006              1.608
 Lead agency = FDIC, t                 0.058*        0.045**     -0.009***               0.022***              0.011
                                      [0.032]        [0.019]      [0.002]                 [0.008]             [0.016]
 Lead agency = STATE, t-1              -0.006         -0.015     -0.023***                 -0.005            -0.041**
                                      [0.051]        [0.027]      [0.002]                 [0.011]             [0.017]
 Lead agency = STATE, t-2               0.003          0.021     -0.008***                 -0.003            -0.029**
                                      [0.057]        [0.028]      [0.002]                 [0.009]             [0.012]
 Cluster                                State          State        State                   State               State
 Fixed effects                        Quarter        Quarter      Quarter                 Quarter             Quarter
                                      Bank ID        Bank ID      Bank ID                Bank ID              Bank ID
 Observations                         239423         239598       238949                  239436              240093
 Adjusted R-squared                    0.794          0.750        0.374                    0.356              0.438
 # of banks                             5323           5325         5329                    5318                5329
 # of clusters                           48             48           48                       48                 48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal agencies being the
lead regulatory agency on the balance sheet variables of the banks. Panel A presents results for Fed (SMBs) and
Panel B presents results for FDIC (NMBs). We modify specification in Table 7 by including two additional
regressors to look at the anticipatory effect of the downgrade. Column 1 looks at the Tier 1 RBCR, column 2 looks
at the Leverage ratio, column 3 looks at the ROA, column 4 looks at Non-performing loans, and column 5 looks at
delinquency rates. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at
least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the
most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. We include quarter
and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5%
level. * significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                           42
        Table 9: Supervisor Identity, CAMELS, and Bank Failure and Problem-Bank Rates
                                               Panel A: Panel Regression
                                                                Composite CAMELS Rating
                                                Bank Failure Bank Failure   Problem-Bank Problem-Bank
                                                Rate Below Rate Below        Rate Below       Rate Above
                                                  Median         Median        Median          Median
                        Within-bank mean           1.641         1.728          1.629           1.741
                         Within-bank SD            0.359         0.389          0.356           0.393
                                                            (1)                          (2)
Lead agency = Federal*Below median                      0.057***                      0.061***
                                                         [0.008]                       [0.010]
Lead agency = Federal*Above median                      0.098***                      0.094***
                                                         [0.008]                       [0.007]
   p-value for difference in coefficients                (0.001)                       (0.014)
                                 Cluster                  State                         State
                           Fixed effects                 Quarter                       Quarter
                                                         Bank ID                      Bank ID
Observations                                             278972                        278972
Adjusted R-squared                                        0.496                         0.495
# of banks                                                6373                          6373
# of clusters                                               48                            48

                                          Panel B: Cross-sectional Regression
                                                                   Bank Failure Rate:
                                                                   SMBs and NMBs
                                 Mean Failure Rate                 0.066       0.075
                                                                    (1)          (2)
                                 Federal-State spread             0.433*      0.775**
                                                                  [0.246]     [0.312]
                                 Observations                        45          40
                                 Adjusted R-squared                0.046       0.117

    Notes: This table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of the federal regulators being
    the lead regulatory agency on CAMELS rating, splitting the states into two groups based on the bank failure rate and
    problem-bank rates during the sample period. We examine the effects in this table across both SMBs and NMBs
    treating both types of federal regulators as the same entity. In Panel A, columns 1 examine banks in states that had
    bank failure rates below and above the median cross-state rate, while columns 2 examines banks in states that had
    problem-bank rates below and above the median cross-state rate. Panel B presents cross-sectional regression of the
    bank failure rate during the sample period on the average composite CAMELS Federal-state spread. In column 1 we
    take all the states while in column 2 we restrict the sample with more than twenty banks. Our sample restricts the
    data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1 . We also
    remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater, concurrent exams by the State and the
    Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10%
    level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.

                                                             43
                           Table 10: Supervisor Identity and Credit Supply

                                                       % Loan growth
                                      Within-bank mean     2.662
                                        Within-bank SD     5.227
                             Lead agency = Federal         0.012
                                                          [0.036]
                             Cluster                       State
                             Fixed effects                Quarter
                                                          Bank ID
                             Observations                 276499
                             Adjusted R-squared            0.151
                             # of banks                    6354
                             # of clusters                   48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal agencies being the
lead regulatory agency on percent loan growth of banks We examine the effects in this table across both SMBs and
NMBs treating both types of federal regulators as the same entity. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state
member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that
correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the
Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the
state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-
2010:Q4.




                                                          44
      Table 11: Supervisor Identity, CAMELS rating, and Public versus Private Banks

                                                                         Composite CAMELS
                                                                         Non-public    Public
                                           Within-bank mean                1.694       1.636
                                            Within-bank SD                 0.387       0.310
                         Federal agency * Non-public dummy                     0.080***
                                                                                [0.008]
                                Federal agency * Public dummy                  0.058***
                                                                                [0.011]
                          p-value for difference in coefficients                (0.090)
                                                        Cluster                  State
                                                  Fixed effects                 Quarter
                                                                               Bank ID
                 Observations                                                   278972
                 Adjusted R-squared                                              0.495
                 # of banks                                                      6373
                 # of clusters                                                     48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal regulators being the
lead agencies on CAMELS ratings, splitting the sample into public and private banks. We examine the effects in
this table across both SMBs and NMBs treating both types of federal regulators as the same entity. Columns 1 and 2
look at non-public and public banks for the FRB and columns 3 and 4 look at non-public and public banks for the
FDIC. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once
since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent
exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks. We include quarter and bank
fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. *
significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                           45
                     Table 12: Supervisor Identity, CAMELS rating, and Crisis

                                                                Composite CAMELS
                                                                Pre-Crisis      Crisis
                                                               (2000-2006) (2007-2009)
                                           Within-bank mean       1.623         1.751
                                             Within-bank SD       0.217         0.249
                         Federal agency * Pre-crisis dummy            0.042***
                                                                        [0.007]
                             Federal agency * Crisis dummy            0.113***
                                                                        [0.015]
                        p-value for difference in coefficients          (0.001)
                                                      Cluster            State
                                                Fixed effects          Quarter
                                                                       Bank ID
                Observations                                            185689
                Adjusted R-squared                                       0.578
                # of banks                                               5854
                # of clusters                                              48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal regulators being the
lead agencies on CAMELS ratings, splitting the sample into crisis (2007-2009) and pre-crisis period (2000-2006).
We examine the effects in this table across both SMBs and NMBs treating both types of federal regulators as the
same entity. Columns 1 and 2 look at pre-crisis and crisis period for the FRB and columns 3 and 4 look at pre-crisis
and crisis periods for the FDIC. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have
switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings
of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier banks.
We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level.
** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.




                                                          46
Table 13: Effect of Bank Size on Supervisor Identify Impact on CAMELS ratings

                                                          Composite CAMELS
                                         Within-bank mean       1.685
                                           Within-bank SD       0.374
                     Lead agency = Federal                    0.072***
                                                               [0.008]
                     Federal * 75th pctile asset dummy        0.022***
                                                               [0.007]
                     75th pctile asset dummy                    0.011
                                                               [0.015]
                     Cluster                                    State
                     Fixed effects                             Quarter
                                                              Bank ID
                     Observations                              278972
                     Adjusted R-squared                         0.495
                     # of banks                                 6373
                     # of clusters                                48

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal regulators being the
lead agencies on CAMELS ratings. We examine the effects in this table across both SMBs and NMBs treating both
types of federal regulators as the same entity. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that
have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also remove observations that correspond to CAMELS
ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and outlier
banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1%
level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                          47
                 Table 14: State Supervisor Characteristics and Impact of Supervisor identity on CAMELS ratings

                                                              % spent on staff          # of examiners to # of          % of examiners with
                                                                 training                     SMB/NMB                   >5 years experience
                                                                      (1)                           (2)                           (3)
                                                             Below       Above            Below        Above            Below        Above
                                                             median      median           median       median           median       median
                                 Within-bank mean            1.678       1.698            1.648        1.798            1.674        1.694
                                   Within-bank SD            0.371       0.382            0.374        0.379            0.371        0.378
                    Federal agency * Below median                0.082***                     0.071***                      0.064***
                                                                  [0.010]                      [0.009]                       [0.007]
                   Federal agency * Above median                 0.069***                     0.096***                      0.087***
                                                                  [0.009]                      [0.011]                       [0.010]
              p-value for difference in coefficients              (0.335)                      (0.087)                       (0.083)
                                            Cluster                State                         State                         State
                                      Fixed Effects               Quarter                      Quarter                       Quarter
                                                                 Bank ID                       Bank ID                       Bank ID
            Observations                                          268494                       276537                        276537
            Adjusted R-squared                                     0.494                        0.494                         0.494
            # of banks                                             6144                          6319                          6319
            # of clusters                                            44                           47                            47

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression that examines the effect of federal regulators being the lead agencies on CAMELS ratings estimated on
subsamples split based on characteristics of state supervisors. We examine the effects in this table across both SMBs and NMBs treating both types of federal
regulators as the same entity. Our sample restricts the data to state and non-state member banks that have switched regulators at least once since 1996:Q1. We also
remove observations that correspond to CAMELS ratings of 3 or greater in the most recent exam, concurrent exams by the State and the Federal Regulator, and
outlier banks. We include quarter and bank fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the state level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. *
significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                                              48
                     Table 15: Supervisor Identity on CAMEL Ratings and its components (all federal regulators)

                                                                      (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                       Combined                     Combined Combined               Combined
                                                       CAMELS                       CAMELS CAMELS                   CAMELS
                                      Within-bank mean   1.761                        1.761    1.761                  1.761
                                        Within-bank SD   0.299                        0.299    0.299                  0.299
                              FRB                      0.138***                     0.126*** 0.116***               0.108***
                                                        [0.016]                      [0.016]  [0.012]                [0.012]
                              FDIC                     0.107***                     0.097*** 0.077***               0.066***
                                                        [0.013]                      [0.011]  [0.011]                [0.008]
                              OCC                      0.156***                     0.152*** 0.150***               0.171***
                                                        [0.020]                      [0.021]  [0.019]                [0.021]
                              OTS                        0.221                        0.132    0.156                  0.069
                                                        [0.137]                      [0.180]  [0.132]                [0.184]
                              Fixed effects                                                    Bank                   Bank
                                                                                     Quarter                         Quarter
                              Observations                          414892           414892   414892                 414892
                              Adjusted R-squared                     0.139            0.167    0.510                  0.537
                              # of banks                             11193            11193    11193                  11193
                              # of clusters                           51                51       51                     51

Notes: The table reports the results from an OLS regression of the FRB, FDIC, OCC or OTS being the lead regulators with the State regulator being the omitted
category. The data includes all banks starting 1996:Q1. Columns (1)-(2) include ROA, Tier 1 capital ratio, Log(Assets). Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level. Sample 1996:Q1-2010:Q4.




                                                                               49
       Figure 1: Regulatory Structure for US Commercial Banks and thrifts 1996:Q1-2011:Q1



OCC                                   National Banks


OTS                                           Thrifts



FED                                     State Member
                                            Banks

 State Bank
 Regulators
                                     State Non-Member
FDIC                                       Banks


                                  State-Chartered Banks
                                              50
.
    Figure 2: Average Regulator Period (Quarters) for SMBs and NMBs.




                                   51
 Figure 3: Observables of SMBs assigned to Fed and State Regulators at 1996:Q1


                                                         Rotating SMB
         4




                                                                           0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
        3
Density




                                                                                 Density
  2      1
         0




                     -2         -1        0      1               2                                0      4     8    12     16   20           24
                                     ROA, 1996q1                                                         Delinquency rate, 1996q1

                                         Starting FED                                                                Starting FED
                                         Starting STATE                                                              Starting STATE
                     kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0293                                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4150
.02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                   .6.8
    Density




                                                                           Density
                                                                             .4      .2
         0




                                                                                     0




                     -20     0      20      40      60           80                               0       3      6       9      12    15
                           Tier 1 Capital Ratio, 1996q1                                               Non-performing to Loans, 1996q1

                                         Starting FED                                                                Starting FED
                                         Starting STATE                                                              Starting STATE
                     kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.2428                                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1961




                                                                      52
Figure 4: Observables of NMBs assigned to Fed and State Regulators at 1996:Q1


                                                         Rotating NMB
         4




                                                                               .2
        3




                                                                            .1 .15
Density




                                                                           Density
  2




                                                                               .05
         1
         0




                                                                               0
                     -2         -1        0      1               2                      0      4     8    12     16   20           24
                                     ROA, 1996q1                                               Delinquency rate, 1996q1

                                         Starting FDIC                                                     Starting FDIC
                                         Starting STATE                                                    Starting STATE
                     kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0213                         kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4179
.02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                               .6 .4
    Density




                                                                             Density
                                                                           .2
         0




                                                                               0




                     -20     0      20      40      60           80                     0       3      6       9      12    15
                           Tier 1 Capital Ratio, 1996q1                                     Non-performing to Loans, 1996q1

                                         Starting FDIC                                                     Starting FDIC
                                         Starting STATE                                                    Starting STATE
                     kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.0099                         kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1994




                                                                      53
                                                 Figure 5: Federal and State CAMELS Spread across States



                                                                   SMBs and NMBs
                    .3
Coefficient, state-agency interaction
          .1        0    .2




                                        AL AZ CO DE GA ID   IN KY MA ME MN MS NC NE NJ NY OK PA SD TX VA WI WY
                                          AR CA CT FL IA  IL KS LA MD MI MO MT ND NH NM OH OR SC TN UT WA WV
                                                                             State




                                                                           54
                               Appendix Table 1: Impact of Supervisor Identity on CAMELS Ratings and its components
                                                           Removing outlier observations

                  (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)      (13)        (14)
       Mean      1.680    1.690        1.484      1.505      1.509      1.591      1.764      1.784      1.906      1.864      1.577       1.549     1.726       1.639
        SD       0.279    0.375        0.282      0.354      0.385      0.488      0.315      0.410      0.424      0.475      0.296       0.339     0.278       0.308
                    Composite               Capital               Asset              Management              Earnings              Liquidity            Sensitivity
                    CAMELS                  rating                rating                rating                rating                 rating                rating
Agency =
FRB             0.093***              0.034***              0.074***              0.131***              0.091***              0.056***              0.097***
                 [0.012]               [0.013]               [0.020]               [0.013]               [0.014]               [0.009]               [0.019]
Agency =
FDIC                       0.067***              0.054***              0.067***              0.082***              0.061***              0.031***              0.049***
                            [0.007]               [0.010]               [0.012]               [0.009]               [0.012]               [0.008]               [0.008]
Cluster          State       State      State      State     State       State     State       State      State      State     State       State      State      State
Fixed effects   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter   Quarter     Quarter
                Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID
Observations     34454      217073     34451      217073     34454      217073     34452      217073     34452      217073     34452      217073     29345      190710
Adj. R-
squared          0.547      0.496      0.519      0.478      0.447      0.429      0.490      0.470      0.578      0.484      0.517      0.496      0.472      0.478
# of banks       1032       5259       1032       5259       1032       5259       1032       5259       1032       5259       1032       5259        963       5219
# of clusters      41         48         41         48         41         48         41         48        41         48         41         48         41         48




                                                                                   55
          Appendix Table 2: Tabulation of Supervisor identity and subcomponents of CAMELS

                  Capital adequacy rating                    Asset quality rating                    Management rating

             SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating                  SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating                 SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating
              Drop           Increase                   Drop            Increase                 Drop            Increase
          Freq.       Pct       Freq.       Pct     Freq.      Pct        Freq.     Pct     Freq.      Pct         Freq.   Pct
FRB        258       50.59       551        63.19    418      47.23        871      65.1     371      39.51         849    77.89
STATE      252       49.41       321        36.81    467      52.77        467      34.9     568      60.49         241    22.11
Total      510        100        872         100     885       100        1,338     100      939       100         1,090    100
          Mean        SD        Mean         SD     Mean       SD         Mean       SD     Mean       SD          Mean     SD
∆CAMELS   -1.022     0.158      1.077       0.295   -1.027    0.169       1.127     0.371   -1.034    0.193        1.103   0.330
            NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating                  NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating               NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating
             Drop            Increase                   Drop            Increase                Drop            Increase
          Freq.       Pct       Freq.       Pct     Freq.      Pct        Freq.     Pct     Freq.      Pct         Freq.   Pct
FDIC      2,282      57.35       2,981      64.22   3,374     56.85       4,316     60.26   3,386     55.38        4,090   66.7
STATE     1,697      42.65       1,661      35.78   2,561     43.15       2,846     39.74   2,728     44.62        2,042   33.3
Total     3,979       100        4,642       100    5,935      100        7,162      100    6,114      100         6,132   100
          Mean        SD        Mean         SD     Mean       SD         Mean       SD     Mean       SD          Mean     SD
∆CAMELS   -1.105     0.371      1.121       0.388   -1.141    0.424       1.176     0.445   -1.089    0.327        1.115   0.357

                     Earnings rating                          Liquidity rating                        Sensitivity rating

             SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating                  SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating                 SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating
              Drop           Increase                   Drop            Increase                 Drop            Increase
          Freq.       Pct       Freq.       Pct     Freq.      Pct        Freq.     Pct     Freq.      Pct         Freq.   Pct
FRB        492       46.46        843       67.77    392        49         591      69.45    247      37.83         580    72.59
STATE      567       53.54        401       32.23    408        51         260      30.55    406      62.17         219    27.41
Total     1,059       100        1,244       100     800       100         851       100     653       100          799     100
          Mean        SD        Mean         SD     Mean       SD         Mean       SD     Mean       SD          Mean     SD
∆CAMELS   -1.044     0.219      1.178       0.478   -1.013    0.122       1.066     0.283   -1.023    0.150        1.045   0.214
            NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating                  NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating               NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating
             Drop            Increase                   Drop            Increase                Drop            Increase
          Freq.       Pct       Freq.       Pct     Freq.      Pct        Freq.     Pct     Freq.      Pct         Freq.   Pct
FDIC      3,623      57.36       3,751      58.44   2,610     56.26       3,033     62.52   1,989     52.31        3,032   65.73
STATE     2,693      42.64       2,667      41.56   2,029     43.74       1,818     37.48   1,813     47.69        1,581   34.27
Total     6,316       100        6,418       100    4,639      100        4,851      100    3,802      100         4,613    100
          Mean        SD        Mean         SD     Mean       SD         Mean       SD     Mean       SD          Mean     SD
∆CAMELS   -1.126     0.403      1.167       0.450   -1.044    0.228       1.084     0.312   -1.010    0.101        1.060   0.265




                                                               56
Appendix Table 3: Tabulation for banks that eventually fail

               Banks that eventually receive 4 or 5 rating,
                    before they receive 4 or 5 rating:
                      SMBs, FRB-STATE rotating
               Drop in CAMELS           Increase in CAMELS
              Freq.      Percent         Freq.      Percent

 FRB            13        32.5           37         71.1
 STATE          27        67.5           15         28.9
 Total          40        100            52         100
              Mean         SD          Mean         SD

 ∆CAMELS      -1.000      0.000         1.038      0.194
                      NMBs, FDIC-STATE rotating
               Drop in CAMELS       Increase in CAMELS
              Freq.      Percent     Freq.      Percent

 FDIC          169        64.5          148        61.7
 STATE          93        35.5          92         38. 3
 Total         262        100           240         100
              Mean         SD          Mean         SD

 ∆CAMELS      -1.023      0.150         1.013      0.111




                            57
            Appendix Table 4: Impact of Supervisor Identity on Bank Variables
                  A more detailed look at Delinquency, NPA and ROA

                                         Panel A: SMBs
                       (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
                    NPLs to        NPLs to Delinquency Delinquency Provision for Noninterest
                   total loans    total loans   rate       rate   Loan & Lease Expense to
                      RRE            CRE       RRE         CRE        Losses       Assets
  Within-bank mean 0.7935           1.2969     2.221      1.327       0.0649       0.792
     Within-bank SD 0.8319          1.6519     1.609      1.807       0.0833       0.1251
FRB                 0.048***       0.136***   0.051*    0.090***     0.004***     0.004**
                     [0.017]        [0.034]   [0.027]    [0.028]      [0.001]     [0.002]
Cluster               State          State     State       State        State       State
Fixed Effects        Quarter        Quarter   Quarter    Quarter      Quarter     Quarter
                    Bank ID        Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID     Bank ID      Bank ID
Observations          37848          24444     37879      37833        37930       37888
Adjusted R-squared    0.298          0.291     0.378      0.321        0.247        0.663
# of banks            1037            840      1037        1035        1041         1040
# of clusters           41             40        41         41           41           41

                                         Panel B: NMBs
                         (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
                     NPLs to       NPLs to Delinquency Delinquency Provision for Noninterest
                    total loans   total loans   rate       rate      Loan &      Expense to
                       RRE           CRE       RRE         CRE     Lease Losses    Assets
   Within-bank mean 0.9014          1.46196    2.587      1.659       0.0680       0.7692
     Within-bank SD 1.05485         2.06448    2.012      2.547       0.0951       0.1294
 FDIC                 0.019**      0.074***    0.021     0.055**       0.001      0.005***
                      [0.007]       [0.025]   [0.017]    [0.027]      [0.001]      [0.001]
 Cluster                State        State     State       State       State        State
 Fixed Effects        Quarter       Quarter   Quarter    Quarter     Quarter       Quarter
                     Bank ID       Bank ID    Bank ID    Bank ID     Bank ID      Bank ID
 Observations         237934        159006    238139     237834      238936        239498
 Adjusted R-squared    0.278         0.268     0.373      0.297        0.239        0.658
 # of banks             5286         4835      5286        5289        5329         5318
 # of clusters           48            48        48         48           48           48




                                              58
