NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION AND HEALTH:
INSIGHTS FROM INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS
David M. Cutler
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Working Paper 17738
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17738
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

We are grateful to Pascaline Dupas and John Strauss for comments, to John Min and Tisa Sherry for
excellent research support, and to the National Institutes on Aging for research funding (grant
P01AG005842). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17738.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David M. Cutler and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Education and Health: Insights from International Comparisons
David M. Cutler and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 17738
January 2012
JEL No. I1,I12,I15
ABSTRACT
In this review we synthesize what is known about the relationship between education and health. A
large number of studies from both rich and poor countries show that education is associated with better
health. While previous work has thought of the effect of education separately for rich and poor countries,
we argue that there are insights to be gained by integrating the two. For example, education is associated
with lower malnutrition in most countries, but in richer countries the educated have lower BMIs whereas
in poor countries the educated have higher BMIs. This suggests that the behaviors associated with
better health differ depending on the level of development. We illustrate this approach by comparing
the effects of education on various health and health behaviors around the world, to generate hypotheses
about why education is so often (but not always) predictive of health. Finally, we review the empirical
evidence on the relationship between education and health, paying particular attention to causal evidence
and evidence on mechanisms linking education to better health.
David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

In their seminal 1965 study, Kitagawa and Hauser documented that mortality in the
United States fell with education. Since then a very large number of studies has confirmed the
more educated enjoy longer lives: Cutler et al. (2008) for example compute that in 1980 at age
25 those with some college could expect to live another 54.4 years whereas life expectancy at 25
for those with a high school degree or less was only 51.6.
Not only are the differences in health by education large, by most measures these
differences have been growing in recent years. For instance in 2000 those with some college
lived 7 years longer than high school dropouts—thus the gap increased by 4 years since 1980
(Cutler et al 2008).1 Education not only predicts mortality in the US, it is also a large predictor of
health in most countries, regardless of their level of development (Strauss and Thomas, 1995).
The more educated are also noticeably healthier while they are alive, as they report being in
better health, having fewer health conditions and limitations (Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010a,
b). Children of educated parents are also in better health in both developed and developing
countries (Strauss and Thomas 1995, Schultz 2007).
In this review we synthesize what is known about the relationship between education and
health in both developed and developing countries. While previous work has thought of the
effect of education separately for rich and poor countries, we argue that there are insights to be
gained by integrating the two. For example, education is associated with lower mortality in most
developed countries, and this relationship is similar regardless of the generosity of the social
protections and health insurance systems that are in place. This suggests that access to care is not
1

Other papers have documented increased gaps by education in other countries as well, for example education
gradients in mortality since 1980 increased in Estonia (Leinsalu et al 2007), Sweden, Finland and Norway
(Shkolnikov et al 2011), Russia (Plavinski et al 2003, Shkolnikov et al 1998), Denmark, England/Wales, and Italy
(Machenback et al 2003). Caution must be taken when interpreting these trends however, as the number and
composition of individuals within education categories has also changed substantially over time.

1

the main reason for the association in the first place. We illustrate this approach by comparing
the effects of education on various health and health behaviors around the world to generate
hypotheses about why education is so often (but not always) predictive of health.
We go on to examine theories for the relation between education and health. We then
review the empirical evidence on this relationship paying particular attention to causal evidence
and evidence on mechanisms linking education to higher health.

I.

Stylized facts about education and health
To examine the link between education and health across countries, we combine data

from three sources. Data on for most developing countries come from the Demographic and
Health Surveys (DHS) for years between 2004 and 2009. Data for the US come from the
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFFS) for 2005. Data for Europe come from the
Eurobarometer Surveys (2005 and 2009). We have a total of 61 countries in total. We matched
each country to its per capita level of GDP in current US dollars reported by the World Bank. To
create a consistent sample, we restrict attention to women ages 15-49 (the DHS does not collect
data on men or older women). More details on the data construction are in the Data Appendix.
Education is measured as years of school in the DHS and the BRFFS, but the
Eurobarometer only asks about the age at which a person finished schooling. We assume that
years of schooling in the Eurobarometer data is five years less than age at which schooling was
finished. Because some people take significant time off before finish schooling, we truncate
schooling at 25 years. Although not ideal, this is the only standardized data source with a large
number of countries.

2

For all of these countries we have measures of height (in centimeters) and weight (in
kilos), which we use to construct Body Mass Index (BMI=weight/height squared), an indicator
for being underweight (BMI<=18.5) and an indicator for being obese (BMI>=30). The data from
the DHS comes from actual measures whereas the data for the US and Europe are self-reported.
For all of the countries we also know whether the person is currently a smoker. For a few
developing countries and all developed countries we know whether the person drinks alcohol.
Finally only for developing countries, we have measures of hemoglobin levels and a measure of
whether the person had a sexually transmitted disease in the last year.
To document basic patterns in the relationship between education and health, we estimate
the following regression for each country in the sample:
(1)

Hic = β0 + β1c*Educationic + Xi α + εi

Where Hi is a health or health behavior indicator of individual i in country c, Education is
measured in years, and Xi contains basic demographics: age, age squared, marital status,
ethnicity, race and religion dummies. For each country and outcome we obtain the regression
coefficient β1c, which we plot by level of GDP (in logs). All of the surveys have complex
sampling design schemes, and we use the weights provided by the survey to compute means and
to weight regressions.
It is difficult to interpret the coefficient of education in these regressions as causal since
education and health could be both determined by unobservable factors. Also the coefficient on
education might reflect the effect of health on schooling rather than the reverse. We discuss these
issues much more below. For the time being we describe the correlations that we observe and
hypothesize on the reasons for the patterns across countries.

3

We estimate linear models and look at the effect of years of schooling across all
countries. It is not clear that years of schooling are comparable across countries since the quality
of education differs widely by country and thus the actual education of individuals might differ
even when years of school are comparable. Ideally one would use test scores or other measures
of achievement (such as literacy and numeracy), as suggested by Hanusheck and Woessmann
(2009), but these are not available here, or in most surveys. Also one might prefer to look at nonlinear models, where the effect of education is allowed to vary depending on the level of
education. Previous research has generally found that linear models are good approximations
(Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010a) though this refers to high income countries. Nevertheless our
estimates are of interest since they mirror the standard estimates that are produced when looking
at specific countries and times. Also we are restricting our attention to women because the DHS
surveys collect information systematically on them but not necessarily for men. Prior research
documents that correlations between education and health are similar for men and women,
though in general correlations are stronger for men but this varies depending on the outcome
(Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010a).
Figure 1 shows the education gradient in BMI as it relates to average income. BMI is
generally taken as an indicator of short term nutrition. The figure suggests a clear pattern by
income: in poor countries, those with more education have higher BMIs whereas the opposite is
true in rich countries. The crossover point is income of about $3,000 per capita, roughly the
income of Bolivia and Peru. However, the relationship between health and BMI is not
monotonic: Higher weight (given height) is associated with lower mortality at low levels of
weight, but after some threshold increased weight is associated with larger mortality. To

4

disentangle these effects we look at the effect of education on the likelihood of being
underweight and on the likelihood of being obese: both of these are indicators of poor health.
Figure 2 shows the patterns for underweight. Overall education is associated with a
decrease in undernutrition: most coefficients are either negative and statistically significant, or
essentially zero (though there are a few exceptions). The effect of education is largest for the
poorest countries and then becomes zero (or positive) as GDP rises. This is essentially due to the
fact that there is very little undernutrition in countries that have reached middle levels of income,
and there is no effect of education on malnutrition when the prevalence rates are low. This is
more evident in Figure 3 which plots education coefficients against levels of malnutrition (the
share of the population that is underweight).
Figure 4 shows the patterns for obesity. These patterns are very similar to the patterns for
BMI: in poor countries, the effect of education on obesity is positive and significant, whereas it
becomes negative and significant for richer countries. This pattern has been noted before
(Stunkard and Sobel 1987, Stunkard 2007, Strauss and Thomas 1998) and it is more marked for
women than men (our graphs only show patterns for women). Thus we observe that around the
world more educated avoid malnutrition, but not always obesity. It is possible that when levels of
nutrition are low, obesity is associated with increased survival since people are better able to
fight infectious disease, and chronic problems are not large killers. But once infectious diseases
fall, and chronic conditions become more important, the pattern reverses (conditional on
knowledge that obesity is bad). It is also possible that girth is a status symbol or symbol of
wealth in societies that are poor; but that in rich societies where knowledge of the health
consequences is widespread, the opposite becomes true, as rich individuals will devote their
resources to staying thin and fit. But the data strongly suggests that the effect of education

5

depends on the level of development and in particular where in the “nutrition transition”
countries are.
Figure 5 shows the patterns for hemoglobin levels by income—though only for
developing countries. Again we find that the effect of education is protective at low levels of
income, and then decreases with GDP; this is again a function of the fact that on average
hemoglobin levels rise with GDP. So in poor countries the more educated avoid malnutrition.
But Figure 6 shows they do not always avoid disease: among very low income countries, there
are more countries where education is associated with a higher incidence of STIs than countries
where education is protective. But there is a trend by income again: education is more likely to
be protective for higher levels for GDP. Recent work that looks at sexual behavior responses by
education level in Africa also reports that the “effect of education” varies depending on the
stages of the HIV epidemic (Iorio and Santaeulalia-Llopis 2011).
Figure 7 shows the patterns for the effect of education on smoking, the leading cause of
preventable deaths worldwide (World Health Organization, 2009). In general the effect of
education on smoking is negative, but for the poorest countries the coefficients tend to be very
small. Also for many middle income countries there is a positive effect of education. It is
unlikely that this reflects differential knowledge of the harms of smoking among the better
educated. The danger of cigarette smoking is well known around the world even in the poorest
countries: for example in Bangladesh 93% of smokers report that smoking causes lung cancer
(International Tobacco Control Policy Evaluation Project). Rather, it may reflect the social
acceptability of smoking as income increases, or the onset of public policies to reduce smoking
at very high incomes. Also possible is that in some countries the effects of knowledge are
counteracted by the effects of higher incomes, since smoking is a normal good. Again these

6

patterns suggest that the effect of education on smoking depends on the level of development
defined both in terms of income and knowledge and will therefore vary over time and space.
Table 1 presents some evidence of this “smoking transition” for the US. In 1949, high school
dropouts are less likely to smoke than high school graduates or those with more education—the
opposite of what we observe today. At this time dropouts also are more likely to think smoking is
harmful. But between 1950 and 1970 the more educated became more likely to think smoking
was harmful as knowledge of the harms of smoking emerged; and by 1969 they are also less
likely to smoke.
Figure 8 shows the patterns for drinking. We do not have data on drinking for many
developing countries, so we examine somewhat higher income countries. Alcohol appears to be a
normal good. Education increases the odds of drinking alcohol in almost all the countries we
examine. Modest alcohol consumption might not be detrimental to health so it is not necessarily
clear that these coefficients have the “wrong” sign. Ideally we would study whether education
lowers heavy drinking, which does fall with education levels in the US and the UK (Cutler and
Lleras-Muney 2010a), but the data are not consistently available across countries.
The previous figures suggest important patterns by education, and could be taken as
reflecting causal relationships from education to health. However we can also document here that
education is partly determined by health by looking at height. Height is generally thought of as
an excellent indicator of early childhood environment, as much of the variation in adult heights is
determined by age 3 (Martorell and Habicht, 1986). Thus the coefficients of education on height
from equation (1) most likely reflect the effect of health on the quantity and quality of education

7

individuals obtain, rather than the effect of education on final height.2 Figure 9 shows the results
for height. For almost all the countries we examine more educated people are taller and the
relationship is generally statistically significant. And though the effect falls a bit with GDP,
education is still very strongly associated with height, even in very rich countries (with a couple
of interesting exceptions among the richest countries).

Summary
All told, the international data on health and education show several stylized facts. The
clearest relationship is between income and the education gradient in nutritional intake. Poor
countries are characterized by a mix of undernutrition and overnutrition. Many people are
undernourished or anemic in poor countries, and these outcomes are strongly negatively related
to education. Less educated people are more likely to be underweight and anemic; better
educated people are more likely to be overweight or obese. In richer countries, where
undernutrition is not very prevalent, there is no education gradient in undernutrition. In contrast
in these countries the prevalence of obesity is large and there is a large positive education
gradient in obesity. This suggests that education is protective for the outcomes that are known to
be bad for health.
The link between education and height is also clear. In all countries – even the richest –
better educated people are taller than less educated people. The magnitude of the relationship is
large throughout the world.

2

However, though most of height is determined at very young ages, there is another critical growth period in
adolescence where the remaining differences in final adult height are determined. Thus it is possible some of the
relationship is due to an effect of schooling on height.

8

The link between education and other measures of health is much less clear. The
correlation between education and smoking is non-linear in income; the relationship between
education and height or STIs is unrelated to income. These patterns demand more complex
explanations.

II.

Understanding the relationship between education and health
Education and health may be related for three reasons: poor health early in life may lead

to less educational attainment; lower educational attainment may adversely affect subsequent
health; or some third factor such as differences in discount rates may affect education and healthseeking behavior. We briefly discuss each of these pathways; more discussion is contained in
our prior work (Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010a, b).
We start by emphasizing the most important common unobserved determinants of both
education and health. The first is parental resources: parents with more resources (broadly
construed to include wealth, social networks, knowledge, etc.) will devote part of them to
improving the survival of their children (by investing in their health) and also to improving their
future outcomes, which in turn means they will invest perhaps more on their children’s
education. Secondly, there are some important individual characteristics that theoretically are
expected to increase both education and health. Ceteris paribus, more patient individuals are
more likely to invest more in both education and health (Fuchs 1982). Also smarter individuals
might be more likely to obtain more schooling and also have better health.

Effect of early life health on education

9

As the previous results indicate, there is a very strong correlation between early life
indicator of health (such as height) and educational attainment—and this is true across all
countries of the world. These correlations have been documented many times before, particularly
in developing countries (Strauss and Thomas 1998). Since education is largely determined at
young ages, this suggests that at least part of the correlation between education and health among
adults is due to the fact that unhealthy children obtain few years of schooling and become
unhealthy adults.
Recent studies show that the relationship we observe – shorter (and sicker) children
obtain less education – is a causal one. Two types of studies investigate the causal effect of
health shocks on human capital accumulation: some take advantage of so-called “natural
experiments,” while others use randomized controlled trials to investigate the question.
Most studies that investigate this causal chain find support for it. For instance, Almond
(2006) documents that individuals affected in utero by the 1918 influenza pandemic obtained
fewer years of schooling than those not affected. Meng and Qian (2006) find that those born
during the Great Famine in China had lower educational achievement than those born not during
the Great Famine. Bleakley (2009) reports that malaria eradication in the US and various Latin
American countries resulted in greater education, and Lucas (2009) finds similar effects of the
eradication malaria campaigns in Paraguay and Sri Lanka; Maccini and Yang (2009) show that
in Indonesia unusual amounts of rainfall in utero predict lower education levels. Finally Bleakley
(2007) and Miguel and Kremer (2004) show that deworming campaigns had substantial effects
on schooling in early 20th century American South and in Kenya respectively. Only the recent
quasi-experimental study by Cutler et al. (2009) finds no effects of malaria eradication in India.

10

A related literature explores the consequences of birth weight on adult outcomes and
finds similar results suggesting that those born with lower birthweights have lower levels of
education, income and health as adults (Case et al., 2005, Behrman and Rosenweig 2004, Black,
Devereaux and Salvanes, 2007). Though these studies do not directly look at nutrition, but rather
at extreme events that influence birth weight, in many cases nutrition and disease are the most
likely intervening mechanisms.
Direct evidence on the effect of nutrition and disease on education is available from
several randomized experiments. For example Bobonis et al. (2006), find that iron
supplementation increases pre-school attendance in India, and Field et al. (2007) find that iodine
supplementation in utero increases educational attainment. Hoddinott et al., (2008) and Maluccio
et al. (2009) report that nutritional supplements before the age of 3 increased education and
earnings in adulthood. Clarke et al (2008) show that treated children who randomly received
malaria treatment in Kenya had improved health and increased cognitive ability.
Whether early life health affects education through morbidity at younger ages or
expectation of life extension at older ages is unknown. Indeed, there is scant evidence on the
extent to which expectations of longer life affects schooling. Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney
(2010) find that when maternal mortality fell in Sri Lanka, girls’ education increased (but not
that of boys). But they cannot compute how much of the education-life expectancy relationship
is accounted by this channel.
Overall, the evidence is consistent in showing that nutrition and disease shocks early in
life are quite detrimental for human capital formation. Interestingly, a negative link between
early life health and educational attainment is not the only theoretical possibility, since health
affects the costs and benefits of schooling (Bleakley 2010). Sickness increases the cost of going

11

to school in terms of effort, and might also lower the returns to school if it lowers life
expectancy. Thus, parents of sick children might optimally choose lower levels of schooling for
those children. However illness also increases the cost of work, and might increase the returns to
school (in terms of avoiding more physically demanding jobs). Thus it could be that the return to
schooling increases as people become less healthy. However there is no empirical evidence of
this alternative, though perhaps it explains why education and height are negatively related in
two very rich countries: Finland and Luxembourg (see Figure 9). This discussion also
underscores the fact that the observed relationship between height and education reflects not only
the physical effects of disease in childhood, but also the behavioral responses of parents which
might attenuate or exacerbate the effects of the health shock itself.
Given that health is an important determinant of schooling, and the fact that education
and health could simply be determined by common factors such as parental resources, it is
extremely challenging to document whether in addition to these well documented relationships,
education itself affects health – the question we consider next.

The effect of education on health: theory
Theoretical foundations for a causal effect of education on health were first provided by
the seminal work of Grossman (1972), based on the human capital model of Becker (1964). One
key insight of Grossman’s model of health capital is that individuals derive utility from health
directly (they do not like being sick) and indirectly by affecting labor market outcomes (sick
individuals work less and earn less). The other essential feature of the model is the recognition
that there is a “health production function” – that there are known factors that individuals (or
institutions) can manipulate in order to affect health in predictable ways. These two features give

12

rise to a behavioral model where individuals demand medical care, food, and other goods and
services because they are aware these factors will improve their health and ultimately increase
their utility.3
In this type of model, education can affect health in a variety of ways. Most obviously,
education affects the type of jobs that individuals get and the income they earn. A year of
education raises income by about 7% (Card 2005), and this is true in both developed and
developing countries. Higher incomes increase the demand for better health, but they affect
health in other ways as well. Richer people can afford gyms and healthier foods; they can also
afford more cigarettes. Further, when an individual’s wage increases, it raises the opportunity
cost of time: because many health inputs require time (such as exercise or doctor visits or
cooking), in the short run wage increases might reduce health. Thus, the income associated with
higher education may or may not improve health.
Highly educated people are also more likely to take jobs that provide health insurance
and other benefits such as retirement accounts (Employee Benefit Research Institute, 2011).
Although one expects these benefits to have a positive effect on health, it is theoretically possible
that they do not. For example individuals with insurance could be less likely to care for
themselves because they face lower financial costs in the event of a disease. Because the
uncompensated costs of disease are large however (morbidity and premature mortality), we do
not expect these indirect effects to dominate the access associated with better insurance.
Finally, more educated people work in different industries and occupations than less
educated people. To the extent that job characteristics affect health, this may affect health as
well. At the dawn of the industrial era, this relationship was undoubtedly positive. Early in the

3

See Strauss and Thomas (forthcoming) for an excellent exposition of the theoretical production of health over the
life course and its determinants.

13

20th century the more educated were more likely to work in white collar occupations, which were
substantially safer than working in agriculture or manufacturing (fewer accidents, exposure to
chemicals, physical strain, etc). Today, this could still be true, but it is less clear. Most
individuals work in the service sector and the better educated may have jobs that are worse for
their health – for example, they spend more time sitting in front of computers, which could turn
out to be bad: sitting (independently of exercise) has been recently shown to detrimental to
health (Patel et al 2010).
Thus the effect of education on health, through its effect on the labor market, is
ambiguous. Moreover, a positive association between education and disease can arise through
the conscious choices of individuals: individuals may well know that exercise is needed to
remain in good physical shape, but they may optimally trade-off some of their health for
increased incomes when wages are high. At the extreme, when individuals have no other
resources than their bodies to earn a living, they will optimally “use up” their bodies to earn a
living: trading off higher lifetime earnings for shorter, sicker lives, as in Case and Deaton (2005).
The theory of compensating differentials predicts just that: individuals can be “paid off” to
accept risky occupations (Rosen 1986).
The second mechanism explored by Grossman is that education can affect the production
function of health directly, acting as a “technology” parameter. This is the so-called “productive
efficiency” mechanism (Kenkel, 1991), in contrast to the “allocative efficiency” mechanism
which we have already described (the more educated will optimally chose different levels of
health inputs because they face different prices and budget constraints). In its simplest
formulation, productive efficiency posits that the better educated will have better health
outcomes, even conditional on access to the same health inputs at the same prices. Better use of

14

information is the classic example. More educated individuals might be better at following
doctor’s instructions (because they might have better self control or more flexibility in their time
use for example) or they might be more likely to believe the information produced by the
scientific establishment and follow recommendations that follow from these (because they took
science courses in school or know scientists directly).
Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010a) provide an example of this pathway. Both more and
less educated people strongly agree that one should wear a seatbelt while driving a car. But the
less educated are much more likely to agree with the opposite of that statement as well: true or
false, seatbelts are just as likely to harm as help you in an accident. It may be that better
educated people have a deeper understanding of the risks in not wearing a seatbelt and the
probabilities that go into a calculation of optimal seatbelt use. Another example concerns how
successful individuals are at using certain health technologies, such as devices to help quit
smoking. Conditional on making an attempt to quit smoking, the better educated are more likely
to be successful quitters (Lillard et al 2007).
There is a third theoretical reason why education could be related to health: education
could change the ‘taste’ for a longer, healthier life. Becker and Mulligan (1997) posit that
education lowers individuals’ discount rates, making them more “patient.” There are two reasons
for this. First, attending school per se is an exercise in delaying gratification, and school may
teach patience; this may carry over into other aspects of life. Second, to the extent that
individuals can “chose” or learn what to like (in other words if discount rates can be chosen),
then those with more education have a greater incentive to choose patience, since they face
steeper income profiles over their lifetimes. The same argument might be told about risk
aversion.

15

Finally, education affects the peers that individuals spend time with, and different peer
sets may encourage different health behaviors. This is particularly important in the context of
health, given that many health behaviors have an important social component. For example,
individuals generally drink together and often smoke together. More generally peers are thought
to be essential in determining risky behaviors. Also peers and social networks are an important
source of information, and of financial, physical and emotional support, and as such can affect
whether individuals get sick and how well they fare when they do. If on average more educated
individuals have more educated peers, they will have access to a greater set of resources. If more
educated individuals are more likely to be better informed (because they learned so in school or
because they remain better informed later), then peers will help individuals reinforce their
knowledge, in a “multiplier” setting.
Notice however, that just as personal financial resources can have an ambiguous effect on
health, so can peers’. A peer group that focuses on sedentary lifestyles and lack of long-term
investment may encourage that same behavior among all members of the peer group.
Beyond the Grossman model, there are other theories that also predict associations
between education and health. The most prominent is that education predicts rank in society, and
those with higher rank are in better health than those with lower rank. In small hierarchical
groups, such as apes and (perhaps) humans, those at the top will have access to more resources
and greater control over their lives in general, whereas those at the bottom will have both fewer
resources and control. As a consequence, those at the bottom will suffer more “stress” and this
in turn lowers immune responses and increases the likelihood of short term illness and long term
chronic disease.

16

This theory has been shown to be accurate among mammals and other species (Sapolsky
2004), and has been tested experimentally with animals to rule out genetic factors as the main
explanation (for example, the top of one hierarchy will suffer in health if they are transferred into
a different group where they have a lower place in the hierarchy). Although it is not entirely
clear whether and how this theory applies to humans in large modern societies – where reference
groups are multiple and they are chosen endogenously – it provides another rationale by which
education may affect health. Note that this theory has an interesting prediction: if all that matters
is relative rank in society, a society with higher average levels of education may have no better
outcomes than a society with lower average levels of education.
Education may also affect health because the things that kids do while in school are
different than what they do outside of school. Though this is a trivial observation, this so-called
“incarceration effect” is extremely important to consider. For example, children in school may
have less exposure to criminal activity or poor role models.
Finally there are other possibilities. The more educated could inadvertently be better or
worse off because of biological processes that are not well understood. For example, more
educated women have higher mortality rates of cancers of the reproductive system. It has been
hypothesized that this “wrong” gradient emerges because more educated women have fewer
children, and having children turns out to be protective from certain cancers (Willett et al.,
2010). Overall, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010b) report that education appears to lower
mortality even after all health behaviors are accounted for, which suggests that some of these
non-behavioral mechanisms might be important – though it is not obvious that all important
health behaviors can be observed.

17

Of course it is very likely that many of these mechanisms are at play at any one time and
place, and that in combination they will yield complex patterns. The patterns reported by de
Walque (2006) about education and HIV in Africa are an interesting case in point—he reports
that “education predicts protective behaviors like condom use, use of counseling and testing,
discussion among spouses and knowledge, but it also predicts a higher level of infidelity and a
lower level of abstinence.” In this example it would appear as if the educated seek out
information at higher rates, know more, and use their information and resources to purchase
protection; but also have some higher risky behaviors, perhaps because of their higher incomes
or lower risk (they can “afford” it).

Evidence on the causal effect of education
A large number of early studies found supporting evidence for the Grossman model using
largely descriptive tools (Grossman 2000). The usual prediction tested was that education and
health were positively correlated. Clearly they are; the literature struggled with instruments for
wages to determine causality. However, these studies were not entirely convincing about
whether education had a causal effect on health, since descriptive methods and imperfect
instruments are not well-suited to establishing causality.
A second generation of studies attempted to provide clearer evidence of a causal link
between education and health again using “natural experiments.” Many of these studies make use
of compulsory schooling as a source of plausibly exogenous variation of education to investigate
whether more school improves adult health. The intuition for this approach is simple: some
individuals are forced to attend school longer because of compulsory school legislation, and
researchers can examine whether the health of those that are forced to obtain more schooling

18

improves relative the health of those not required to stay in school. Studies in the US (LlerasMuney, 2005), Denmark (Arendt, 2005), Netherlands (Van Kippersluis et al 2011), Sweden
(Spasojevic, 2004), the UK (Silles 2009, and Powdthavee 2009) and Germany (Kempter et al.
2011) using changes in compulsory schooling find that indeed these laws ultimately improved the

health of the affected populations. On the other hand, recent work by Clark and Royer (2010),
Oreopolous (2006), and Jurges et al (2009) finds no effect of compulsory schooling laws on
health in England, and Albouy and Lequien (2009) find no effects in France.
The literature that has estimated the effect of education on health behaviors using natural
experiments is also mixed. For example, Sander (1995a, b), De Walque (2004), Kenkel, Lillard
and Mathios (2006) and Grimard and Parent (2007), Jurges et al (2011) find that schooling
lowers smoking rates but Grimard and Parent (2007) and Kempter et al (2011) find no evidence
that schooling affects smoking behavior.
It is difficult to interpret this conflicting evidence. All of the papers that find positive
effects of education on health use natural experiments to construct IV estimates of the impact of
education. They tend to find effects that are larger than OLS. Although this has been generally
interpreted as reflecting heterogeneity of treatment effects (those that are affected by the
legislation have larger returns), the alternative interpretation is that the “natural experiment” did
not in fact work as well as an experiment, and there is still substantial bias in the education
estimates, as thoroughly discussed in Rosenzweig and Wolpin (2000). For example Mazumder
(2010) shows that the results in Lleras-Muney are not robust to the inclusion of state-specific
trends. However there is very little variation left once these controls are added, so it is not clear
whether the effects are truly overestimated, or whether the variation in the laws is not sufficient
to estimate an effect of education. This discussion underscores the limitations of IV studies in

19

general. From a methodological point of view, the paper that makes the fewest assumptions is
the Clark and Royer Regression-Discontinuity study, and this paper finds no effects of education
on health.
Also interesting to note is that these papers all report impacts along different margins, not
just because of the obvious reason that they study different times and places, but because the
“experiments” themselves are different. In the UK, the changes in compulsory schooling were
strictly followed and an entire cohort of individuals was forced to obtain almost one more year of
schooling as a result. In the US by contrast, the laws that are typically studied increased
educational attainment by 0.05 of a year—that is only 1 in 20 individuals obtained one more year
of schooling. There are two important differences here. First the affected population in the US is
a small sample among those that were potentially affected—it is indeed possible returns are
different for this subset. Second in the US only a few individuals in a given cohort and place
were affected, but entire cohorts were affected in the UK. If, for example, education matters
because of rank, then in the US those that stayed in school had their rank increased relative to the
counterfactual of no compulsory schooling law, but this is not clear in the UK.
It is also theoretically possible that the effect of education varies over time and place, and
that the results from the previous studies correctly document this variation. Indeed, the
international evidence suggests that the returns to education do vary across space. It is notable
that the two studies that find no effects of education (Clark and Royer in the UK and Albouy and
Lequien in France) study cohorts during and shortly after WWII, a time when the income returns
to education were falling and generally low.
The fact that the effect of education on labor market earnings itself is causal (Card 2005)
also suggests a positive effect of schooling: if schooling is rewarded in the labor market because

20

it raises productivity, how does it do so? Whatever general human capital is learnt in school and
rewarded in the labor market might also be useful in the production of health, since it is useful in
the production of goods. If education makes better workers by making workers better decision
makers or better able to deal with complexity or uncertainty (as has been hypothesized by Nelson
and Phelps, 1975, Schultz 1975, Rosenzweig 1995), then these abilities can be used in other
domains, in particular for health.
One central conclusion of this discussion is that looking into the specific mechanisms by
which education affects health would improve our understanding of the education-health link
substantially. We review what is known about this next, after describing the latest attempts to
infer causality in the literature.
In addition to natural experiments described above, there are a variety of experimental
interventions that have been carried out and can be used to infer the effect of education on health,
typically in low income countries. Duflo, Dupas and Kremer (2011) study the effects of a
program than randomly distributed school uniforms – a significant cost associated with school –
among upper primary level students in Kenya. The intervention successfully increased levels of
schooling for both genders by a substantial amount (the dropout rate fell by 18 percent). Seven
years later, treated girls had significantly lower rate of marriage and pregnancy, but the treatment
had no had effect on sexually transmitted diseases. Duflo et al. also study a randomized
intervention to add HIV information to the curriculum of some students. We can think of this as
an intervention that affects the content or quality of school rather than the quantity. Interestingly
this intervention had no effect on sexually transmitted diseases, but the rate of unwed teenage
pregnancies fell.

21

Baird et al (BMO 2010) look at the effects of conditional cash transfers on schooling,
pregnancy and marriage rates in Malawi. Conditional cash transfers are transfer programs where
the receipt of income is conditional on certain behaviors, generally related to health or schooling.
Unconditional cash transfers do not have any strings attached. Like Duflo et al. they find that the
conditional cash transfer program resulted in lower levels of sexual activity, teen pregnancy and
marriage rates among young girls in the short term, in addition to increasing schooling.
Jensen and Lleras-Muney (2010) study an intervention in the Dominican Republic that
informed 14-year old boys about the labor market returns to school. The intervention
successfully increased schooling by 0.2 years, and significantly decreased work in the formal
labor market. They also find that treated boys started drinking heavily later and were less likely
to smoke than untreated boys.
These studies suggest that education affects specific health behaviors, but not all
behaviors. However even here, it is not clear that one can infer that education is the ultimate
cause of the changes in health behavior we observe. The gold standard for establishing causality
would call for randomly assigning individuals to various levels of education. Clearly, this
approach is unethical and unfeasible. Instead these studies look at an “intent-to-treat”
intervention, where individuals are randomly “incentivized” to obtain different levels of
education. With this design it is possible to estimate the effect of education on health, if (1) the
intervention successfully raises education levels and (2) the random incentives that are provided
to increase schooling affect health only through education (the exclusion restriction assumption).
In this light, consider whether randomized interventions that potentially raise schooling
can be used to estimate the causal effect of schooling. Typically interventions are designed so
that reasonably sized effects on education can be detected with the chosen sample. But even if

22

this requirement is met and the intervention increases education levels, the intervention must
induce students to attend school but not directly or indirectly impact any other determinant of
health. It is difficult to design an intervention that meets this assumption. Providing scholarships
to those that are credit constrained is equivalent to increasing income in the short run, which
directly or indirectly is likely to affect health. Providing uniforms is not quite like providing
income, but it increases incomes indirectly, by substituting for household spending. The more
constrained individuals are in their consumption, and the higher the effect of the intervention on
schooling is, the more likely it is that the income effects of the intervention are large. Finally
informing misinformed students of the returns to school affects the present discounted value of
earnings of all participants, regardless of whether they are induced to attend school or not. Since
health (and its determinants) is likely to depend on permanent rather than temporary (current)
income, this intervention also fails the exclusion restriction assumption.
Another important limitation of randomized interventions is that in the short run,
schooling is not expected to affect health since the young are generally in excellent health and
because health is a stock. Instead we expect the health effects to emerge slowly and cumulate.
But it is difficult and expensive to follow individuals for many years; the interventions above
follow individuals for several years but on average the participants are still quite young at the last
follow up (for example in the Jensen and Lleras-Muney, the intervention takes place when boys
are 14 and they are 18 when they are last interviewed). The interventions then look at health
behaviors but it is not clear how these effects will eventually translate into for example mortality.
There are only 2 studies of randomized education interventions that follow individuals
over a long period of time. One looks at the participants Perry Preschool School program (PPP)
37 years later (Muennig et al 2009) and the other looks at the participants of the Carolina

23

Abecederian (ABC) Project at age 21 (Muennig et al 2011). Both of these interventions occurred
early in childhood, and they have been shown to have had persistent effects on wages and other
outcomes (Heckman et al., 2010). The results from these two studies are again in conflict: the
treated students in the ABC program had significantly better health than the controls, but that
was not true in the PPP program, although in both cases the treated appear to have better health
behaviors. These results are to be taken with caution though as in both cases the number of
observations consists of only about 100 individuals.
Thus simple randomized trials cannot conclusively nail down the question of whether
education affects health. But it is possible to make progress on this question by investigating
mechanisms through which interventions affect education, by designing more complex
randomized interventions, or by making stronger assumptions theoretically. We discuss the
evidence on mechanisms next and conclude with a series of observations on what questions
could be explored in future research.

III.

Evidence on the mechanisms linking education and health
To be convincing, studies of the effect of education on health will need to understand the

pathways that link the two. Because there are a large number of potential mechanisms, this is a
difficult task (e.g. Cunha et al., 2006). In addition, the evidence on mechanisms is somewhat
weaker than the evidence on causality, since we often have to make assumptions about what
constitutes a mechanism.
Some studies have attempted to look at why education matters for health. Consider the
research cited above by Duflo, et al. on the effect of education on sexual behaviors and fertility.
An important reason why education improves outcomes for girls is that it delays marriage and

24

fertility, since the common practice is for girls to marry soon after finishing school. This is turn
means girls will have fewer years of “exposure” to get pregnant, and thus fewer children over
their lifetime. Also girls in school have children later, which is beneficial because reproduction
during the early teenage years is riskier for the health of the mother and the infant compared to
reproduction in prime adult years (Trussell and Pebley 1984).
The results from the randomized trial in the Dominican Republic analyzed by Jensen and
Lleras-Muney seem also to be driven in part by the incarceration effect: most boys that are not in
school start working or are idle – the set of people that they interact with when they are not in
school is different from their peers in school, and “treated boys” (those given the message about
the value of education and stay in school longer) report that their peers are significantly less
likely to drink and smoke. Notice further that early exposure to a different set of peers could
have important long term consequences, as smoking and drinking are addictive behaviors that
affect youth’s physical and mental development.
Consider now the natural experiments that use compulsory schooling as an instrument for
education. In the US in the 1910s, the time period analyzed by Lleras-Muney, children who were
not in school were either idle or working. The main occupation for children 10-15 at the time
was agriculture (Bureau of the Census, 1924). Agricultural work is substantially more hazardous
to health than school work. Thus it is possible the health effects of forcing children to stay in
school during this period are driven by the difference in health hazards across environments.
However by the 1940s the types of jobs adolescents engaged in when they were not in school
were substantially different, and perhaps not as hazardous. This may explain why the returns to
post-World War II compulsory education in the UK were smaller.

25

However the evidence suggests that the effect of education is not limited to this
incarceration effect alone. Duflo, et al. find that the delay in marriage extends well beyond the
increase in years of schooling generated by the intervention, so at least in this case, incarceration
alone cannot explain the observed effects.
Another possibility is that education matters (sometimes) for health because schools
directly provide information on how to improve health, and it is the health information itself,
rather than being in school that affects behaviors. More educated individuals are indeed better
informed about health risks in developed countries (Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010a). And when
information first becomes available, it seems to first become known to the more educated, who
in turn seem to be the first to respond. Aizer and Stroud (2010) show that educated mothers
stopped smoking at higher rates after the 1964 Surgeon General Report first widely publicized
the harms of smoking, and their babies’ health increased more as a result. De Walque (2004)
shows that smoking for the best educated declined in the 1950s, before the Surgeon General’s
report, as the dangers of smoking were increasingly discovered. Similarly de Walque (2006)
documents that there was no relationship between education and HIV in Uganda in 1990, but one
emerged by 2000 after a decade of information campaigns on prevention. And Anderberg,
Chevalier and Wadsworth (2011) describe how when information was first (incorrectly) reported
about possible autism risks associated with the MMR vaccines, vaccination rates fell more in
areas with more educated individuals. In fact, in some cases it appears as if all of the effect of
education is explained by information: for example Thomas et al. (1991) report that most of the
effect of maternal education on child height can be explained by differences in information.
But information cannot be the whole explanation; we observe differences in health
behaviors by education even when there are no differences in information by education. For

26

example in the experiment in the Dominican Republic analyzed by Jensen and Lleras-Muney,
there were no differences in the extent to which smoking and drinking were perceived as harmful
by the treated and the control boys, and yet the treated boys smoked and drank less. Similarly in
developed countries today knowledge of the harms of smoking is nearly universal, and though
there are some small differences by education in knowledge, these differences are very small
compared to the differences in smoking rates by education. In the Duflo et al. study, curriculum
interventions alone had little impact on behavior. Finally, observational studies suggest that a
small portion of the effect of education on behaviors is due to differences in knowledge (Kenkel
1991, Meara 2001, Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010a). It appears that when knowledge first
becomes available on how to improve health, it substantially increases education disparities. But
in the long run, information diffuses and other factors are more important in explaining the
associations between education and health. This again suggests important dynamics in the
health-education relationship.
In this sense, information may be like other innovations in health. For example LlerasMuney and Lichtenberg (2006) report that the more education are more likely to use recently
approved drugs than the less educated, and this appears to be driven by those with chronic
conditions who use drugs repeatedly, suggesting that learning is an important component of the
education effect. Similarly in developing countries more educated individuals are generally more
likely to adopt new innovations (Foster and Rozenweig 2010). Whether the initial advantage of
the educated fades away or gets stronger with time might depend in turn on the type of health
technology. For example some medication regimes are difficult to adhere to, and the educated
might have a permanent advantage at using them—this is the case for diabetes type 1 (Goldman
and Smith 2002). Other innovations instead are “de-skilling,” such as the birth control pill

27

(Rozenweig and Schultz 1989), in which case eventually the less educated catch up. The results
from Cohen, Dupas and Schaner (2011) provide some interesting evidence on this point: when
access to malaria treatment improves, the gap in access between the educated and the uneducated
falls. However the educated still behave quite differently from the uneducated in their treatmentseeking behaviors: they appear to be more likely to know the likelihood that they have malaria
and they are more likely to visit a health care center and less likely to use other treatments when
their symptoms are worse. This is not true among illiterate individuals.
The evidence from randomized interventions suggests some mechanisms are important
whereas others are not—but of course as the discussion above suggests the extent to which any
findings are generalizable is not clear. Some of the effect of schooling is through the
incarceration effect as we already discussed. Another important mechanism is income, as the
Malawi conditional cash transfer intervention suggests. Finally peers are also important. Jensen
and Lleras-Muney find that discount rates, risk aversion and health information were not affected
by the intervention they study, even as schooling increased. Instead they observe that it is the
income and the behavior of students’ peers that are affected and most plausibly explain the
changes in smoking and drinking.
Interestingly, this evidence is consistent with the exploratory findings in Cutler and
Lleras-Muney (2010a) who consider a comprehensive set of mechanisms to explain health
behaviors in the US and the UK. They can account for about 70% of the effect of education (in a
statistical sense), through resources (30%), family and friends (10%), and information (10%) and
cognition (20%). On the other hand risk aversion, discounting, stress and other personality traits
did not appear to mediate the relationship between education and behaviors – though the noise in
these measures gives one some pause. Conti et al (2010) who use a more structural approach also

28

find that education appears to be causally related to many health behaviors and outcomes, with
selection explaining (roughly) half of the association between education and outcomes.

IV.

Summary
On balance, the literature we review highlights a wealth of interactions between

education and health. Education appears to be causally related to health in many settings, but not
always, and the reverse is true as well.
Equally important, this review highlights some unanswered issues. The most important
issue is to understand in more detail how education translates into health. To what extent is
education associated with specific knowledge, with cognitive ability in general, or with different
social settings, either during school or after? Some evidence on this may come from looking at
the quality of education individuals receive. Most of the literature has looked at the impact of
additional years of schooling. Yet many of the theories say that the quality of the years should
matter as well. This has not been explored in any great detail.
Simple experimental designs that randomly encourage individuals to obtain schooling can
be useful in providing further evidence of causality on health and health behaviors—but they
cannot conclusively answer the question of whether education alone is responsible for the
observed effects because in general it is difficult to satisfy the exclusion restriction that is needed
to reach such conclusions. However more sophisticated designs such as the ones discussed in
Ludwig, Kling and Mullanaithan (2011) could be implemented to help identify mechanisms and
causality both. For example one could design an experiment with three treated groups, where
individuals are given unconditional cash transfers (cash-only group), conditional cash transfers if
they attend school (attendance group), and conditional cash transfers for both going to school

29

and obtaining good grades (performance group). Under the assumption that all treatments induce
changes in education, income and grades, we can learn about the separate effects of education,
income and learning on health. By comparing the controls to the cash-only group one can
estimate the effects of income on health and health behaviors. By comparing the outcomes of the
cash-only group and the attendance group one can obtain an estimate of the effects of attendance.
Finally by comparing the performance group and the attendance group one can learn about the
effects of education content.
Further, it is vitally important to understand the translation from intention into action. In
developed countries, almost everyone knows the behaviors that are good for health and would
like to behave healthier. Yet people systematically fail at this task. How do we understand these
failures, and what types of interventions would reduce them? In a way, this is asking for a
benchmark by which to compare education. Improving health by inducing more education is
costly; many people do not enjoy schooling, and forcing additional years of schooling comes at a
price. If we can replicate the impact of education on health using other methods, this would be
very attractive.
In sum, the burgeoning literature on education and health is just the beginning. A review
written a decade from now will ideally have many more specific conclusions to draw.

30

References
Almond, D. 2006. Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero influenza
exposure in the post-1940 U.S. population. Journal of Political Economy 114: 562-712.
Anderberg, Chevalier and Wadsworth. 2011. Anatomy of a Health Scare: Education Income and
the MMR controversy in the UK. Journal of Health Economics.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.01.009
Arendt, J.N. 2005. Does education cause better health? A panel data analysis using school reform
for identification. Economics of Education Review 24:149-160.
Baird, Sarah, Ephraim Chirwa, Craig McIntosh and Berk Özler, 2010. The short‐term impacts of
a schooling conditional cash transfer program on the sexual behavior of young women.
Health Economics, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., vol. 19(S1), pages 55-68, September.
Barghaus, K.M., D.M. Cutler, R.G. Fryer, and E.L. Glaeser. 2008. Understanding racial
differences in health. Harvard University, mimeo.
Becker, G., 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference
to Education. Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
Becker, G., and C. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3): 729-758.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. 2007. From the cradle to the labor market? The
effect of birth weight on adult outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 409-439.
Bleakley, H. 2007. Disease and development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the
American South. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73-117.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2006. Malaria in the Americas: A retrospective analysis of childhood exposure.
Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Bobonis, G.J., E. Miguel, and C.P. Sharma. 2006. Iron deficiency anemia and school
participation. Journal of Human Resources 41(4): 692-721.
Card, David. Estimating The Return To Schooling: Progress On Some Persistent Econometric
Problems. Econometrica, 2001, v69(5 Sep), 1127-1160
Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson. 2005. The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstance. Journal of Health Economics 24: 365-389.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson. 2002. Economic status and health in childhood: the
origins of the gradient. American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334.

Clark, D., and H. Royer. 2007. “The effect of education on longevity: Evidence from the United
Kingdom. Mimeo, Case Western Reserve University.
Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman and Sergio Urzua. 2010. “The Education-Health Gradient,”
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 100, 234–238.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. J., & Masterov, D. V. 2006. Interpreting the evidence on
life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek, & F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Education, chap. 12. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 697-812.
Cutler, D.M., and A. Lleras-Muney. 2007. Education and health: evaluating theories and
evidence. In J.S. House, R.F. Schoeni, G.A. Kaplan, and H. Pollack, eds., The Health Effects
of Social and Economic Policy, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Cutler, D.M. and A. Lleras-Muney, 2010a, “Understanding differences in health behaviors by
education,” Journal of Health Economics, 29(1), 1-28.
Cutler, D.M. and A. Lleras-Muney, 2010a, "The Education Gradient in Old Age Disability," in
David Wise, ed., Research Findings in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 101-120.
Cutler, D.M., E.R. Meara and S. Richards, 2008, “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in Mortality
and Life Expectancy by Education, 1981-2000,” Health Affairs, 27(2), 350-360.
Deaton, A., D. Cutler, and A. Lleras-Muney. 2006. The determinants of mortality. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.
de Walque, D. 2004. "Education, information, and smoking decisions: evidence from smoking
histories, 1940-2000," Policy Research Working Paper Series 3362, The World Bank.
de Walque, D. 2006, “Who Gets AIDS and How? The Determinants of HIV infection and sexual
behaviors in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya and Tanzania, World Bank Policy
Research Paper No. 3844.
Elo, I. T. and S.H. Preston. 1996. Educational differentials in mortality: United States, 1979-85.
Social Science and Medicine 42(1): 47-57.
Elo, I.T. and S.H. Preston. 1997. Racial and ethnic differences in mortality at older ages. In L.
Martin and B. Soldo, eds., Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of Older Americans.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, pp. 10-42.
Elo, I.T., C.M. Turra, B. Kestenbaum,and B.R. Ferguson. 2004. Mortality among elderly
Hispanics in the United States: Past evidence and new results. Demography 41: 109-128.
Employee Benefit Research Institute. 2011. EBRI Databook on Employee Benefits, Washington,
D.C.: EBRI.

Field, E., O. Robles and M. Torero. 2007. Iodine deficiency and schooling attainment in
Tanzania. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2010. Microeconomics of Technology Adoption.
Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 2: 395 -424
Glied, S. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2008. Health inequality, education, and medical innovation.
Demography, forthcoming.
Grossman, M. 1972. The Demand for Health—A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grossman, M. 2000. The Human Capital Model, in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Handbook
of Health Economics, Volume 1A, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Heckman, J. SH Moon, R Pinto, PA Savelyev, and A Yavitz, “Analyzing Social Experiments as
Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence from the HighScope Perry Preschool
Program”, NBER Working Paper No. 16238, 2010.
Hoddinott, John; John Maluccio, Jere Behrman, R. Flores and Reynaldo Martorell. 2008. “Effect
of a nutrition intervention during early childhood on economic productivity in Guatemalan
adults.” Lancet, 371:411-416
Huisman, M., Kunst, A., Bopp, M., et al. 2005. Educational inequalities in cause-specific
mortality in middle-aged and older men and women in eight western European populations.
Lancet 365(9458): 493-500.
Jayachandran, S. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2009. Life expectancy and human capital investment:
evidence from maternal mortality declines. Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 124, No. 1:
349–397.
Jurges, Hendrik, Steffen Reinhold, Martin Salm, Does schooling affect health behavior?
Evidence from the educational expansion in Western Germany, Economics of Education
Review, In Press, Corrected Proof, Available online 9 April 2011, ISSN 0272-7757, DOI:
10.1016/j.econedurev.2011.04.002.
Jürges, H., Kruk, E., Reinhold, S., 2009. The Effect of Compulsory Schooling on Health –
Evidence From Biomarkers. MEA Discussion Paper 183-09
Kitagawa, E. M. and P. M. Hauser (1973) Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lillard, Dean R., Vandana Plassmann, Donald Kenkel, Alan Mathios. 2007. Who kicks the habit
and how they do it: Socioeconomic differences across methods of quitting smoking in the
USA, Social Science & Medicine, Volume 64, Issue 12, June 2007, Pages 2504-2519.

Lindeboom, Maarten, Ana Llena-Nozal, Bas van der Klaauw. 2009. Parental education and child
health: Evidence from a schooling reform, Journal of Health Economics, Volume 28, Issue 1,
January , Pages 109-131
Lleras-Muney, A. 2005. The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
States. Review of Economic Studies 72: 189-221.
Lorio, Daniela and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis. 2011. “Education, HIV Status, and Risky Sexual
Behavior: How Much Does the Stage of the HIV Epidemic Matter?” Mimeo.
Lucas, A. 2005. Economic effects of malaria eradication: Evidence from the malarial periphery.
Mimeo, Brown University.
Maluccio, John; John Hoddinott; Jere Behrman; Reynaldo Martorell; Agnes Quisumbing and
Aryeh Stein. 2009. “The impact of improving nutrition during early childhood on education
among Guatemalan adults.” Economic Journal, 119(537):734-763.
Maccini, S. and D. Yang. 2007. Under the weather: Health, schooling and socio-economic
consequences of early life rainfall. Mimeo, University of Michigan.
Martorell, Reynaldo and Habicht, Jean-Pierre. (1986) “Growth in early childhood in developing
countries”, in F. Falkner and J.M. Tanner, eds., Human Growth, Volume 3, Methodology.
Ecological, Genetic, and Nutritional Effects on Growth, second edition, New York: Plenum,
241-262.
Mazumder, B. 2008. Does education improve health? A reexamination of the evidence from
compulsory schooling laws. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives Q2: 216.
Meng, X. and N. Qian. 2006. The long run health and economic consequences of famine on
survivors: Evidence from China's Great Famine. IZA Discussion Paper 2471.
Miguel, E. and M. Kremer. 2004. Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health in the
presence of treatment externalities. Econometrica 72(1): 159-217.
Muennig, P., L. Schweinhart, J. Montie & M. Neidell. 2009. Effects of a prekindergarten
educational intervention on adult health: 37-year follow-up results of a randomized
controlled trial. American Journal of Public Health 99: 1431–1437.
Muennig, P. Dylan Robertson, Gretchen Johnson, Frances Campbell, Elizabeth P. Pungello, and
Matthew Neidell. 2011. The Effect of an Early Education Program on Adult Health: The
Carolina Abecedarian Project Randomized Controlled Trial. American Journal of Public
Health. March 2011, Vol 101, No. 3, pp. 512-516
Oreopoulos, P. 2007. Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health and happiness from
compulsory schooling. Journal of Public Economics 91(11-12): 2213-2229.

Patel, Alpa V., Leslie Bernstein, Anusila Deka, Heather Spencer Feigelson, Peter T. Campbell, 5
Susan M. Gapstur, Graham A. Colditz, and Michael J. Thun. Leisure Time Spent Sitting in
Relation to Total Mortality in a Prospective Cohort of US Adults. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 2010; DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwq155
Rosenzweig MR. 1995. Why are there returns to schooling? Amer. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 85
(2):153–58
Rosenzweig MR, Schultz TP. 1989. Schooling, information and nonmarket productivity:
contraceptive use and its effectiveness. Int. Econ. Rev. 30:457–77
Sapolsky, R.M. 2004. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers. An updated guide to stress, stress-related
diseases, and coping (3rd Edition). New York: Freeman.
Schultz, T. Paul. 2007. Population Policies, Fertility, Women’s Human Capital, and Child
Quality Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 4, edited by T. Paul Schultz and John
Strauss, Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
Smith, J.P. 2004. Unraveling the SES-health connection. Population and Development Review
30(Supplement): 108-132.
Smith, J.P. 2005. Consequences and predictors of new health events. In D.A. Wise, ed., Analyses
in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 213-237.
Smith, J.P. 2007. The impact of social economic status on health over the life-course. Journal of
Human Resources 42: 739-764.
Spasojevic, J. 2003. Effects of education on adult health in Sweden: Results from a natural
experiment. PhD dissertation, City University of New York Graduate Center, New York.
Sobal J, Stunkard AJ. Socioeconomic status and obesity: a review of the literature. Psychol Bull
1989;105:260-75.
Stunkard, A. J. (2007) Socioeconomic Status and Obesity, in Ciba Foundation Symposium 201 The Origins and Consequences of Obesity (eds D. J. Chadwick and G. Cardew), John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd., Chichester, UK. doi: 10.1002/9780470514962.ch11
Strauss, J. and D. Thomas. 1998. Health, nutrition, and economic development. Journal of
Economic Literature 36(2): 766-817.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Human resources: empirical modeling of household
and family decisions,” in J. R. Behrman and T. N. Srinivasan (eds.), Handbook of
development economics, volume 3A, Amsterdam: North Holland Press.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. forthcoming. “Health Over the Life Course. In T.P. Schultz
and J. Strauss (eds.), Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North
Holland Press.
Trussell, James and Anne R. Pebley. 1984. The Potential Impact of Changes in Fertility on
Infant, Child and Maternal Mortality. Studies in Family Planning.Vol. 15, No. 6, pp. 267-280
Van Kippersluis, Hans, O'Donnell, Owen A. and Van Doorslaer, Eddy, Long Run Returns to
Education: Does Schooling Lead to an Extended Old Age? (April 30, 2009). Tinbergen
Institute Discussion Paper 09-037/3.
Willett WC, Tamimi RM, Hankinson SE, Hunter DJ, Colditz GA. Chapter 20: Nongenetic
Factors in the Causation of Breast Cancer, in Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne
CK. Diseases of the Breast, 4th edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
World health Organization. 2009. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2009:
implementing smoke-free environments.

.4

Figure 1: Coefficient of Education on BMI by GDP

.2

Namibia
Zambia
UgandaLesotho
Kenya
Mali
Benin
India Ghana
Cameroon
Nigeria
Zimbabwe
Ethiopia Tanzania
Madagascar
Congo
DR
Liberia
Nepal
Senegal
Malawi
Swaziland
Sierra Leone Egypt
Cambodia
Rwanda
Timor-Leste

Cyprus

Ireland

-.4

-.2

0

Austria
PeruMaldives Estonia
Luxembourg
Romania
Bolivia
Czech
Rep
Greece
Portugal
AlbaniaLatvia
UK
Sweden
Spain
Netherlands
Italy
MoldovaArmenia Bulgaria
Germany
Croatia
Turkey
SloveniaBelgium
Lithuania
Denmark
France
Finland
Hungary
Poland
Slovakia
US

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Figure 2: Coefficient of Education on Underweight by GDP
Ireland

.01

Croatia
Lithuania

EstoniaPortugal
Poland
Italy

0

Denmark
Slovakia
Sweden
Armenia
Romania
Bolivia
Albania
Cyprus
Slovenia
Moldova
US
PeruMaldives
Germany
Egypt
Senegal
Austria
Netherlands
Bulgaria
Rwanda
Spain
Swaziland
France
Greece
Cambodia
Cameroon
Benin
LiberiaSierra Leone
Turkey
Latvia
Malawi
Luxembourg
Congo
DRTanzania
Mali
Timor-LesteGhana
Nigeria
Zambia
Lesotho
Zimbabwe

-.01

Ethiopia

Hungary
Czech Rep

Nepal

Namibia

UK
Belgium
Finland

-.02

Kenya
Madagascar
Uganda
India

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Figure 3: Coefficient of Education on Underweight
by underweight level
.01

IrelandCroatia
Lithuania

Estonia
Portugal
Italy

Poland

Timor-Leste
Ethiopia
Nepal
Madagascar
India

-.02

-.01

0

Denmark
Slovakia
Sweden
Armenia
Bolivia
Albania
Cyprus
Slovenia
Moldova Romania
US Germany Maldives
Peru
Egypt
Senegal
Netherlands
Bulgaria
Spain Greece Austria
Rwanda
France
Swaziland
Cambodia
Cameroon
Benin
Sierra
Leone
Liberia
Turkey
Latvia Malawi
Luxembourg
Tanzania
Congo DR
Mali
Nigeria
Ghana
Lesotho Zambia
Zimbabwe
Hungary
Czech Rep
UK
Kenya
Namibia
Belgium
Uganda
Finland

0

.1

.2
Share Underweight

.3

.02

Figure 4: Coefficient of Education on Obesity by GDP
Cyprus

Luxembourg

.01

Lesotho

-.01

0

Namibia
Zambia
Mali
BeninCameroon
Ghana
Zimbabwe
TanzaniaKenya
Egypt
NigeriaSwaziland
Romania
LiberiaUganda
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Ethiopia
India
Malawi
Congo
DR
Rwanda
Germany
Madagascar
Sweden
Ireland
Cambodia
Nepal
Timor-Leste
Greece
PeruMaldives
France
UK
Latvia
Bolivia
Albania
EstoniaPortugal
Spain
Slovenia
Bulgaria
Czech RepItaly
Turkey
Austria
Croatia
Netherlands
MoldovaArmenia
Lithuania
Hungary

-.02

Slovakia
Poland

US
Belgium
Denmark
Finland

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Figure 5: Coefficient of Education on Hemoglobin by GDP
Cambodia

.06

Ethiopia

Mali

.04

Uganda

Senegal

India
Madagascar
Ghana
Bolivia
Benin
Moldova

.02

Rwanda

Albania

-.02

0

Congo DR
Tanzania
Sierra Leone
Nepal
Cameroon
LesothoEgypt
Timor-Leste
Swaziland
Liberia
Kenya
Zambia
Nigeria
Namibia
Maldives
Armenia Peru
Malawi
Zimbabwe

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

.004

Figure 6: Coefficient of Education on STIs by GDP
Mali

Cameroon

Lesotho

.002

Liberia
Benin
Uganda
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Bolivia
Timor-Leste Nigeria
Albania
Peru
Maldives

0

Moldova
Congo DR Madagascar
Zambia
Egypt
Ethiopia
Malawi
Rwanda
Nepal
India
Tanzania
Cambodia

-.002

Kenya
Zimbabwe

Armenia
Namibia

-.004

Swaziland

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

.02

Figure 7: Coefficient of Education on Smoking by Income
Portugal

-.04

-.02

0

Albania
Luxembourg
Turkey
Bolivia Peru
MoldovaArmenia
Senegal
Egypt
Ghana
Ethiopia Tanzania
Greece
Zimbabwe
Benin
NigeriaSwaziland
Maldives
Mali
Cameroon
Malawi
Liberia
Zambia
Denmark
Kenya
Bulgaria
Congo DR Timor-Leste
Czech Rep Austria
NamibiaLithuania
Sierra Leone
Rwanda
Romania
Uganda India
Sweden
Madagascar
Cambodia
Spain
Germany
Croatia
Nepal
Latvia
Estonia Cyprus
Italy
France
Lesotho
Finland
Poland
US
Slovenia Netherlands
Slovakia
Hungary

-.06

UK
Ireland

Belgium

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Figure 8: Coefficient of Education on Drinking by Income
.04

US

.03

Estonia
Ireland
Netherlands
Finland Luxembourg

Bulgaria Poland
Albania

.02

Spain
GreeceAustria
Lithuania Slovenia
Romania Czech Rep
Belgium
Germany

.01

Sweden
LatviaHungary Cyprus

Namibia

Denmark

UK
France
Portugal
Italy

-.01

0

Zambia
Ghana
Bolivia
Congo
Ethiopia
Liberia
Rwanda
DR
Nepal
Uganda
Sierra
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
Cambodia
Madagascar
Mali
Timor-Leste
Benin
Leone
Lesotho
Kenya
Senegal
Moldova
Cameroon
Egypt
Nigeria
Armenia
Swaziland
PeruMaldives
Malawi
India

Slovakia

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Figure 9: Coefficient of Education on Height by Income

.6

.8

Austria

Congo DR

Albania

.4

Moldova
ZambiaBolivia Peru
Rwanda
Sierra Leone

0

.2

US
Slovakia
Estonia
Lithuania
Latvia Czech Rep UK
Turkey
Croatia
Madagascar
Greece
Armenia Namibia
Mali
Sweden
Malawi
Cameroon
Liberia Tanzania
Ethiopia
Bulgaria
Senegal
Benin
India NigeriaSwaziland
Lesotho
Kenya
France
Nepal
Zimbabwe
Hungary
Cambodia Ghana
Spain
Timor-Leste
Egypt
Belgium
Poland
Netherlands
Uganda
Romania
Italy
Cyprus
Portugal
Germany
Maldives
Slovenia
Denmark
Ireland

-.2

Finland
Luxembourg

4

6

8
10
Log of per capita GDP current US$

12

Table 1: The evolution of knowledge and smoking gradients in education in the US 19491969

Year of survey:
1949
1954
1957
1969
Panel A: effect of education on knowledge
"Do you think
cigarette
smoking is
What is your opinion--do you
Dependent
harmful or
think cigarette smoking is one of
variable:
not?"
the causes of lung cancer, or not?
<HS
Some college
College+

.057*
0.012
0.021

-.054*
0.032
0.067

-.065**
.116**
.172**

-0.041
0.045
.111**

Panel B: Effect of education on smoking
Dependent
variable:
Current Smoker?
<HS
Some college
College+

-.056*
0.019
-0.045

-0.016
-0.026
-0.061

0.024
-0.008
-0.003

.054*
0.011
-.076*

All regressions are adjusted for age, sex and race. Individuals with a high school degree only are the reference
group.

Data Appendix
1. DHS Surveys
We selected 31 countries with either a DHS-IV or a DHS-V survey that includes data on a
woman’s anthropometry (height and weight), education level, and her drinking or smoking
habits. All surveys contain nationally representative samples of ever-married women between
the ages of 15 and 49.
Height is the respondent’s height in centimeters. Body Mass Index (BMI) is computed as weight
(in kilos) divided by height (in meters) squared. Underweight is equal to one if the person’s BMI
is less than or equal to 18.5; obese is equal to one if the person’s BMI is greater than or equal to
30. Anemia is coded 1 if the person is anemic at all, irrespective of the level of anemia (slight,
moderate, severe). Hemoglobin is the individual’s hemoglobin level in g/dl adjusted for altitude.
Anemia and hemoglobin were considered unknown if hemoglobin levels were below 5 or greater
than 50. If the adjusted hemoglobin level was not available, the unadjusted level was used.
Smoke is coded 1 if the individual has currently smokes, 0 if not. STI is equal to 1 if the
individual had a sexually transmitted infection in the last 12 months. Drink is a binary variable if
the individual has ever or recently consumed alcohol (this varies by country).
Regressions control for age, age2, education, married, religion dummies, and ethnicity dummies.
Age and education are measured in years. Religion and ethnicity dummies are country specific.
Marital status is 1 if the woman is married or living with a partner as if married, and 0 otherwise.
All means and regression coefficients were computed taking survey design into account, unless
strata or sample weights were not provided by the survey.
2. Eurobarometer data
Our European data are drawn from 2 waves of the Standard Eurobarometer. Women's
anthropometry (height, weight, BMI, probability of being underweight or obese) are drawn from
Eurobarometer 64.3, which was collected in November-December 2005. All other outcome
variables of interest (alcohol consumption, smoking, physical activity and sport, and fruit
consumption) are drawn from Eurobarometer 72.3, which was collected in October 2009. Both
surveys contain nationally representative samples of women between the ages of 15 and 49 in 29
European countries.
Height is the respondent’s height in centimeters. Body Mass Index (BMI) is computed as weight
(in kilograms) divided by height (in meters) squared. Underweight is equal to one if the
respondent's BMI is less than 18.5; Obese is equal to one if the respondent's BMI is greater than
or equal to 30. Currently Smokes is equal to one if the respondent currently smokes, and is zero
otherwise; Consumed Alcohol in Past Year is equal to one if the respondent has consumed any
alcoholic beverages in the past 12 months.
Regressions control for age, age2, education level and marital status. Age is measured in years.
Marital status is 1 if the woman is married or living with a partner, and 0 otherwise. Education
level is the age at which the respondent left school, in years. All means and regression
coefficients were computed using the post-stratification weights provided with the surveys.

3. Behavioral and Risk Factors Survey for the US
For the US we use the 2005 wave of the Behavioral And Risk Factor survey, which contains
height, weight, drinking and smoking. We again keep only women ages 15 to 49.
Height is the respondent’s height in centimeters. Body Mass Index (BMI) is computed as weight
(in kilograms) divided by height (in meters) squared. Underweight is equal to one if the
respondent's BMI is less than 18.5; Obese is equal to one if the respondent's BMI is greater than
or equal to 30. Currently Smokes is equal to one if the respondent currently smokes, and is zero
otherwise. A person is said to drink if they drank any alcohol in the last 30 days.
Regressions control for age, age2, education level and marital status. Age is measured in years.
Marital status is 1 if the woman is married or living with a partner, and 0 otherwise. Education
level is measured in years of school. Race and ethnicity dummies are included. All means and
regression coefficients were computed using the post-stratification weights provided with the
surveys.
4. GDP data
The GDP per capita data comes from the World Bank, using the GDP per capita (current US$)
indicator. When the dataset comes from a survey taken over multiple years, the GDP per capita
figure is the mean during that period.

