                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




IMPACTS OF UNIONIZATION ON EMPLOYMENT, PRODUCT QUALITY AND PRODUCTIVITY:
          REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY EVIDENCE FROM NURSING HOMES

                                           Aaron J. Sojourner
                                             Robert J. Town
                                           David C. Grabowski
                                            Michelle M. Chen

                                          Working Paper 17733
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17733


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2012




  Thanks to Tom Holmes for generous assistance with data acquisition and to Qihui Chen and Devon
  Phillips for excellent research assistance. This research uses data from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal
  Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported by the following National
  Science Foundation Grants: SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and ITR-0427889; National Institute on
  Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Any opinions and conclusions
  expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census
  Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Frandsen
  also gratefully acknowledges support from NSF Grant SES-0922355 and Sojourner from the U.
  Minnesota Grant-in-Aid of Research program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
  and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2012 by Aaron J. Sojourner, Robert J. Town, David C. Grabowski, and Michelle M. Chen. All rights
  reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
  provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impacts of Unionization on Employment, Product Quality and Productivity: Regression Discontinuity
Evidence From Nursing Homes
Aaron J. Sojourner, Robert J. Town, David C. Grabowski, and Michelle M. Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 17733
January 2012, Revised June 2014
JEL No. I12,J51

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effects of nursing home unionization on numerous labor, establishment, and
consumer outcomes using a regression discontinuity design. We find negative effects of unionization
on staffing levels and no decline in care quality, suggesting positive labor productivity effects. Some
evidence suggests that nursing homes in less competitive local product markets and those with lower
union density at the time of election experienced stronger union employment effects. Unionization
appears to raise wages for a given worker while also shifting the composition of the workforce away
from higher-earning workers. By combining credible identification of union effects, a comprehensive
set of outcomes over time with measures of market-level characteristics, this study generates some
of the best evidence available on many controversial questions in the economics of unions. Furthermore,
it generates evidence from the service sector, which has grown in importance and where evidence
has been thin.


Aaron J. Sojourner                                 David C. Grabowski
Carlson School of Management                       Harvard University
321 19th Ave S, 3-300                              Department of Health Care Policy
Minneapolis, MN 55409                              Harvard Medical School
asojourn@umn.edu                                   180 Longwood Avenue
                                                   Boston, MA 02115
Robert J. Town                                     grabowski@med.harvard.edu
Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School                                 Michelle M. Chen
University of Pennsylvania                         Department of Finance and Real Estate
3641 Locust Walk                                   The College of Business Administration
Philadelphia, PA 19104                             Florida International University
and NBER                                           11200 S.W. 8th Street
rtown@wharton.upenn.edu                            Miami, Florida 33199
                                                   min.chen2@fiu.edu
                                                                                             1


    Understanding the impact of unionization is a long-standing, controversial, and difficult
question in labor economics. Unions have potentially wide-reaching effects, from employment
levels and the wage distribution to productivity, output quality, and establishment survival.
These effects are critical both for current labor policy debates and for understanding broad
labor market and production shifts in the U.S. economy. Economic theory yields ambiguous
predictions on the direction of unions’ impacts along many of these dimensions, highlighting
the importance of the long empirical literature on unions effects (Mellow, 1981; Lewis, 1963;
Freeman and Medoff, 1984; Hirsch and Addison, 1986; Hirsch, 2004).
    A central challenge faced by much of the literature is credibly identifying causal effects.
Unobserved differences between union and non-union workers or firms may bias traditional
cross-sectional or fixed effects approaches. DiNardo and Lee (2004) overcame this challenge
in introducing the regression discontinuity (RD) design to identify and estimate union ef-
fects using close union certification elections as a natural experiment. Their findings, which
contrast with much of the previous literature, raise questions about the causal interpretation
of prior, broader union-nonunion comparisons.
    Another limitation of previous research is that most studies have focused on a relatively
narrow aspect of unionization’s impact due to data constraints. Studies of the union effect
on wage levels and distribution (e.g., Card, 1996) are silent on establishment-level effects,
and vice versa (DiNardo and Lee, 2004; Lee and Mas, 2009). Few, if any, studies have
combined individual-level analysis with estimates of union effects on establishment-level
outcomes, although the interpretation of union effects depend crucially on both. We make
some contribution in this regard, though the cross-source matching demanded reduces sample
size and precision of the individual-level analysis substantially.
    In this paper we study the impact of unionization by applying RD analysis to a variety
of outcomes focusing on a single industry: nursing homes. We link data from the National
Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS)
with detailed Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) data on nursing homes and
Census Bureau data on individual earnings to analyze the effects of unions on employment,
output, quality, earnings, and mobility. This study offers some of the best evidence available
on union productivity effects and some of the only evidence from the service sector. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first study of the impact of unionization on output quality
in which quality is reliably measured and unionization effects are plausibly identified.
    There are a number of advantages to focusing empirical analysis on the nursing home
industry. First, the activities of nursing home workers and technologies of production are
very similar across organizations. Thus, we remove an important dimension of organizational
heterogeneity that may confound study of an industry that encompasses more heterogeneity
                                                                                                        2


or of cross-industry analyses.
    Second, we get a deep view into firms. Due to the large public role in the finance and
regulation of nursing homes, detailed establishment-level outcome data exist across a broad
range of labor, firm and consumer outcomes. Data are available for almost the entire industry
nationally and in a panel across many years. We use this data to test theoretical predictions
about how the union effect depends on the degree of economic rents, the elasticity of consumer
demand, union density, and regulatory environment (Hirsch and Addison, 1986; Stewart,
1990; Booth, 1995). We are also able to cast empirical light on theoretical ambiguities, such
as the union effect on employment levels, worker productivity, and firm growth and survival.
The panel also permits falsification tests of the research design based on pre-election data.
    Third, unions might be expected to have larger effects on firms and consumers in nursing
homes than in many other industries, providing more potential to detect their impact. Here,
labor is central to the production process. It makes up two-thirds of nursing home costs
(Gertler and Waldman, 1992) and is the key input into the quality of patient care (Wunder-
lich, Sloan and Davis, 1996). Furthermore, the need to provide nursing home care that is
proximate to residents’ hometowns or families limits the possibility of outsourcing (Helpman
and Krugman, 1987) and reduces the elasticity of consumer and labor demand. Our analysis
thus focuses on the impact of unionization in a setting with potentially large effects.
    Fourth, recognizing this potential, unions have made nursing homes a strategic organizing
priority for more than 20 years (Sojourner, Chen, Grabowski and Town, 2011). Consequently,
hundreds of union representation elections are available, permitting more powerful inference
than a focus on most other industries would. It also means our analysis is relevant for
an increasingly important segment of the economy in general, and the unionized sector
in particular. Much of the previous literature, on the other hand, has focused largely on
manufacturing, mining or construction, sectors that are declining both in the overall economy
and the unionized sector.1
    We find that unionization of a nursing home facility leads to significant declines in the
mean number of nursing hours per resident day. These declines in staffing suggest that
unionization leads to increases in the price of labor. Analysis of the Census bureau earnings
data yields corroborating albeit noisy evidence. We also find evidence that unionization shifts
the composition of the workforce at nursing homes toward lower-earning workers. The decline
   1
    A larger fraction of the U.S. workforce and more union members now work in health care and social
services than in manufacturing. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the number of Americans
employed in manufacturing fell by about 40 percent since 1970, from 18 million to 11 million, while the
number in health care and social assistance grew by 533%, from 3 million to 16 million. In terms of the
incidence of unionization, the number of union members in manufacturing fell 76 percent between 1983 and
2010, from 5.8 to 1.4 million. Meanwhile, the number of union members in health care and social assistance
rose by 133 percent, from 1.2 to 1.6 million over the same period (Hirsch and Macpherson, 2011).
                                                                                                  3


in staffing is not associated with changes in care quality, although these estimate effects
are somewhat imprecise. That is, the evidence suggests that unionization increases labor
productivity measured by both output per nursing hour and quality of care per nursing hour.
To dig deeper, we analyze effects on a larger set of labor-sensitive care-quality measures, and
find somewhat stronger evidence of no negative quality effect. There is also no evidence of
a significant impact on other strategic margins such as establishment size, occupancy rates,
resident case mix, or facility survival.
    We also explore whether unions have heterogeneous impacts along three dimensions.
First, we find larger effects in more concentrated markets (above median HHI), as predicted
by theories of rent-sharing. Second, we find larger effects in less organized markets (below
median union density), consistent with theories emphasizing threat effects and union substi-
tution strategies by nonunion management in more organized markets. Finally, effects vary
by the strength of state regulation of high-skill nurse staffing in complex ways consistent
with basic economic theory. In less regulated states, unionization induces homes to reduce
staffing levels across all skill levels. In states with tighter restrictions on the ability of homes
to reduce higher-skill staffing levels, adjustments are concentrated on the margin of adjusting
levels of less-skilled staff.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the
institutional background of unionization and nursing homes and our data. Section 3 describes
our empirical framework, based largely on Lee and Lemieux (2010). Section 4 focuses on
evidence on the validity of our identification strategy. Section 5 presents our principal results.
Section 6 concludes.


                   1     Institutional Setting and Data
1.1    Institutional Setting
The nursing home sector is large and growing. In 2009, nursing homes expenditures were
approximately $187 billion, and the sector employed more than 1.8 million people. Nurs-
ing homes provide long-term, custodial and post-inpatient recuperative and rehabilitation
services for patients who suffer from significant disabilities that require 24-hour monitoring
and care. The combination of an aging population and increasing life expectancy points to
increasing demand for long-term nursing home care over the coming decades. The Bureau
of Labor Statistics forecasts that employment in this sector will grow by 24 percent over
the next decade. There are over 16,000 nursing homes operating in the US with 1.7 million
beds which care for 1.4 million patients. The dominant payer for nursing home patients is
                                                                                                              4


Medicaid with a little over 60 percent share of the patient population, with the remainder
split between Medicare and private pay/privately insured patients.2 For-profit, not-for-profit
and government owned firms all provide nursing home care with for-profit firms accounting
for the majority (approximately two-thirds) of the facilities.
    Unions have long focused on nursing homes as a ripe pool for their organizing efforts. In
1983, Services Employees International Union (SEIU) President John Sweeney initiated a
campaign to organize hundreds of chain-affiliated nursing homes. Andy Stern, who succeeded
Sweeney as SEIU President, vowed to increase organizing efforts directed towards nursing
homes. This “Dignity, Rights and Respect” campaign aimed to organize 100 facilities a year.
At approximately the same time, the United Food and Commercial Workers International
(UFCW) began targeting southern nursing facilities. Dozens of other unions also attempted
to organize long-term care facilities during these years. Despite this, unions have not kept
pace with the industry’s rapid growth and the unionized share of workers has declined,
though at a slower rate than in many other sectors (Sojourner et al., 2011).
    Nursing home care is labor intensive and the activities that nursing home employees
perform (e.g. assist patients with bathing, toiletting, feeding, medication management and
moving in and out of bed) are essentially the same across all facilities. Most direct patient
care in nursing homes is provided by certified nursing assistants (NAs) who have limited pro-
fessional training. Nursing homes also employ registered nurses (RNs) and licensed practical
nurses (LPNs). RNs typically have two to four years of education at a college, university, or
hospital. LPNs have nine months to one year of education, typically in a community college.
RNs can provide direct patient care and often oversee LPN and NA staff. These different
types of labor are imperfect substitutes for one another.


1.2       Data Sources
Our principal analysis dataset is the first national panel on nursing home characteristics that
also includes information on labor relations at each home, including data on union elections,
collective bargaining, and unionization status among each home’s employees. Building off
data assembled for Holmes (2006) we used records linked from the NLRB and the Federal Me-
diation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) from 1978 to 2002 to health systems data collected
by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) from 1993 to 2008. CMS’s
Online Survey, Certification, and Reporting (OSCAR) system provides establishment-level
data over time on each nursing home in the U.S. that cares for Medicaid- or Medicare-financed
residents. It includes 96% of all U.S. nursing home establishments. The OSCAR data set
  2
      Medicare covers post-acute care services for 100 days after a qualified inpatient stay at a hospital.
                                                                                                               5


contains information on facility characteristics and employment by type of worker. Impor-
tantly, OSCAR contains detailed data on quality of care. All of the measures constructed
from this dataset (described below) have been used extensively in previous economic analy-
ses of the nursing home industry (Cawley, Grabowski and Hirth, 2006; Grabowski, Gruber
and Angelelli, 2008; Lu, forthcoming). We supplement our analysis with data on payroll and
individual worker earnings and mobility available through the Census Bureau. Our sample
includes all federally-financed, privately-owned nursing homes existing in years between 1991
and 2001. For this population, we have information on labor relations from the late 1970s
to the early 2000s and outcome data for 1993 to 2008. We link information from several
sources.
    The NLRB elections records and FMCS bargaining notices provide information about
each nursing home’s unionization history. From the NLRB data, we observe when union
certification elections occurred and the election results. The NLRB runs elections rules in
response to petitions by groups of employees expressing a desire for union representation.
The election is usually held at the nursing home.3 If a union receives a strict majority of the
votes cast (i.e., 50 percent plus one) among the bargaining unit in question, then it is certified
as the bargaining agent of the employees in the unit and the employer has a duty to bargain
with the union. If the union loses, no such duty arises. This sharp difference in status due
to a potentially small difference in voting outcomes provides the basis of the research design.
In our nursing home population, on average unions received about 52.9 percent of the votes
and won the election 55.8 percent of the time (Table 1).4 Figure 1 presents the fraction of
elections in each vote share bin for the 627 focal elections. The distribution peaks in the
first bin above the cut-off.
    FMCS records contain information about the presence of a union contract. This is useful
because many newly-certified bargaining units fail to reach initial contract agreements and
the union may fade before establishing a toehold within the establishment. FMCS notices
give reliable measures that a union is present, although absence of such notices is not a
reliable indicator of union absence. In all private firms, the union and company have a
duty to file notices of intent to bargain at least 30 days prior to contract expiry. These
   3
     While we do not observe which employees are included in any particular election, most unions seek
to represent all nursing-home employees, wall-to-wall. Others, such as the American Nurses Association,
include only nurses. Allen (2004) writes that, in nursing homes, “Normally, employees in nursing, dietary,
housekeeping, and laundry are the most likely to be unionized.” The Supreme Court decided in 1994 that
nurses who supervise lesser-skilled employees are not eligible to unionize and NLRB elections are often
preceded by a hearing to decide exactly which nurses belong in the bargaining unit.
   4
     This variable is not raw vote share. It is modified to account for the fact that the support of the raw vote
share variable changes mechanically with the number of votes cast (DiNardo and Lee, 2004). For analysis,
the shares are normalized so that a 50 percent vote share has the value 0.
                                                                                                        6


are filed only if a union contract is in place.5 In the health care industry uniquely, firms
are also required to file notices of intent to bargain for first contracts. These notices are
filed subsequent to a union election victory but prior to signing an agreement. In some
cases, the parties fail to reach agreement on an initial contract, the union dissipates, and
the establishment may remain nonunion. Our measure of union presence in a nursing home
is an indicator of having an FMCS notice filed more than a year post-election. We use the
FMCS data in a falsification test and observe that certification really does lead to differential
increases in unionization, similar to DiNardo and Lee (2004).
    The OSCAR dataset provides establishment-level data from all Medicaid- and Medicare-
certified nursing home facilities in the United States (96 percent of all facilities). The OSCAR
data include information about nursing homes’ compliance with federal regulatory require-
ments. Following an initial survey, states survey each facility about every 12 months on
average and no less often than every 15 months. Following the survey, nursing homes submit
facility, resident, and staffing information which are captured in the OSCAR data. The key
employment variables constructed from the OSCAR data are hours per resident-day (HPRD)
for NAs, RNs, and LPNs. In our data, nursing homes employ, on average, 2.13 NA, 0.77
LPN and 0.59 RN HPRD (Table 1).6 These three staff types are reported on the federal
“Nursing Home Compare” report card website. Nursing home consumers and their support
persons are encouraged to use this information, along with other quality measures provided
on the web site, to help select a nursing home.
    We also use the OSCAR data to construct measures of care quality. Under the direction
of CMS, state surveyors use 175 consolidated measures encompassing structural, procedu-
ral, and outcome measures of quality to assign deficiencies during the regular inspection of
nursing homes that are reported in the OSCAR data. Several alternative remedies could be
imposed on facilities that receive a high number of deficiencies. These punishments include
civil money penalties, denial of payment for new admissions, state monitoring, temporary
management, immediate termination, and other approaches. Beyond their importance as a
government oversight mechanism in monitoring nursing homes, deficiencies have long been
used as an approximation for nursing home quality and are widely thought to depend on
staffing levels (Konetzka, Yi, Norton and Kilpatrick, 2004). The federal government has
made information on the number of deficiencies assigned to each certified facility nationwide
available to consumers on its “Nursing Home Compare” web site. We construct two qual-
ity measures based on the deficiency data: the total number of deficiencies found and an
indicator that a severe health deficiency was found. Table 1 shows that on average about
  5
      However, it may not always be filed when contracts are in place; compliance is not perfect.
  6
      We set staffing levels over 8 HPRD to missing, following (OMalley, Caudry and Grabowski, 2011).
                                                                                               7


seven deficiencies were found in our nursing homes, and about 23 percent of homes had a
severe deficiency. A third quality measure is market-based: the percentage of the home’s
residents who pay for their care with their own private funds rather than through Medicaid
or Medicare. Although the Medicaid program is the dominant payer of nursing home ser-
vices (accounting for about 50 percent of expenditures and roughly 70 percent of bed-days),
private-pay residents are associated with higher profit margins relative to Medicaid resi-
dents and are therefore an important signal of facility resources (Mor, Zinn, Angelelli, Teno
and Miller, 2004). To the extent that nursing homes compete to attract these higher margin
clients by offering higher quality care, percentage private-pay can be taken as a market-based
proxy for care quality. In our population, about 23 percent of patients were private-pay.
    The OSCAR data also provides measures of other strategic operating margins that union-
ization might affect and which could be potential confounds in understanding union effects on
productivity. These include each home’s total number of beds (scale of production and firm
growth), percentage of beds occupied (labor-capital ratio), and an acuity index of residents’
health conditions, which measures the residents physical functioning level by incorporating
both an activities of daily living index and the proportion of residents requiring special treat-
ments. Our nursing homes house on average about 125.7 beds, have an occupancy rate of
84.8 percent, and have an acuity index of about 10.3.
    Since nursing home markets tend to be local, we also construct market-level variables
which economic theory suggests may impact the magnitude of union effects. We construct
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) based on nursing homes’ shares of total beds in a county.7
We also calculate the percentage of beds in a county that are in unionized homes by com-
bining NLRB, FMCS, and OSCAR data, since theory also predicts that the impact of the
unionization of a given establishment may depend upon penetration of unions into the rel-
evant labor market (Booth, 1995; Hirsch and Addison, 1986), though the relationship is
complex and the empirical implications ambiguous.
    Finally, to get measures of earnings, we match via nursing home name and address to the
U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and Longitudinal Employer-
Household Dynamics data (LEHD). The LBD provides a panel of establishment-level mea-
sures of payroll and number of employees for all establishments. The LEHD provides a record
of each employment relationship (an employee-employer match) and quarterly earnings for
each employee and contains useful information to understand union effects but covers only
30 participating states (Frandsen, 2010). We analyze individual employee earnings for the
subsample of nursing homes in these states. Although the Census data contains no measure
of wages or hours, we construct an establishment-level measure of average wage by dividing
  7
      Basing HHI on a home-specific, 25-mile radius market does not change results.
                                                                                                   8


the total wage bill from the LBD by the total employed FTE from the OSCAR data. We
deflate all dollar amounts to year-2000 dollars.


1.3    Sample Selection Criteria
The NLRB, FMCS, and Census data cover only private (i.e., non-government) nursing
homes. Thus, we exclude government-owned facilities (about 8 percent of total) from the
establishment-level analysis. Our resulting sample consists of 22,357 unique licensed facil-
ities; 14,556 were in operation in 1992, and 15,638 facilities in 2002. In our data, 2,088
facilities had at least one certification election between 1978 and 2001. Of these, 1,375 (66
percent) homes had at least one election where a union won. In the other 713 facilities with
elections, the elections went against the union.
    In the regression discontinuity analysis, we focus on NLRB certification elections that
meet the following criteria:

   1. At least 20 individuals voted. This minimizes the risk that the exact outcome could be
      perfectly controlled by the company, the union, or workers. This would undermine the
      quasi-randomization across the vote-share threshold (DiNardo and Lee, 2004; Lee and
      Lemieux, 2010).8

   2. Occurred after at least one inspection report is observed in our OSCAR data for that
      home. The OSCAR data start in 1993. The last NLRB election in our data is from
      2002. Therefore, all elections we consider occur in 1993-2002. The requirement of
      at least one pre-election OSCAR observation ensures our ability to use pre-election
      home characteristics for two important purposes (Lee and Lemieux, 2010). First, we
      can test for pre-election discontinuities in this rich set of baseline observable home
      characteristics. If such discontinuities were evident, this would cast doubt on the
      validity of the identifying assumptions. As these are the post-election outcomes of
      interest, it is very useful to see whether there were discontinuities prior to the election.
      Second, we can include baseline pre-election characteristics as explanatory variables
      in the analysis of union effects. These are not included to control for selection, but
      to reduce the variance unexplained influences and increase power, as in analysis of
      experimental treatment effects.

   3. First such election observed in a home. Considering multiple elections for the same
      home raises a number of conceptual issues about whether a nursing home is treatment
  8
    Bajari, Hong, Park and Town (2011) develop a method for when the value of the forcing variable is
chosen.
                                                                                                          9


       or control. Focusing on only the first post-OSCAR election in each home sidesteps
       these thorny issues. We terms this the home’s focal election.
       Another issue with multiple elections is the possibility that unions or management learn
       enough through recently-past elections to manipulate the outcome of the election in
       such a way as to introduce systematic differences across the threshold in unobservables
       and, thereby, to invalidate the identifying assumption. This concern diminishes as the
       time between elections extends. We exclude homes that experienced an NLRB election
       in the five years immediately prior to the focal election in our data.

   4. In a home without evidence of unionized employees. We do this to clarify interpretation
      of the “treatment” as a contrast between homes with no unions certified as bargaining
      agent and any union so certified. We exclude elections in homes that had previously
      filed an FMCS notice of intent-to-bargain, which implies the presence of a union.
      Because the FMCS records extend back to the late 1970s and we consider elections in
      the 1993-2002 period, this gives us at least 15 years of history to examine.9

   5. Nursing home that was not publicly owned. State agencies regulate publicly-owned
      homes’ labor relations. Data from the federal NLRB and FMCS do not cover these
      homes so we do not have accurate measures of public homes’ unionization status. This
      makes our estimates relevant to private-sector nursing homes, including both for-profit
      and not-for-profit, but silent on their effects in public-sector homes.

    Applying criteria 1, 3, 4, and 5 yields a sample of 1,846 elections. Applying criteria 2,
restricting the sample to the end of the period, cuts this to 627 elections. These are the focal
elections used in the main analysis. A subsample of 429 could be matched to the Census
data using establishment name, address and SIC code.


                             2      Empirical Framework
The principal challenge to identifying the causal effects of unionization is that outcomes
at nursing homes that unionize are likely to be different from outcomes at nursing homes
   9
    We may mistakenly include some long-time union homes in our sample. Homes that: (1) unionized prior
to the start of our NLRB data (late 1970s), (2) whose union and management both consistently failed to
comply with the FMCS requirement to file a notice of intent to bargain at each contract expiry, (3) had
no NLRB election between the start of our NLRB data and the start of the OSCAR data, and (4) had an
NLRB election after its first OSCAR observation. This does not undermine the validity of the design; it
only moves the treatment a little closer to Dinardo and Lee’s definition. Because they analyze all elections
in any firm, the treatment is newly-certifying an agent to represent an additional bargaining unit in a home
that may or may not already contain unionized workers.
                                                                                                 10


that do not unionize for reasons that have nothing to do with unionization. We overcome
this selection bias problem using a regression discontinuity design based on close union
certification elections, an approach first used in the union context by DiNardo and Lee (2004).
The idea is that nursing homes where a union barely lost a certification election should be
similar to nursing homes where a union barely won, and thus post-election differences that
are observed between them can be attributed to the effects of union certification. We largely
adopt DiNardo and Lee’s set up, although some differences in data structure require modest
adjustments.
    Our basic empirical model expresses the conditional mean of outcome Yit of nursing home
i at post-election date t (defined as the time elapsed since a certification election) as a function
of union certification status, Di , the normalized vote share for the union, Xi (centered at zero
and adjusted as in DiNardo and Lee), and other nursing home characteristics, Wit , which
can include lagged outcome values:

                                Yit = Di τ + f (Xi ) + Wit δ1 + Uit ,                           (1)

where union certification depends deterministically on the vote share, Di = 1 [Xi > 0], and
f (·) is continuous at zero.
    The causal effect of unionization for unions near the threshold of certification is identified
by the coefficient τ under the following continuity assumption on unobservable influences Uit :

                     limx↑0 E(Uit |Wit , Xi = x) = limx↓0 E(Uit |Wit , Xi = x)                  (2)

This assumption means that no (unobserved) factor influences the outcome in a discontinuous
manner across the election victory threshold other than union certification status, so any
observed average differences across the threshold can be attributed to the causal effects of
unionization.
    This assumption would be satisfied if close elections were literally as random as coin flips.
Of course, elections are not coin flips, but as long as there is some stochastic element in the
final vote tally, the condition should be satisfied. Restricting to elections with more than 20
voters, as described above, should make this more plausible.
    We estimate the union effect τ using local linear regression (Hahn, Todd and Van der
Klaauw, 2001) and a triangular kernel with bandwidth chosen optimally according to Im-
bens and Kalyanaramang (2009) (IK-optimal). This essentially restricts analysis to nursing
homes that experienced close elections. We show the results are not qualitatively sensitive
to choice of functional form f , bandwidth, or control set (W ) through a series of robustness
tests with results detailed in the Appendix. In order to allow for the possibility of errors cor-
                                                                                             11


related within home across observations, we estimate standard errors using a home-clustered
bootstrap (M=200).
    Both to assess robustness and improve precision, we estimate effects using three basic
specifications, which differ by the set of included covariates (W ). Specification 1 includes no
covariates beyond vote share. Specification 2 includes nursing home i’s pre-election mean
of the dependent variable as a regressor. Specification 3 includes the home’s full vector of
pre-election means for all OSCAR characteristics. If the identifying assumption is valid,
all three specifications should give similar estimates and the specifications with additional
covariates should be more precise, as in a randomized control experiment.


                       3     Evidence of RD Validity
3.1    Test for pre-election discontinuities
The RD design is premised on the assumption that no systematic differences exist in the
populations of homes across the threshold before the election. A large advantage of RD
designs over control function approaches is that it delivers these testable, falsifiable impli-
cations (DiNardo and Lee, 2011). We test this with respect to, first, the density of vote
share and, second, the mean of observable pre-election characteristics. First, a McCrary test
returns a p-value of 0.33, consistent with a valid design. However, the test is not strictly
valid for discrete forcing variables. We also implement the Frandsen (2013) test, developed
for this setting, and obtain a p-value of 0.69, also consistent with a valid design.
    Second, we test for a discontinuity with respect to characteristics observable up to the
date of the election. We focus on homes with elections occurring after at least one OSCAR
observation is available precisely in order to enable this kind of falsification test. In formal
terms, we want to test the joint hypothesis that τk = 0 for all k for t ≤ 0. We use local linear
regression as in the main results below, but estimated as a system (Lee and Lemieux, 2010),
to facilitate joint hypothesis testing while allowing for possible correlation in errors within
home across characteristics (dimensions of Y ). Each observed Yitk for t ≤ 0 is included as an
outcome, the 4 parameters for a piecewise linear function of vote share are interacted with
a vector of k-indicators.

                       Yit1 = β01 + β11 Xi + τ1 Di + β21 Di Xi + it1                       (3)
                       Yit2 = β02 + β12 Xi + τ2 Di + β22 Di Xi + it2
                       ...
                      YitK = β0K + β1K Xi + τK Di + β2K Di Xi + itK
                                                                                                                12


We use only observations from homes that have elections with vote shares close to the
threshold, where “close” is defined as within a given bandwidth (h) of the threshold. We
vary h to assess sensitivity.
    Tests for discontinuities in a wide array of pre-election nursing home and election charac-
teristics reveal no evidence of selection. Discontinuity estimates for each characteristic (τ̂k )
from this analysis are presented in Table 2. In addition to the nursing home characteristics
from OSCAR that are the focus of our analysis, we also include two characteristics of the
focal NLRB election in order to provide an even stronger test: the logs of bargaining unit
size and number of valid votes cast. Columns correspond to different values of h. The final
row presents the p-value from the joint hypothesis test. At each bandwidth, the joint hy-
pothesis is not rejected. There is not evidence of systematic differences across the threshold
in nursing home characteristics prior to the election.10


3.2      Certification and unionization
The variable actually determined by a union election is union certification, and this is not
equivalent to unionization.11 To show that our RD design based on union certification is
informative about the effects of unionization, we present evidence that certification raises the
probability of establishing union collective-bargaining agreements. We consider whether each
home had any FMCS notice of intent to bargain filed anytime after the first post-certification
year.12 About half of unionized firms do not file FMCS notices (DiNardo and Lee, 2004). If
half of certifications lead to first contracts and half of contracts lead to FMCS filings, then
we would expect a 25 percentage point effect on filings after the first post-certification year.
    In fact, that is what the data show. Figure 2 presents the share of homes with post-
certification FMCS filings by vote-share bin as well as expected share estimated using local
linear regression and the IK-optimal bandwidth. There is a large discontinuity in the prob-
  10
      Allowing errors to be correlated within home and measure ik across time t rather than within i across
kt gives similar results. Using piecewise quadratic functions of vote share also produces similar results
(Table A.1).
   11
      Slippage can occur in both directions. On one hand, achieving NLRB certification is no guarantee that
a union will take root. Certification creates a duty to bargain collectively but not to reach agreement.
Consistent with Bronfenbrenner (2003), Ferguson (2008) finds first contracts are reached in 56 percent of
establishments in the first year after union certification. In the other cases, unionization may wither and the
home remain nonunion. On the other hand, unions may organize outside the NLRB election process. These
homes are not directly relevant to the RD analysis carried out here but are indirectly relevant in two ways.
First, if an FMCS notice is subsequently filed in a home that organizes outside the NLRB process, the home
is counted as union for the purpose of measuring the market’s union density for nearby homes that later
experience elections. Secondly, if unions form outside the NLRB process in homes where unions previously
lost NLRB elections, this would also diminish the chance of finding an effect.
   12
      In health care uniquely, notice is required for first-contract bargaining rather than only at re-negotiation.
Therefore, notices in the first post-certification year may not indicate the existence a signed agreements.
                                                                                                          13


ability of FMCS filing at the vote-share threshold. Where the union just loses the election,
only 16 percent of homes experience subsequent filings, presumably due to subsequent union-
ization efforts. Certification is estimated to cause a 23 percentage point increase in filing
likelihood, excluding the first post-certification year.
    If certification principally impacts nursing home operations through helping unionization
persist, the direction of the certification effects in these homes should be the same as the
direction of union effects. Our primary results come from signing effects so we use the terms
certification and unionization effects interchangeably. However, the magnitude of effects of
unions taking root in firms may be larger than these certification effects.13
    In sum, the RD approach appears valid as there is no systematic discontinuity in nursing
home characteristics prior to the certification election. Further, union certification appears
to lead to union contracts in about half of cases.


                  4     Estimated Effects of Certification
We now turn to estimating the effect of a union winning NLRB certification across a range
of outcomes using the panel of post-election observations. In the post-election sample, the
median elapsed time is 4.7 years, with an average of 5.0 years and a standard deviation of
3.3 years. For each outcome k, we estimate the discontinuity τk in the expected value of
characteristic k across the threshold and interpret this as the effect of certification on that
characteristic. For each k, we present estimates from the three specifications described above
to assess sensitivity. Graphs corresponding to specification 1 in the pre- and post-election
subsamples separately are also presented.


4.1     Staffing levels
Certification appears to reduce total staffing levels, particularly for NAs and RNs. Certifi-
cation is estimated to causes NA staffing to fall by -0.311 (0.116) hours per resident-day in
specification 1, which conditions only on vote share (Table 3 top row). The 95 percent con-
fidence interval (CI) is [-0.540, -0.083]. Conditioning on each home’s pre-election mean NA
staffing level in specification 2 yields an estimated negative effect of -0.360 (0.118) HPRD.
Conditioning on each home’s pre-election means for all staffing, quality, other strategic mar-
gins, and market characteristics in specification 3 yields a stable estimate, -0.331 (0.114).
  13
     These can be interpreted as intent-to-treat effects with noncompliance. We refrain from fuzzy RD
analysis to get treatment-on-treated effects due to serious measurement error in the union “treatment”
measure. While FMCS notices after the first post-certification year reliably indicate the presence of a union
contract, the absence of such filing does not reliably indicate union absence.
                                                                                                    14


This is about a 15 percent effect against the post-election sample mean. Figure 3(a) shows
the result corresponding to specification 1. Pre-election observations are considered in the
left panel to test for pre-treatment discontinuity at the threshold. The pre-election disconti-
nuity is small and insignificant, a difference of only 0.015 HPRD in NA staffing with standard
error of 0.178. Post-election observations are used in the right panel to help assess the union
certification effect. After the election, the discontinuity is large and significant. It appears
to be driven especially by differences at homes close to the cut-off rather than shifts across
the whole range of vote-shares.
    Estimates of effects on LPN staffing levels are also negative and stable across specifica-
tions, but small and insignificant (second row).
    Estimates for effects on RN staffing (third row) are also negative and stable across speci-
fications. Specification 1 yields a -0.278 (0.209) effect. As displayed in Figure 3(c), this post-
election difference is only a little larger than the pre-election difference. To guard against a
spurious finding driven by pre-election differences, specification 2 conditions on each home’s
pre-election mean RN staffing level. The estimated effect actually increases slightly to -0.317
(0.153) and becomes significant at 5 percent. Specification 3 adds the whole vector of pre-
election means to the conditioning set to adjust for any pre-election differences and yields an
estimated effect of -0.291 (0.140), also significant at 5 percent. This corresponds to a large
50 percent difference in staffing levels. Given the pre-election difference, a hugely negative
true effect does not seem plausible but the sum of evidence points to a negative effect on RN
staffing. Comparing the pre- and post-election RN staffing levels shows that there was some
secular reduction in RN staffing levels over time in both certified and uncertified homes. The
drop appears especially large in homes where unions won elections with large majorities.
    The negative estimated effects for NAs and RNs and the null for LPNs also hold under
a full range of assumed parametric functional forms and bandwidths. Estimates using mean
(zero-order) comparisons at h = 0.05 and linear, quadratic, cubic, and quartic control func-
tions at each bandwidth 0.15, 0.25, and 0.35 are presented in for NAs (Table A.2), for LPNs
(Table A.3), for RNs (Table A.4), and for the other outcomes in Tables A.5 through A.12 in
the Appendix. Negative point estimates for NAs and RNs show up across functional form
and bandwidth assumptions, though magnitudes vary somewhat.14
    Taken together, this analysis of direct-care staffing outcomes suggest that certification
leads to reduced staffing levels in nursing homes with the largest and most precisely estimated
effect on the employment of NA. This alone suggests a boost in the simplest measure of labor
productivity: quantity of resident-days of care provided per hour of labor.
    Because only a fraction of certifications lead to enduring unionization, unionization effects
 14
      Within functional form and bandwidth, estimates are mostly stable across conditioning sets.
                                                                                                          15


are likely larger than these estimated certification effects. If one assumes certification has no
effect except through unionization, then unionization effects could be estimated by scaling up
the share of certifications that lead to enduring unionization. This would imply unionization
effects are roughly double the estimated certification effects. The idea that the sign of
certification and unionization effects are the same seems very credible. However, we suggest
caution in embracing this precise interpretation of magnitudes because certification (or lack
thereof) may operate through other channels besides unionization.
    A reduction in staffing levels could be driven by positive effects of unionization on wages
and other unit labor costs. This would be consistent with a right-to-manage model of union
bargaining in which firms are free to choose employment levels based on the collectively
bargained wage, and weighs against alternative models of efficient bargaining over both wages
and employment, or firm monopsony, whereby employment need not decrease in response to
higher wages (Pencavel, 1991; McDonald and Solow, 1981; Link and Landon, 1975; Manning,
2003). It is also consistent with new evidence against monopsony in the nursing home labor
market for NAs (Matsudaira, forthcoming). Another part of the story could be that, in
homes where unions just lose elections, management raises staffing levels in order to try
to preempt a repeat organizing attempt. This could explain the post-election blip up for
expected NA HPRD just below the threshold (Figure 3(a)).
    Aside from differential wage effects, federal minimum staffing requirements could play
a role in affecting unionization’s impact across the different staffing classes. Federal law
requires all homes to have an RN on duty at least 8 hours every day and to have a licensed
nurse (RN or LPN) on duty the rest of the time. However, federal law has no requirements
regarding NAs. Therefore, any nursing homes employing RNs more than 8 hours per day,
when faced with increases in RN wages, might substitute towards less expensive LPNs.


4.2     Quality
Given that the nursing home literature generally links staffing levels to care quality, one
might expect the decline in staffing levels to have a deleterious impact on the care quality.
If so, it may be that unions reduce quality-adjusted productivity. In order to have a more
complete view of the impact of certification on nursing homes we assess the union’s impact
on quality along both clinical and resident experience dimensions.15
  15
    An obvious empirical strategy one might consider is to estimate the parameters of a production function
in an RD framework. We decided not to pursue this possibility. In our context, at a minimum, we would want
to specify an empirical quality production technology that allows for a hierarchical organizational structure
(Simon and Barnard, 1976; Williamson, 1967; Rosen, 1992) and an additional, correlated technological
unobservable beyond unobservables that affect union certification (Olley and Pakes, 1996). To the best of
our knowledge, no one has estimated such a model. Even if estimating such a model were feasible given our
                                                                                                            16


     Broadly, the point estimates suggests little impact on average care quality although
these effects are imprecisely estimated. The estimates reported in Figures 4(a) to 4(c) show
no significant differences across the threshold pre- or post-election in the total number of
deficiencies, the presence of a severe deficiency, nor in homes’ percentage of private-pay
residents, those who are likely more responsive to and demanding of both care quality and
the quality of the resident experience. Confidence intervals include both positive and negative
changes in quality. Estimates for total deficiency count and the presence of a severe deficiency
are relatively stable when pre-election characteristics are added to the conditioning sets
(Table 3 rows 4 and 5). The sign of the percent private-pay effect point estimate goes from
positive to negative. Evidence from the richest specification is mixed. The point estimate
on severe deficiency suggests a positive quality effect but those on total deficiency count and
percent private pay suggest a negative quality effect, and the total deficiency count estimate
becomes significant at the 10 percent level. Overall, this mixed evidence suggests no large
negative impact on quality but does not nail the question.
     Digging deeper, we estimate union effects on the seven specific proxies for care quality
listed in Table 4. These outcome measures are chosen because they are either particularly
sensitive to labor quality, measure substitution (perhaps inappropriately) away from labor
to technology when faced with higher labor costs, or are additional, direct evidence of care
quality affects (Cawley et al., 2006).16 Consistent with the results presented above, we find
little evidence of changes in care quality along these clinical dimensions. However, in general,
these estimates are also imprecise. The results in Table 4 show no significant effects, with
one exception: the percent of residents on psychoactive medications is about 4 percent lower
in homes where unions win elections, off a base of 55 percent, which would indicate higher
quality care. In order to improve precision, we also estimated a single, latent care-quality
factor using these 7 variables as independent, noisy measures of quality. With this outcome
and using specification 1, certification is estimated to raise quality by 0.163 (0.185) standard
deviations, with a CI of [-0.196,0.522]. This also suggests that large reductions in staffing
did not drive large reductions in quality but again the estimate is noisy.
data, it is beyond the scope of this paper to develop and estimate such a model.
   16
      Urethral catheterization can lessen the need for staff to assist with toileting, but place the resident
at greater risk for urinary tract infection, with other long-term complications including bladder and renal
stones, abcesses, and renal failure. Immobility resulting from the use of physical restraints may increase the
risk of pressure ulcers, depression, mental and physical deterioration, and mortality. Feeding tubes can result
in complications including self-extubation, infections, aspiration, unintended misplacement of the tube, and
pain. Overuse and misuse of psychoactive medications may result in mental and physical deterioration.
Although many residents are bedfast or chairbound due to medical conditions, bedfast and chairbound
residents are at a higher risk of developing pressure ulcers and other complications. Pressure ulcers are areas
of the skin and underlying tissues that erode as a result of pressure or friction and/or lack of blood supply.
                                                                                                    17


4.3       Other strategic margins
If unionization leads homes to shift to a less severe case mix and the work becomes easier,
then this might be confounded for a productivity increase. To assess this possibility, we
estimate the effect of union certification on the facility resident acuity index. There is no
evidence of a significant difference in residents’ average acuity. Table 3 shows the estimate of
-.188 (0.230) from specification 3, which which is statistically insignificant and small relative
to both the mean (10.2) and standard deviation (1.5) of the patient acuity distribution. We
also examine effects on total number of beds and the percentage of beds occupied, both
of which measure potential adjustments to labor-capital ratios. We observe no significant
effect of certification on either the total number of beds nor the occupancy rate. Here too,
point estimates are small, precise, and insignificant. Graphs are in appendix Figures A.1(a),
A.1(b), and A.1(c).17


4.4       Productivity
Combining our results on employment and the quality impact of certification allows us to
examine the productivity impact of unionization. Specifically, if productivity is measured
as quality-adjusted output (resident-days of care provided) per labor hour, then our results
suggest that average productivity improved after union certification. Evidence below on
payroll and occupancy rates suggest that productivity in terms of output per labor cost
may also have increased. This is consistent with increases in productivity holding workers
fixed (Duncan and Stafford, 1980; Freeman and Medoff, 1984; Perelman, 2011). Unionized
nursing homes may also have a stronger incentive to invest in workers’ human capital and
provide additional training (Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999; Dustmann and Schönberg, 2009).
It is also consistent with prior evidence that unionization in a two-sided selection process
leads to negative selection for higher-skilled workers and positive selection for lower-skilled
(Pettengill, 1979; Reynolds, 1986; Card, 1996; Hirsch and Schumacher, 1998).
    This fundamental result is quite robust to specification choice. Because the estimate in
each cell of Table 3 depends on a bandwidth choice chosen optimally for that regression,
the bandwidths differ across cells (details in Table A.14). This approach uses the available
information efficiently within regression but opens the possibility the negative staffing effect
and null quality effect may be driven by differences in bandwidth. However, this does not
appear to be the case. Table A.13 presents estimates analogous to those in Table 3 but holds
the bandwidth fixed across all regressions (h = 0.12). Nothing changes meaningfully.
 17
      We also investigated the impact of unionization on number of residents and found no effect.
                                                                                                            18


4.5     Market structure and unionization
The RD analysis suggests that union certification had no effect on the competitive structure
of the local nursing home market but did increase union density. Unions may impact entry,
exit, acquisition and investment strategies of homes and their competitors and thus impact
market structure. However, the estimates in the bottom panel of Table 3 show estimated
effects on the local HHI of near zero. Certification increases union density almost mechan-
ically, because those homes where unions win elections are categorized as newly union in
computing its market’s post-election union density. However, it is interesting to note the
magnitude of the estimate, as it suggests the average unionizing home holds about 10 percent
of the beds in its county’s market.
    Finally, we do not find evidence that certification affects firm survival.18 Table 5 reports
estimated effects on indicators of survival to 2005, to 5 years post-election and to 10 years
post-election. All of the estimates are small relative to the dependent variable means, and
none are significant. This finding is consistent with prior theoretical and empirical work
(Freeman and Kleiner, 1999; DiNardo and Lee, 2004) and consistent with positive produc-
tivity effects.


4.6     Evidence on mechanisms from earnings data
To better understand the mechanisms underlying the estimated staffing level effects we focus
on the subsample of homes represented in the Census’s LEHD and LBD databases where
confidential earnings data are available. Unfortunately, this shrinks the sample size further.
The analysis has less power and our conclusions are less definitive. The estimates presented
in this subsection are credibly unbiased given the research design, but are generally not
statistically significant at conventional levels. In the 429-home Census subsample, the mean
payroll is $5.4 million paid to a mean of 216 employed individuals per home who earn an
average of $20,871 annually.19
    Analysis of individual earnings suggests that union certification raises the earnings of
stayers, individuals who remain employed at the nursing home post-election. The lower panel
of Table 6 reports estimated effects on log earnings of about 0.1, although the estimates are
  18
      We measure nursing home closure as failure to appear in the OSCAR data for three years, following
Bowblis (2011). Given that inspections are mandated at least every 15 months, this is a conservative measure.
As our OSCAR panel extends through 2007, we study survival to 2005 as as defined by an indicator measuring
whether each home has any OSCAR observation in calendar years 2005, 2006, or 2007.
   19
      The Census subsample resembles the main sample in terms of mean nursing home characteristics (Ap-
pendix Table A.15 versus Table 1) and effects on direct-care staffing levels, care quality, and other strategic
margins (Appendix Table A.16 versus Table 3). In the subsample, there is also evidence of large negative
effects on RN and NA staffing levels and no consistent evidence of declining care quality.
                                                                                                  19


imprecise. This suggests that unions may have raised the cost of labor on average for a given
worker.
    Nonetheless, estimates using LBD data suggest that total payroll and average earnings
nonetheless did not increase at unionized homes. The upper panel of Table 6 reports esti-
mates of the union effect on the log of total payroll, the log of total employment, the log of
average earnings (the difference between the two) and the log of average wage (where aver-
age wage is payroll divided by FTE from the OSCAR data). The estimated union effects on
employment and payroll are negative but not significantly different than zero.
    Estimates of the individual earnings effect by initial earnings level suggest that the pos-
itive individual earning effects were concentrated at the lower end of the distribution, and
effects at the top may have been negative, providing a possible explanation. Figure 5(a)
shows estimates and confidence intervals of the union effect on log earnings for workers who
remained employed by decile of the pre-election earnings distribution using RD analysis.
The estimates are noisy, but are generally positive below the fifth decile, and are negative
above the sixth, and significantly so at the tenth. A test of the hypothesis that the effects
are equal above and below the fifth decile against the alternative that effects below are larger
rejects at the 5 percent level. In light of these results, one interpretation of the staffing level
effects is that higher-paid workers were more likely to leave nursing homes in response to the
negative earnings effects, while lower-paid workers preferred to stay.
    By contrasting the distribution of pre-election earnings for workers who remain employed
at homes subsequent to a union victory with the distribution of pre-election earnings for
workers who remain employed at homes subsequent to a union loss, we can develop direct
evidence on the validity of this interpretation. Figure 5(b) plots the estimated pre-election
log earnings density among stayers for homes that barely unionized and homes that barely did
not.20 The figure shows unionized stayers are much more likely to come from the lower end
of the distribution, and the difference is significant at the .01-level. Figure 5(c) on the other
hand plots the estimated union and non-union pre-election earnings density for employees
who left the nursing home. Employees who left a unionized home were much more likely
to come from the upper end of the distribution than employees who left non-union homes.
Note that there is no mechanical reason why the leavers’ difference must be the reverse of
the stayers’ difference. These analyses show directly that the composition of workers at
homes that unionized shifted toward workers who were at the lower end of the earnings
distribution, both through retention and separation. For completeness, Figure 5(d) shows
how unionization affected which workers came to the home after an election. Consistent
  20
   The union (nonunion) estimated density is from local-linear density estimates using homes within h
above (below) the threshold, where h is the mean-squared-error-optimal bandwidth.
                                                                                                               20


with the interpretation above, the figure shows workers that came to a unionized home
were relatively more likely to be at the lower end of the post-election earnings distribution,
although the difference is muted because it is combined with the causal effect on the earnings
distribution, which is larger at the lower end.


4.7     Effects by market characteristics and time horizon
The impact of unionization may depend on the antecedents of local labor market union
activity, the competitive environment, the regulatory environment and the amount of time
the union has been active. Below we report the RD estimates by differences in these market
and nursing home level characteristics.
    Union density. Unions’ ability to negotiate and enforce terms of employment depends
on their strength in the local labor market, not just on being certified at a particular home.
RD estimates suggests that the union reduction in staffing levels is concentrated in homes
where the local market has below-median union density. Table 7 reports estimates similar
to the ones in Table 3, but with the sample split according to whether pre-election union
density in the home’s market was above or below the median. The negative point estimates
on RN and NA staffing are larger in magnitude in less unionized markets (top panel) than in
more unionized markets (bottom panel).21 This suggests the unions are able to have larger
effects where union density is lower. The results on quality look very similar in both types
of markets suggesting that productivity may adjust smoothly.
    In more highly unionized markets, unions have more power to support higher compen-
sation levels. However, part of this ability comes from reducing competitive pressure on
union firms by also raising compensation at nonunion firms in those markets. This occurs
directly through raising market-clearing wages and indirectly through threat effects, which
induce nonunion managers to try to match union standards in order to preempt employees’
interest in unionizing. Therefore, in more unionized markets, there may be less scope for
newly organized unions to raise wages. In this scenario, existing unions in more highly orga-
nized markets raise standards in nonunion firms, meaning their effects potentially pre-date
unionization and would be under-estimated in the RD design.
    Nursing-home market competitiveness. Unions’ ability to extract economic rents from
firms depends on the existence of rents in the firms. Because firms in less competitive markets
may have more rents, we would expect to see bigger union effects in less competitive (higher
HHI) markets (Abowd and Farber, 1990). Our RD estimates confirm this prediction, showing
that the observed union effects are concentrated in less-competitive markets. Table 8 shows
   21
      Bootstrap tests for difference in the specification 1 estimates show that only the difference in RN staffing
is marginally significant (p=0.06).
                                                                                                           21


that for NA and RN HPRD, the negative employment effects are large and highly significant
for homes with above-median HHI, but smaller and not significant in below-median HHI
markets.22 For LPNs, the pattern runs in the other direction, but is not significant.
    The evidence also suggests that certification leads to lower care quality in less competitive
markets and perhaps higher quality care in more competitive ones. In more competitive mar-
kets, the likelihood of a severe deficiency decreases 18.9 (9.6) percent with certification and
the point estimate on total deficiency count is negative, also consistent with higher quality of
care. Negative employment effects accompanied by positive quality effects suggest positive
productivity effects in more competitive markets. In contrast, in less competitive markets,
where staff declines are sharper, the evidence suggests negative effects on care quality. Total
deficiency counts go up by 2.93 (1.36) and the signs on private pay percentage and severe
deficiency results are similarly signed. The effect on productivity in less competitive markets
is ambiguous. Certification has significantly worse effects on two of the three quality mea-
sures in less competitive markets compared to more competitive markets: total deficiency
count (p=0.02) and percentage private-pay (p=0.09). However, none of the differences in
staffing level effects are significant. This finding strengthens the empirical foundation for an
earlier literature that suggested more positive union productivity effects in more competitive
product markets and more concern about negative productivity effects in less competitive
product markets (Hirsch and Addison, 1986).
    Another possible interpretation of this result comes from noting that product market
competitiveness is likely correlated with labor market competitiveness, suggesting HHI may
proxy for monopsony power in the labor market. In that case, this finding could be inter-
preted as supportive of a theoretical result in Section 12.5 of Manning (2003) that union
wage mark-ups are likely higher in less competitive labor markets, assuming unions do not
strongly prefer greater employment over higher wages.
    Staffing regulations. Many states have legislated minimum staffing levels that are more
stringent than the national standards. In order to explore the impact of these regulations on
the impact of unionization, we classify state/year pairs as either having “strong” or “weak”
staffing regulations based on the work of Harrington (2008) and estimate the impact of union
certification for each sample. Strong regulatory states place floors on RNs and LPNs per
resident and typically do not place as binding limits on the use of NAs. Unionization in the
“strong” states should thus be primarily associated with significant declines in NAs as the
regulations limit adjustments in RN and LPN staff. The results are presented in Table 9.
  22
    Ideally, we would like to look at both HHI and union density simultaneously and in a statistical framework
that allows for formal measurement of differences. However, given the limited sample size, this does not
produce meaningful results.
                                                                                            22


Consistent with the prediction, certification has a much larger (and statistically significant)
impact on NAs in strong state-year nursing homes compared to weak state-year nursing
homes. In weak regulatory regimes, the point estimates for NA and RN are all negative but
imprecisely estimated.
    Elapsed time. Union effects might grow over time, as the union becomes entrenched
and the contract expands. On the other hand, the union might simply accelerate changes
that would have occurred anyway. This relationship would produce a large effect early,
which narrows over time (Freeman and Kleiner, 1990). To investigate this issue, we split the
sample of observations at the median post-election elapsed time (4.6 years) to investigate
shorter-run versus longer-run effects.
    No large differences exist between short and long run effects. Table 10 presents short-
run estimates using only OSCAR observations soon after the election in the top panel and
long-run estimates from observations in later years in the bottom panel. The negative
NA employment point estimate increases in magnitude and the RN estimate diminishes
somewhat. However, neither is statistically different. Looking at the long-run sample, there
appears to be a marginally significant increase in total deficiencies. This differs from the
result in the short-run and overall sample. It could be evidence of declines in care quality
driven by greater decreases in RN staffing levels. However, neither of the other quality
measures, private pay percentage nor presence of severe deficiency, confirms this story.
    To summarize, certification appears to decrease employment of NAs and RNs but not
LPNs. There is evidence of wage increases for lower-skilled workers. Although there are
significant declines in employment, we do not observe change in the quantity or quality of
nursing home care produced, nor do we see evidence that certification affects capital invest-
ment or nursing home survival. The effect of certification is enhanced in less dense union
markets, in more concentrated markets, and when staffing regulations are more stringent.


                                   5     Conclusion
This paper provides new evidence on the effects of unions on employment, product quality,
and productivity in the increasingly important service sector, where little is known about
union effects. Using a regression discontinuity design, we found robust evidence that certi-
fication leads to unionization in about half of certified homes and that certification causes
a significant decline in staffing levels. We found no compelling evidence that certification
resulted in reductions in the number of patients treated or quality of care although these
estimates were imprecise. This finding points to unionization leading to increased labor
productivity or, at least, not reduced labor productivity. The evidence we develop also
                                                                                                        23


suggests that unionization increases productivity among workers at the lower end of the
wage distribution, which offsets the reduction in employment of higher wage occupations.
This increase could occur as a benefit of better labor-management cooperation (Freeman
and Medoff, 1984) or selection (Card, 1996). There is weaker, suggestive evidence that total
payroll did not increase and that homes shift their occupational mix towards lower-paid,
lower-skill occupations. These changes do not appear to harm firm growth or survival. We
also observed stronger unionization effects in facilities in more-concentrated markets and in
the least-unionized markets. The latter result is also consistent with large threat effects of
unions in highly-unionized markets.
    Increased labor productivity does not imply that management would invite unionization
or that it could make the same changes unilaterally. Our findings are consistent with Lee
and Mas (2009)’s finding of an imprecise, positive point estimated effect of certification
on profits.23 First, increased labor productivity does not imply higher profits, especially if
accompanied by higher wages. Second, managers and owners may also simply have a taste
for more unilateral control over the workplace (Fehr, Herz and Wilkening, 2013) and may
dislike unionization, to some extent, on these grounds. Third, a legally-binding collective
bargaining agreement and the credible expectation of future bilateral bargaining may make
certain productivity-enhancing commitments possible that would not otherwise be so, such
as process improvements driven through labor-management dialogue (Freeman and Medoff,
1984; Cooke, 1992; Black and Lynch, 2001) and commitments to finance and share training
costs (Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999).
    Looking at the nursing home industry, although interesting in its own right, is important
primarily because it can give insight into the role of unions in broader parts of the economy.
Going forward, unions are likely to survive and expand primarily in non-tradeable sectors
where the possibility of outsourcing is minimal and in sectors where organized workers can
most directly use their political influence to shape the terms of market competition. Nursing
homes exhibit both of these qualities. While much of the literature on union effects has
focused on industries that are in decline both in the unionized sector and in the overall
economy, the present and future of organized labor is in health care, education, public
services, retail and other industries of this kind, to which our evidence from nursing homes
is germane.




  23
     They found negative effects on profits in the difference-in-difference analysis, driven by firms where
unions won elections by wide margins. Our study does not examine that question.
                                                                                     24


                                   References
Abowd, J. and H. Farber, “Product Market Competition, Union Organizing Activity,
 and Employer Resistance,” 1990. NBER Working Paper Number 3353.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke, “The Structure of Wages and Investment in General
 Training,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (3), 539–572.

Allen, J. E., Assisted Living Administration, Springer Publishing Company: New York,
 N.Y., 2004.

Bajari, Patrick, Han Hong, Minjung Park, and Robert Town, “Regression Discon-
 tinuity Designs with an Endogenous Forcing Variable and an Application to Contracting
 in Health Care,” 2011. University of Minnesota manuscript.

Black, Sandra E and Lisa M Lynch, “How to compete: the impact of workplace practices
  and information technology on productivity,” Review of Economics and statistics, 2001,
  83 (3), 434–445.

Booth, Alison L., The economics of the trade union, Cambridge Univ Press: Cambridge,
 1995.

Bowblis, John R., “Ownership Conversion and Closure in the Nursing Home Industry,”
 Health Economics, 2011, 20 (6), 631–644.

Bronfenbrenner, Kate, Trade Union Renewal and Organizing, Continuum: London,

Card, David, “The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis,”
 Econometrica, 1996, 64 (4), 957–979.

Cawley, John, David C. Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth, “Factor Substitution in
 Nursing Homes,” Journal of Health Economics, 2006, 25 (2), 234–247.

Cooke, William B., “Product Quality Improvement through Employee Participation,”
 Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1992, 46 (1), 119–134.

DiNardo, John and David S Lee, “Program evaluation and research designs,” Handbook
 of Labor Economics, 2011, 4, 463–536.

DiNardo, John E. and David S. Lee, “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private
 Sector Employers: 1984-2001,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (4), 1383–1441.

Duncan, Greg J. and Frank P. Stafford, “Do Unions Recieve Compensating Differen-
 tials,” American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (3), 355–371.

Dustmann, Christian and Uta Schönberg, “Training and Union Wages,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (2), 363–376.

Fehr, Ernst, Holger Herz, and Tom Wilkening, “The Lure of Authority: Motivation
  and Incentive Effects of Power,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1325–59.
                                                                                        25


Ferguson, John-Paul, “Eyes of the Needles: A Sequential Model of Union Organizing
  Drives, 1999-2004,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 2008, 62 (3), 3–21.

Frandsen, Brigham, “Union Wage Setting and the Distribution of Employee Earnings:
  Evidence from Certification Elections,” 2010. Massachusetts Institute of Technology
  manuscript.

Frandsen, Brigham R., “Party Bias in Union Representation Elections,” 2013. Brigham
  Young University manuscript.

Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff, What do unions do?, Basic Books: New
  York, N.Y., 1984.

   and Morris M. Kleiner, “The Impact of New Unionization on Wages and Working
  Conditions,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1990, pp. 8–25.

   and , “Do Unions Make Enterprises Insolvent?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
  July 1999, 52 (4), 510–527.

Gertler, Paul J. and Donald M. Waldman, “Quality-Adjusted Cost Functions and
 Policy Evaluation in the Nursing Home Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992,
 pp. 1232–1256.

Grabowski, D.C., J. Gruber, and J.J. Angelelli, “Nursing Home Quality as a Common
 Good,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (4), 754–764.

Greenhouse, Steven, “Labor Board Approves Faster Vote on Unions,” New York Times,
 Nov. 2011.

Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw, “Identification and estimation of treat-
 ment effects with a regression-discontinuity design,” Econometrica, 2001, 69 (1), 201–209.

Harrington, C., “Nursing Home Staffing Standards in State Statues and Regulations,”
 2008. University of California, San Francisco manuscript.

Helpman, E. and P.R. Krugman, Market structure and foreign trade, The MIT Press:
 Cambridge, Mass., 1987.

Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson, “http://unionstats.com,” 2011.

   and Edward J. Schumacher, “Unions, Wages, and Skills,” Journal of Human Re-
  sources, 1998, 33 (1), 201–219.

Hirsch, B.T., “What Do Unions Do for Economic Performance?,” Journal of Labor Re-
 search, 2004, 25 (3), 415–455.

   and J.T. Addison, The economic analysis of unions: new approaches and evidence,
  Allen & Unwin: London, 1986.
                                                                                      26


Holmes, T.J., “Geographic Spillover of Unionism,” 2006. NBER Working Paper Number
 12025.

Imbens, G.W. and K. Kalyanaramang, “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
  Discontinuity Estimator,” 2009. NBER Working Paper Number 14726.

Konetzka, R. Tamara, Deokhee Yi, Edward C. Norton, and Kerry E. Kilpatrick,
 “Effects of Medicare Payment Changes on Nursing Home Staffing and Deficiencies,” Health
 Services Research, 2004, 39 (3), 463–488.

Lee, David S. and Alexandre Mas, “Long-run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evi-
  dence from Financial Markets, 1961-1999,” 2009. NBER Working Paper Number 14709.

   and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 2010, 48 (2), 281–355.

Lewis, H.G., Unionism and relative wages in the United States: an empirical inquiry,
  University of Chicago Press: Chicago, Ill., 1963.

Link, Charles R. and John H. Landon, “Monopsony and Union Power in the Market
  for Nurses,” Southern Economic Journal, 1975, 41 (4), 649–659.

Lu, Susan F., “Multitasking, Information Disclosure and Product Quality: Evidence from
 Nursing Homes,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, forthcoming.

Manning, Alan, Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets, Princeton
 University Press: Princeton, N.J., 2003.

Matsudaira, Jordan, “Monopsony in the Low-Wage Labor Market? Evidence from Mini-
 mum Nurse Staffing Regulations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

McDonald, Ian M. and Robert M. Solow, “Wage Bargaining and Employment,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 1981, 71 (5), 896–908.

Mellow, Wesley, “Unionism and Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 1981, 63 (1), 43–52.

Mor, Vincent, Jacqueline Zinn, Joseph Angelelli, Joan M. Teno, and Susan C.
 Miller, “Driven to Tiers: Socioeconomic and Racial Disparities in the Quality of Nursing
 Home Care,” Milbank Quarterly, 2004, 82 (2), 227–256.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommuni-
 cations Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.

OMalley, A.J., D.J. Caudry, and D. C. Grabowski, “Predictors of Nursing Home
 Residents Time to Hospitalization,” Health Services Research, 2011, 46 (1), 82–104.

Pencavel, J., Labor Markets Under Trade Unionism: Employment, Wages, and Hours,
 Basil Blackwater: Cambridge, Mass., 1991.
                                                                                    27


Perelman, M., “Retrospectives X-Efficiency,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25
 (4), 211–222.

Pettengill, J.S., “Labour Unions and the Wage Structure: A General Equilibrium Ap-
 proach,” Review of Economic Studies, 1979, 46 (4), 675–693.

Reynolds, M.O., “Trade Unions in the Production Process Reconsidered,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 1986, 94 (2), 443–447.

Rosen, S., “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 1992, 13, 311–323.

Simon, H.A. and C.I. Barnard, Administrative behavior, Vol. 3, Cambridge Univ Press,
  1976.

Sojourner, A.J., M.M. Chen, D.C. Grabowski, and R.J. Town, “Trends in Nursing
  Home Unionization,” Inquiry, 2011, 47 (4).

Stewart, M.B., “Union Wage Differentials, Product Market Influences and the Division of
  Rents,” Economic Journal, 1990, 100 (403), 1122–1137.

Williamson, O.E., “Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size,” The Journal of Polit-
 ical Economy, 1967, pp. 123–138.

Wunderlich, Gooloo S., Frank A. Sloan, and Carolyne K. Davis, Nursing staff in
 hospitals and nursing homes: Is it adequate?, National Academies Press, 1996.
                                                 6     Tables
                                 Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max     Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.      Min     Max      Obs.

NLRB election characteristics
Vote share                       0.029       0.195   -0.475   0.475    627
1(vote share > 0.50)             0.558       0.497        0       1    627


OSCAR nursing home characteristics
                                             All observations                      Post-election observations only
NA hours/resident day (HPRD)    2.13         0.763        0      8    7942    2.123       0.718        0        8    5319
LPN HPRD                       0.773         0.528        0      8    7993    0.778       0.485        0 7.137       5334
RN HPRD                        0.558         0.803        0 7.914     7978    0.503       0.736        0 7.914       5332
Total deficiency count         6.826            6.5       0     81    8045     6.87       5.978        0       81    5353
1(severe deficiency)           0.233         0.423        0      1    8045    0.265       0.442        0        1    5353
Pct. private pay              22.622        17.641        0    100    8045    21.59      16.196        0      100    5353
Acuity index                  10.275         1.576        3 24.083    7971    10.22       1.536        3 24.083      5329
Total beds                   125.684        79.377        5    977    8045   124.74      73.111        5      976    5353
Pct. beds occupied            84.837        19.272 0.207       100    8045   85.284      16.942 0.556         100    5353
HHI, in county                 0.152         0.195 0.003         1    8045    0.159          0.2 0.003          1    5353
Union density, private only   31.102        26.744        0    100    8045   35.446      27.538        0      100    5353
Turnout                       86.571          9.07 45.833      100    8031   86.671       9.138 45.833        100    5344
Log(bargaining unit size)      4.497          0.65 3.091 7.142        8031    4.479       0.616 3.091 7.142          5344
Log(number valid votes)        4.347         0.652 2.996 7.066        8045    4.331       0.619 2.996 7.066          5353

                                            Table 1: Summary statistics




                                                                                                                            28
                                                                                                        29


                                                          Vote share within h of 0.50 threshold
 Variables                                          h = 0.05 h =0.15 h =0.25 h =0.35 h =0.50
 Staffing
 NA HPRD                                               -.0584       -.058      -.0987     -.0204        -.137
                                                        (0.111)     (0.182)     (0.122)     (0.222)     (0.111)

 LPN HPRD                                               -.113       -.117      -.0307      .0529      -.0723
                                                        (0.101)     (0.161)     (0.106)     (0.217)     (0.100)

 RN HPRD                                                -.103      -.0872     .00984          .11     -.0321
                                                        (0.176)     (0.231)     (0.173)     (0.257)     (0.151)



 Quality
 Total deficiency count                                  .349       -.264        .518        1.26        1.09
                                                        (0.853)      (1.09)      (0.89)     (0.798)     (0.713)

 1(severe deficiency)                                  -.0584       -.058      -.0987     -.0204        -.137
                                                        (0.111)     (0.182)     (0.122)     (0.222)     (0.111)

 Prct. private pay                                       2.47        2.72       -.275        .148       -1.78
                                                         (3.06)      (3.76)      (3.00)      (2.58)      (2.42)



 Other strategic margins
 Acuity index                                           -.181      -.0348       -.166       -.172       -.388
                                                        (0.276)     (0.349)     (0.259)      (0.31)      (.23)∗

 Number of beds                                         -8.63         -11       -7.96        2.67        .499
                                                         (26.4)      (30.2)      (22.6)       (19)       (16.7)

 Prct. beds occupied                                     .505        1.46       -2.25       -.671       -.162
                                                          (4.7)       (5.7)      (4.35)       (3.7)      (3.45)



 Market characteristics
 Market HHI - same county                               .0125       .0786     -.00284        .123      .0234
                                                       (0.0301)     (0.124)     (0.043)     (0.205)     (0.072)

 Union density, private only                            -3.94       -4.86       -3.81       -5.36       -6.71
                                                         (3.54)       (4.6)      (3.78)      (3.48)    (3.08)∗∗



 Election characteristics
 Log(NLRB election unit size)                           -.184       -.188       -.156      .0313        -.106
                                                        (0.169)     (0.235)      (0.17)     (0.236)     (0.142)

 Log(Valid votes cast in election)                      -.207       -.206       -.168      .0122        -.125
                                                        (0.167)     (0.232)      (0.17)     (0.239)     (0.144)

 Number of homes observed                                 131        350         483         576         626
 Number of home-dates observed                            587      1,517       2,042       2,480       2,688
 Number of home-date-outcomes observed                  6,986     18,077      24,350      29,574      32,053
 Adjusted R2                                             .526       .602        .628        .639        .645
 Joint-null F -test p-value                              .844       .885        .968        .697        .359
Coefficient (within-home-correlation corrected SE) Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each column
presents discontinuity estimates from a separate system of first-order linear equations in vote share. Only
observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold are used. With h = 0.05, this tests
for a difference in means, as only one support point is used on each side of the threshold.

Table 2: Test for discontinuity in mean nursing home characteristics in pre-election panel
                                                                                                          30


                                                   Estimates
 Specification                             1            2              3

 Staffing
 NA HPRD                              -.311         -.360         -.331
                                       (.116)∗∗∗     (.118)∗∗∗     (.114)∗∗

 LPN HPRD                             -.072         -.050         -.043
                                       (.106)        (.068)        (.073)

 RN HPRD                              -.278         -.317         -.291
                                       (.209)        (.153)∗∗      (.140)∗∗



 Quality
 Total deficiency count              1.326           .839         1.609
                                       (.897)        (.837)        (.870)∗

 1(severe deficiency)                 -.067         -.065         -.048
                                       (.052)        (.052)        (.044)

 Prct. private pay                   2.633          -.971        -2.023
                                      (3.908)       (2.220)       (2.202)



 Other strategic margins
 Acuity index                         -.177         -.352         -.188
                                       (.311)        (.242)        (.230)

 Number of beds                      -24.31         5.151         5.368
                                      (25.81)       (4.624)       (4.728)

 Prct. beds occupied                 3.143          2.334         2.081
                                      (4.584)       (3.851)       (3.724)



 Market characteristics
 Market HHI - same county              .051        -.0004          .003
                                       (.051)        (.008)        (.010)

 Union density, private only         5.545          9.688        10.841
                                      (7.328)       (4.904)∗∗     (3.557)∗∗∗



 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable             N           Y         Y
 All other outcome variables       N           N         Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5% ∗∗∗: 1%. Each cell presents
discontinuity estimate from a separate local linear regression. Number of home-dates observed varies due to
missing outcomes or conditioning values. Across outcomes, the range of number of homes observed is 626
to 627 (616 to 627) (610 to 611) in specification 1 (2) (3), including 5,319 to 5,353 (5,250 to 5,353) (5,220
to 5,245) observed home-times. Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for each regression are in
Table A.14.

Table 3: Estimated effects on nursing homes characteristics using post-election panel and
local linear estimator
                                                                                                          31




                                                                        Post-election mean
                                              Estimates                    of outcome
 Specification:                         1         2           3

 Prct. urethral catheter           -.817       -.933      -.917                 7.13
                                   (1.441)     (.997)     (.956)

 Prct. mobility restrained          .478       -.526     -1.415                 9.24
                                   (1.578)    (1.577)    (1.584)

 Prct. spc. feeding tube           -.580       -.206        .27                 6.90
                                   (1.738)    (1.043)    (1.006)

 Prct. psycho-active meds          -4.84       -4.67      -3.13                 56.43
                                    (2.76)∗    (2.47)∗    (2.61)

 Prct. skin pressure sores        -1.369      -1.673      -.613                 7.77
                                     (.97)    (1.322)    (1.121)

 Prct. bedfast                      .123       -.217        .26                 4.79
                                   (1.052)     (.977)     (.935)

 Prct. mobility chair               .237         .07     1.412                  52.84
                                   (3.568)    (3.485)    (2.992)



 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable           N        Y        Y
 All Table 3 variables           N        N        Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance:     ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each cell
presents discontinuity estimate from a separate local linear regression. Number of home-dates observed
varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values. For all outcomes but pressure sores, the of number of
homes-dates observed is 5,353 in specifications 1 and 2 and 5,245 in specification 3. For pressure sores, the
number is 5,238 (3,484) (3,417) in specification 1 (2) (3). Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for
each regression are in Table A.14.

Table 4: Estimated effects on nursing homes characteristics using post-election panel and
local linear estimator
                                                                         32




                                            Specification
                                        1                           3
DV: 1(survives to 2005)
                                    .107                         .069
                                  (.082)                       (.063)
N                                    627                          611
DV Mean                                         0.872

DV: survival over various post-election spans
1(survived > 5 years)
                          0.033                0.009
                        (0.084)             ( 0.055)
N                           480                  466
DV Mean                            0.915

1(survived > 10 years)
                                    .011                        -.066
                                  (.038)                       (.094)
N                                    102                          101
DV Mean                                         0.873

Conditional on home’s pre-election
mean Table 3 variables           N                                 Y
Coefficient/(SE). Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%         ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.
Each cell presents discontinuity estimate from a separate local linear
regression. Sample sizes differ between 1 and 3 due to missing
conditioning values. Specification 2 omitted.

            Table 5: Estimated effects on survival
                                                                                                          33




 Specification:                             1              2         3
 Outcome:
 Home-quarter
 log(payroll)                         -0.206         -0.107     -0.078
                                        (.342)         (.114)    (.116)

 log(employment)                      -0.139         -0.052     0.024
                                        (.299)         (.096)    (.110)

 log(average earnings)                -0.083         -0.127     -0.111
                                        (.083)         (.059)    (.075)

 log(average wages)                    0.076         -0.104     -0.055
                                        (.330)         (.130)    (.124)



 Employee-quarter for stayers
 log(earnings gain)                    0.127     undefined      0.094
                                        (.118)                   (.529)

 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable              N            Y      Y
 All Table 3 variables              N            N      Y
Notes: The table reports local linear regression discontinuity estimates (standard errors) of the effect of a
union victory on the dependent variable in the left-hand column. Average earnings are payroll/employment
and average wages are payroll/FTE. Earnings gains are defined as the difference between an individual’s
post-election earnings and average pre-election earnings. All outcomes are from the LBD, except FTE from
OSCAR and earnings gain from the LEHD.

Table 6: Estimated effects on earnings, payroll, and average wages in the Census subsample
                                                                                                                             34



                                                 Estimates
 Specification                      1          2            3
 Home in Less Unionized Nursing Home Markets (below median density) at Election
 NA HPRD                        -.418      -.535        -.533
                              (0.185)∗∗ (0.196)∗∗∗    (0.219)∗∗
 LPN HPRD                       -.055      -.056        -.051
                              (0.156)   (0.084)       (0.106)
 RN HPRD                        -.637      -.610        -.487
                              (0.331)∗  (0.243)∗∗     (0.252)∗
 Total deficiency count          .877     1.678         1.974
                              (1.295)   (1.202)       (1.401)
 1(severe deficiency)           -.045      -.045        -.033
                              (0.060)   (0.061)       (0.065)
 Prct. private pay              2.987    -2.029        -4.207
                              (4.768)   (3.019)       (3.819)
 Acuity index                    .394      -.134        -.377
                              (0.491)   (0.363)       (0.432)
 Number of beds               -14.887     3.433         6.475
                              (29.86)   (4.536)       (5.164)
 Prct. beds occupied            4.681     6.560         5.784
                              (7.638)   (4.856)       (5.966)
 Market HHI - same county        .065    -.0003         -.010
                              (0.092)   (0.014)       (0.020)
 Union density, private only   21.408    20.500        19.564
                              (8.230)∗∗ (7.974)∗∗∗    (6.004)∗∗∗

 Home in More Unionized Nursing Home Markets (above          median density) at Election
 NA HPRD                        -.165    -.097                   -.111
                              (0.137)  (0.137)                 (0.202)
 LPN HPRD                       -.107    -.128                   -.034
                              (0.125)  (0.108)                 (0.137)
 RN HPRD                         .124     .071                   -.128
                              (0.132)  (0.155)                 (0.187)
 Total deficiency count          .508    -.069                   1.005
                              (1.203)  (1.264)                 (1.474)
 1(severe deficiency)           -.047    -.038                   -.012
                              (0.065)  (0.067)                (0 .081)
 Prct. private pay              2.098    -.627                  -2.154
                              (4.393)  (2.882)                 (6.170)
 Acuity index                   -.482    -.525                   -.128
                              (0.382)  (0.324)                (0 .566)
 Number of beds                -6.139    3.734                   4.293
                             (34.682)  (8.154)               (02.030)
 Prct. beds occupied           -5.274   -5.259                  -3.595
                              (4.867)  (4.865)                 (5.516)
 Market HHI - same county       -.026     .003                    .007
                              (0.041)  (0.005)                 (0.007)
 Union density, private only   -3.588     .593                   2.014
                              (8.432)  (6.394)                 (8.390)

 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable                N            Y               Y
 All other outcome variables          N            N               Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance:    ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%      ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each cell presents discontinuity
estimate from a separate local linear regression and each column corresponds to a different set of control variables. Number of
home-dates observed varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values. Across outcomes, the range of number of home-
dates observed is 2,719 to 2,733 (2,695 to 2,733) (2,681 to 2,695) in specification 1 (2) (3) in the top panel and 2,596 to 2,620
(2,555 to 2,620) (2,534 to 2,550) in the bottom panel. Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for each regression are in
Table A.14.


                           Table 7: Estimated effects by market’s union density
                                                                                                                             35



                                                       Estimates
 Specification                     1                 2             3
 Home in More Competitive Nursing Home       Markets (below median HHI) at Election
 NA HPRD                       -.237             -.230         -.188
                             (0.170)          (0.153)       (0.163)
 LPN HPRD                      -.247             -.160         -.135
                             (0.122)∗∗        (0.085)∗      (0.102)
 RN HPRD                       -.217             -.064         -.116
                             (0.219)          (0.167)       (0.220)
 Total deficiency count       -1.074           -1.464          -.444
                             (1.208)          (1.193)       (1.437)
 1(severe deficiency)          -.165             -.187         -.189
                             (0.077)∗∗        (0.085)∗∗     (0.096)∗∗
 Prct. private pay             9.453              .789         -.327
                             (5.662)∗         (3.261)       (4.265)
 Acuity index                  -.344             -.251         -.190
                             (0.424)          (0.384)       (1.036)
 Number of beds              -23.298            6.419        -2.614
                             (22.68)          (6.073)       (8.040)
 Prct. beds occupied           7.826            5.718         6.366
                             (4.843)          (4.940)       (7.311)
 Market HHI - same county       .007           -.0004        -.0003
                             (0.007)          (0.002)       (0.003)
 Union density, private only    .355           -1.098        -1.373
                             (5.509)          (3.586)       (5.375)

 Home in Less Competitive Nursing Home Markets (above median HHI) at Election
 NA HPRD                        -.343     -.416        -.552
                              (0.156)∗∗ (0.160)∗∗∗   (0.216)∗∗
 LPN HPRD                        .092      .011         .005
                              (0.147)   (0.106)      (0.118)
 RN HPRD                        -.344     -.560        -.470
                              (0.285)   (0.270)∗∗    (0.236)∗∗
 Total deficiency count         3.056     2.500        2.927
                              (1.240)∗∗ (1.306)∗∗    (1.363)∗∗
 1(severe deficiency)            .036      .038         .018
                              (0.063)   (0.064)      (0.065)
 Prct. private pay             -4.090    -4.100       -3.836
                              (5.142)   (3.469)      (3.293)
 Acuity index                   -.264     -.739        -.402
                              (0.491)   (0.378)∗∗    (0.412)
 Number of beds                -20.69     1.644        3.534
                             (33.933)   (6.333)      (6.156)
 Prct. beds occupied           -1.883     -.655       -2.013
                              (6.556)   (4.935)      (5.232)
 Market HHI - same county        .044      .003         .002
                              (0.081)   (0.014)      (0.019)
 Union density, private only    8.990    18.033       16.348
                             (10.872)   (7.887)∗∗    (7.587)∗∗

 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable                N            Y              Y
 All other outcome variables          N            N              Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance:   ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%       ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each cell presents discontinuity
estimate from a separate local linear regression and each column corresponds to a different set of control variables. Number of
home-dates observed varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values. Across outcomes, the range of number of home-
dates observed is 2,513 to 2,531 (2,478 to 2,531) (2,478 to 2,486) in specification 1 (2) (3) in the top panel and 2,806 to 2,822
(2,772 to 2,822) (2,745 to 2,759) in the bottom panel. Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for each regression are in
Table A.14.


                    Table 8: Estimated effects by product market competitiveness
                                                                                                                             36



                                            Estimates
 Specification                         1         2             3
 Observations in State-Years with Strong RN/LPN Staffing Regulation
 NA HPRD                           -.352     -.405         -.371
                                  (.152)∗∗  (.151)∗∗∗     (.151)∗∗
 LPN HPRD                          -.089     -.108         -.095
                                 ( .113)   ( .106)        (.104)
 RN HPRD                           -.032     -.153         -.202
                                 ( .254)   ( .200)        (.192)
 Total deficiency count             .363      .586         1.333
                               ( 1.000)     (.991)       ( .944)
 1(severe deficiency)              -.068     -.067         -.033
                                 ( .054)   ( .055)       ( .060)
 Prct. private pay                 5.135      .274        -1.825
                               ( 4.382)    (2.846)       (2.890)
 Acuity index                      -.266     -.446         -.071
                                 ( .393)   ( .316)        (.317)
 Number of beds                 -23.182     -2.329        -1.274
                               (25.639)    (5.630)       (3.924)
 Prct. beds occupied               6.824     6.190         6.899
                               ( 6.485)    (4.752)      ( 4.784)
 Market HHI - same county           .015      .003          .006
                                 ( .043)    (.005)       ( .007)
 Union density, private only       2.971     5.006         6.698
                               ( 7.753)    (4.113)       (3.984)∗

  Observations in State-Years with Weak RN/LPN Staffing Regulation
 NA HPRD                           -.184     -.183         -.255
                                 ( .196)    (.168)        (.268)
 LPN HPRD                           .051      .045          .053
                                  (.204)    (.078)       ( .283)
 RN HPRD                           -.550     -.414         -.375
                                  (.324)∗   (.199)∗∗      (.865)
 Total deficiency count            2.054      .158          .828
                                (1.584)    (1.748)      (4.270)
 1(severe deficiency)               .002      .005         -.019
                                  (.079)    (.078)       ( .232)
 Prct. private pay                -2.687    -2.194        -3.974
                               ( 5.021)    (3.753)     (17.703)
 Acuity index                      -.400     -.473         -.498
                                  (.499)    (.487)       ( .721)
 Number of beds                  19.657      6.801         3.956
                               (47.458)    (6.706)     (10.597)
 Prct. beds occupied              -7.227    -6.307        -8.562
                               ( 5.241)    (5.027)     (11.836)
 Market HHI - same county           .095     -.009          .015
                                  (.102)    (.019)       ( .105)
 Union density, private only       7.996    17.627       18.429
                               (13.836)   (10.088)∗    (13.306)

 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable                N             Y               Y
 All other outcome variables          N             N               Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance:   ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%       ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each cell presents discontinuity
estimate from a separate local linear regression and each column corresponds to a different set of control variables. Number of
home-dates observed varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values. Across outcomes, the range of number of home-
dates observed is 3,585 to 3,605 (3,545 to 3,605) (3,529 to 3,544) in specification 1 (2) (3) in the top panel and 1,734 to 1,748
(1,705 to 1,748) (1,689 to 1,701) in the bottom panel. Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for each regression are in
Table A.14.


           Table 9: Estimated effects by strength of state RN/LPN staffing regulation
                                                                                                                             37



                                                       Estimates
 Specification                          1          2             3
 Short-run effects: observations less than median elapsed time (4.6 years) past election
 NA HPRD                            -.333      -.350         -.337
                                 (0.163)∗∗   (0.135)∗∗∗    (0.134)∗∗
 LPN HPRD                           -.090      -.061         -.042
                                 (0.136)     (0.083)       (0.075)
 RN HPRD                            -.307      -.282         -.236
                                 (0.258)     (0.171)∗      (0.152)
 Total deficiency count              .593      -.065          .512
                                 (1.001)     (0.876)       (0.896)
 1(severe deficiency)               -.078      -.070         -.046
                                 (0.073)     (0.074)       (0.060)
 Prct. private pay                  -.737     -2.135        -3.341
                                 (3.905)     (2.237)       (2.200)
 Acuity index                       -.165      -.296         -.044
                                 (0.359)     (0.267)       (0.241)
 Number of beds                  -18.729      11.296         9.624
                                (28.978)     (4.804)∗∗     (4.949)∗
 Prct. beds occupied               1.728       1.164          .210
                                 (5.235)     (3.687)       (3.348)
 Market HHI - same county            .046       .007          .011
                                 (0.045)     (0.008)       (0.009)
 Union density, private only       8.462      11.058        12.109
                                 (6.441)     (4.165)∗∗∗    (3.249)∗∗∗

 Long-run effects: observations more than median elapsed     time (4.6 years) past election
 NA HPRD                           -.270      -.261            -.250
                                 (0.129)∗∗  (0.128)∗∗        (0.149)∗
 LPN HPRD                          -.029      -.049            -.051
                                 (0.099)    (0.080)          (0.073)
 RN HPRD                           -.131      -.305            -.318
                                 (0.170)    (0.153)∗∗        (0.129)∗∗
 Total deficiency count            1.848      1.593            2.546
                                 (1.103)∗   (1.084)          (1.182)∗∗
 1(severe deficiency)              -.056      -.056            -.033
                                 (0.053)    (0.051)          (0.057)
 Prct. private pay                 1.885     -1.296            -.176
                                 (4.128)    (2.759)          (2.688)
 Acuity index                      -.178      -.375            -.269
                                 (0.330)    (0.302)          (0.284)
 Number of beds                  -29.470     -1.161            2.660
                                (21.108)    (6.805)          (5.498)
 Prct. beds occupied               3.010      2.372            3.411
                                 (5.515)    (4.555)          (4.423)
 Market HHI - same county           .053      -.005            -.001
                                 (0.062)    (0.011)          (0.012)
 Union density, private only       2.714      8.053            8.570
                                 (7.974)    (6.123)          (5.217)∗

 Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 This outcome variable                N            Y              Y
 All other outcome variables          N            N              Y
Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance:    ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%       ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Each cell presents discontinuity
estimate from a separate local linear regression and each column corresponds to a different set of control variables. Number of
home-dates observed varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values. Across outcomes, the range of number of home-
dates observed is 2,652 to 2,676 (2,618 to 2,676) (2,593 to 2,617) in specification 1 (2) (3) in the top panel and 2,667 to 2,667
(2,632 to 2,677) (2,620 to 2,628) in the bottom panel. Optimal bandwidth and observations within it for each regression are in
Table A.14.


                       Table 10: Estimated effects by elapsed time since election
                                                                                         38




                                                    7           Figures




            Figure 1: Density of election vote shares in main sample (N =627).




                          Outcome: 1(any FMCS filing 1+ year post−election)
                     1
                     .8
                     .6
                     .4
                     .2
                     0




                          −.5                                         0       .5
                                                                 Vote Share
                          Note: uses the IK−optimal bandwidth, 0.222.




Figure 2: Expectation of indicator for any FMCS notice filed at least one year after focal
NLRB election by vote share. Means of the indicator variable by vote share bin are plotted.
Estimated expectation from local-linear regression on either side of the threshold using the
IK-optimal bandwidth is graphed.
                                           Outcome: NA HPRD                                                                                                         Outcome: LPN HPRD
                            Pre-election                                            Post-election                                                      Pre-election                                      Post-election
          3




                                                                                                                                     2
          2.5




                                                                                                                                     1.5
          2




                                                                                                                                     1
          1.5




                                                                                                                                     .5
          1




                                                                                                                                     0
                -.5                 0                  .5         -.5                       0                  .5                          -.5                 0                 .5         -.5                   0                 .5
                               Vote Share                                              Vote Share                                                         Vote Share                                         Vote Share

                      Disc. estim. (SE): .015 (.178)                    Disc. estim. (SE): -.311 (.116)                                          Disc. estim. (SE): -.211 (.154)                  Disc. estim. (SE): -.072 (.106)

        Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.093.                                                Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.1.


                                                            (a)                                                                                                                       (b)

                                                                                                        Outcome: RN HPRD
                                                                                          Pre-election                                           Post-election
                                                                        2
                                                                        1.5
                                                                        1
                                                                        .5
                                                                        0




                                                                              -.5                 0                 .5         -.5                       0                  .5
                                                                                             Vote Share                                             Vote Share

                                                                                    Disc. estim. (SE): -.249 (.268)                  Disc. estim. (SE): -.278 (.209)

                                                                   Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.096.


                                                                                                                         (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         39
Figure 3: Staffing levels: expected nurse aide (NA), licensed practical nurse (LPN), and registered nurse (RN) hours per
resident-day (HPRD) by vote share bin in the pre- and post-election periods are plotted. Estimated expectations from local-
linear regression on either side of the threshold using the IK-optimal bandwidth as in specification 1 of Table 3 is graphed.
                                 Outcome: Total deficiency count                                                                                             Outcome: 1(severe deficiency)
                           Pre-election                                            Post-election                                                      Pre-election                                       Post-election
          15




                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                     .8
          10




                                                                                                                                     .6
                                                                                                                                     .4
          5




                                                                                                                                     .2
          0




                                                                                                                                     0
               -.5                 0                   .5         -.5                      0                  .5                          -.5                 0                  .5         -.5                   0                 .5
                              Vote Share                                              Vote Share                                                         Vote Share                                          Vote Share

                     Disc. estim. (SE): .41 (1.34)                       Disc. estim. (SE): 1.33 (.9)                                           Disc. estim. (SE): -.061 (.05)                    Disc. estim. (SE): -.067 (.052)

        Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.095.                                                Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.203.


                                                            (a)                                                                                                                       (b)

                                                                                                   Outcome: Pct. private pay
                                                                                         Pre-election                                           Post-election
                                                                        50
                                                                        40
                                                                        30
                                                                        20
                                                                        10
                                                                        0




                                                                             -.5                 0                  .5         -.5                      0                  .5
                                                                                            Vote Share                                             Vote Share

                                                                                   Disc. estim. (SE): 8.32 (5.24)                    Disc. estim. (SE): 2.63 (3.91)

                                                                   Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.102.


                                                                                                                         (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
Figure 4: Care quality: expected total deficiency counts, indicator that a severe deficiency present, and percentage of residents
private-pay by vote share bin in the pre- and post-election periods are plotted. Estimated expectations from local-linear
regression on either side of the threshold using the IK-optimal bandwidth as in specification 1 of Table 3 is graphed.
                                Union earnings effect by decile of pre−election earnings                              PDF of pre−election log earnings for stayers




                                                                                                        .6
                   .5




                                                                                                        .4
                        0
              coefficient




                                                                                                        .2
                   −.5




                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        −.2
                   −1




                                0          2               4                6               8     10          4               6               8                10    12
                                                                   decile                                                           log quarterly earnings

                                                   90 percent CI                point estimates                                      Union              No union



                                                               (a)                                                                        (b)



                                PDF of pre−election average log earnings for leavers                              PDF of post−election average log earnings for comers




                                                                                                        .5
               .4




                                                                                                        .4
               .3




                                                                                                        .3
               .2




                                                                                                        .2
               .1




                                                                                                        .1
               0




                                                                                                        0
               −.1




                            4                  6                  8                    10          12         4               6               8                10    12
                                                        log quarterly earnings                                                      log quarterly earnings

                                                         Union                  No union                                             Union              No union



                                                               (c)                                                                        (d)




                                                                                                                                                                          41
Figure 5: How does unionization affect selection and earnings? Subfigure 5(a) presents the local-linear estimates of effect
of unionization on post-election earnings among employees who continue working at the home in the calendar quarter after
the election (stayers) by pre-election earnings decile. Subfigure 5(b) presents local-linear estimates of densities of pre-election
earnings for stayers at homes where unions just win elections and homes where unions just lose, as well as the difference between
the distributions. Subfigure 5(c) does the same for those who leave the home. Subfigure 5(d) does the same for post-election
earnings for those who begin employment at the home after the election.
        A        For Online Publication - Web Appendix
Impacts of Unionization on Quality and Productivity
by Sojourner, Frandsen, Town, Grabowski, & Chen
March 19, 2014
                                                                                                        ii

A.1     Tables
                                                         Vote share within h of 0.50 threshold
 Variables                                         h = 0.05 h =0.15 h =0.25 h =0.35 h =0.50
 Staffing
 NA HPRD                                              -0.058       -0.26      0.058         -1.9      0.254
                                                       (0.111)      (2.86)      (1.63)     (1.47)      (1.16)

 LPN HPRD                                              -.113       -.309        .128        -1.8         .32
                                                       (0.101)      (2.82)       (1.6)     (1.44)      (1.14)

 RN HPRD                                               -.103        -.27        .166       -1.79       .353
                                                       (0.176)      (2.84)      (1.62)     (1.46)      (1.16)



 Quality
 Total deficiency count                                0.349      -0.498      0.591      -0.349        1.53
                                                       (0.853)      (3.09)      (1.89)     (1.68)      (1.36)

 1(severe deficiency)                                 -0.058       -0.26      0.058         -1.9       .254
                                                       (0.111)      (2.86)      (1.63)     (1.47)      (1.16)

 Prct. private-pay                                      2.47        2.53     -0.0918       -1.58      -1.27
                                                        (3.06)      (4.68)      (3.35)     (2.97)      (2.63)



 Other strategic margins
 Acuity Index                                         -0.181      -0.201      -0.005       -2.00     -0.006
                                                       (0.276)      (2.86)      (1.64)     (1.48)      (1.17)

 Number of beds                                        -8.63       -9.58       -6.39        1.12       .506
                                                        (26.4)      (31.8)      (23.6)     (20.1)      (17.2)

 Prct. of beds occupied                                 .505         .63       -2.31       -1.72         .37
                                                         (4.7)      (5.84)      (4.32)     (3.62)      (3.37)



 Market characteristics
 Market HHI - same county                             0.0125      -0.141      0.149        -1.73      0.419
                                                       (.0301)      (2.82)       (1.6)     (1.44)      (1.14)

 Union density, private only                           -3.94       -5.14       -3.78       -5.27      -5.90
                                                        (3.54)      (5.15)      (3.92)     (3.71)      (3.20)



 Election characteristics
 Log(NLRB election unit size)                          -.184       -.367      -.0016       -1.87       .271
                                                       (0.169)      (2.85)      (1.62)     (1.46)      (1.16)

 Log(Valid votes cast in election)                     -.207       -.385      -.0114       -1.89       .248
                                                       (0.167)      (2.84)      (1.62)     (1.45)      (1.15)

 Number of homes observed                                131        350         483         576         626
 Number of home-dates observed                           587      1,517       2,042       2,480       2,688
 Number of home-date-outcomes observed                 6,986     18,077      24,350      29,574      32,053
 Adjusted R2                                            .526       .604        .629         .64        .646
 Joint-null F -test p-value                             .844       .933        .977        .468        .296
 Coefficient (within-home-correlation corrected SE). Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.
 Each column presents discontinuity estimates from a separate system of second-order linear equations (3).
 Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold are used.

Table A.1: Test for discontinuity in mean nursing homes characteristics in pre-election panel
using quadratic vote share function
Table A.2: Estimated effect on certified nurse’s aide (NA) hours per resident day (HPRD) in post-election panel under various
bandwidth and specifications
  Bandwidth (h):                  h = 0.05                                h = 0.15                              h = 0.25                               h = 0.35
  Specification:         1           2           3              1            2           3             1          2            3              1           2           3

                                                                      Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
  τ̂                    -.198       -.218       -.209
                      (.078)∗∗   (.069)∗∗∗   (.068)∗∗∗

                                                                           Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
  τ̂                                                           -.228        -.257       -.243        -.138       -.124       -.124          -.102       -.094       -.068
                                                             (.096)∗∗    (.086)∗∗∗   (.084)∗∗∗      (.076)∗     (.068)∗     (.068)∗        (.067)      (.061)       (.06)

                                                                           Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
  τ̂                                                           -.392        -.477       -.470        -.298       -.358        -.340         -.248       -.245        -.254
                                                             (.181)∗∗     (.16)∗∗∗   (.154)∗∗∗      (.12)∗∗   (.107)∗∗∗    (.105)∗∗∗      (.102)∗∗    (.09)∗∗∗    (.088)∗∗∗

                                                                            Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
  τ̂                                                           -.347        -.416        -.408       -.393       -.506        -.478          -.31        -.422       -.400
                                                             (.147)∗∗     (.13)∗∗∗    (.125)∗∗∗     (.202)∗    (.18)∗∗∗    (.176)∗∗∗      (.145)∗∗    (.129)∗∗∗   (.126)∗∗∗

                                                                          Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
  τ̂                                                                                                 -.506       -.609       -.659          -.498        -.569       -.513
                                                                                                    (.451)      (.411)      (.398)∗       (.233)∗∗    (.207)∗∗∗     (.2)∗∗

  Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
  this variable        N            Y            Y              N            Y           Y             N          Y            Y              N          Y            Y
  all variables        N            N            Y              N            N           Y             N          N            Y              N          N            Y

  Homes obs.            131         128          126           350          343         340           483        476           473           576         568         564
  Home-dates obs.      1,142       1,122        1,117         3,031        2,981       2,970         4,174      4,124         4,113         4,934       4,879       4,860
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  iii
Table A.3: Estimated effect on licensed practical nurses (LPN) hours per resident day (HPRD) in post-election panel under
various bandwidth and specifications
           Bandwidth (h):               h = 0.05                          h = 0.15                       h = 0.25                       h = 0.35
           Specification:         1        2         3           1           2         3           1        2         3          1         2         3

                                                               Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
           τ̂                   -.052    -.070      -.087
                               (.066)   (.055)     (.048)∗

                                                                        Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
           τ̂                                                   -.093      -.118    -.109        -.009     -.044    -0.083      -.042     -.04     -0.064
                                                               (.081)     (.066)∗   .062∗       (.063) (.051) (.049)∗          (.061)    (.046)    (.042)

                                                                      Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
           τ̂                                                   -.052     -.057   -0.038        -.091   -.115     -0.09         -.003     -.062     -.082
                                                               (.163)    (.134)   (.112)       (.098) (.081)     (.074)        (.087)    (.066)    (.061)

                                                                        Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
           τ̂                                                  -.063        -.074   -0.057       -.196    -.19     -0.149       -.173    -.181     -0.138
                                                               (.13)       (.107)    (.09)      (.173) (.141)      (.126)      (.121)   (.099)∗    (.088)

                                                                       Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
           τ̂                                                                                     .34     .333      .235        -.18      -.12      -.042
                                                                                                (.398) (.322)      (.275)      (.204)    (.165)    (.151)

           Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
           this variable       N         Y        Y              N           Y         Y           N        Y        Y           N         Y         Y
           all variables       N         N        Y              N           N         Y           N        N        Y           N         N         Y

           Homes obs.           131       129       126         350         348       340         483      481       473        576       572       564
           Home-dates obs.     1,147     1,128     1,122       3,038       3,019     2,976       4,187    4,168     4,125      4,948     4,916     4,873
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  iv
Table A.4: Estimated effect on registered nurse (RN) hours per resident day (HPRD) in post-election panel under various
bandwidth and specifications
    Bandwidth (h):                h = 0.05                            h = 0.15                              h = 0.25                              h = 0.35
    Specification:        1         2           3            1          2           3              1           2           3              1          2           3

                                                                    Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
    τ̂                   -.148     -.248      -0.233
                        (.137)   (.116)∗∗    (.095)∗∗

                                                                           Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
    τ̂                                                      -.186       -.34       -0.327       -.00837       -.185       -0.252         -.033     -.151       -0.195
                                                           (.161)    (.134)∗∗    (.114)∗∗∗       (.119)      (.097)∗    (.089)∗∗∗       (.104)    (.084)∗     (.077)∗∗

                                                                         Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
    τ̂                                                      -.37      -.441       -.313         -.196       -.365       -.310            -.060      -.271       -.319
                                                           (.286)    (.237)∗    (.186)∗        (.198)      (.17)∗∗    (.139)∗∗          (.168)    (.137)∗∗   (.119)∗∗∗

                                                                          Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
    τ̂                                                      -.319      -.412     -0.316          -.708       -.716      -0.561           -.334      -.475      -0.371
                                                           (.242)    (.204)∗∗   (.159)∗∗       (.326)∗∗   (.267)∗∗∗   (.203)∗∗∗         (.233)    (.202)∗∗    (.163)∗∗

                                                                        Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
    τ̂                                                                                          .164        .067          .170          -.835       -.738      -0.579
                                                                                               (.642)      (.458)        (.408)       (.358)∗∗    (.295)∗∗    (.232)∗∗

    Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
    this variable       N          Y          Y              N          Y           Y              N           Y           Y              N          Y           Y
    all variables       N          N          Y              N          N           Y              N           N           Y              N          N           Y

    Homes obs.           131        128        126          350        344         340            483         477         473            576        568         564
    Home-dates obs.     1,146      1,133      1,123        3,036      3,007       2,978          4,186       4,157       4,128          4,947      4,905       4,876
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  v
    Table A.5: Estimated effect on total deficiency count in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
     Bandwidth (h):                h = 0.05                           h = 0.15                             h = 0.25                             h = 0.35
     Specification:        1          2          3           1           2          3              1          2           3             1          2           3

                                                                     Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
     τ̂                   1.041     .895        1.274
                         (.576)∗   (.549)     (.513)∗∗

                                                                          Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
     τ̂                                                     .757        .759     1.225          .677         .562       0.911          1.152       .92        1.165
                                                           (.726)      (.712)   (.653)∗        (.569)       (.556)     (.516)∗       (.507)∗∗    (.492)∗     (.46)∗∗

                                                                          Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
     τ̂                                                     1.886      .569       1.962          .454       .495        1.06           .277       .349       1.006
                                                           (1.376)    (1.312)    (1.294)        (.893)     (.879)      (.813)         (.731)     (.731)      (.681)

                                                                          Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
     τ̂                                                     1.575      .621      1.768         3.213       1.753      3.349            .89        .646        1.503
                                                           (1.106)    (1.062) (1.034)∗       (1.442)∗∗    (1.363) (1.343)∗∗          (1.105)     (1.064)     (1.014)

                                                                         Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
     τ̂                                                                                          .991      -1.73       0.238           3.88      2.428        4.495
                                                                                               (3.534)    (3.199)     (3.153)       (1.769)∗∗    (1.71)    (1.666)∗∗∗

     Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
     this variable        N         Y        Y               N           Y         Y               N          Y          Y              N          Y           Y
     all variables        N         N        Y               N           N         Y               N          N          Y              N          N           Y

     Homes obs.           132        132        126         351         351        340            484        484         473           577         577        564
     Home-dates obs.     1,151      1,151      1,125       3,045       3,045      2,981          4,198      4,198       4,134         4,967       4,967      4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  vi
 Table A.6: Estimated effect on severe deficiency indicator in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
         Bandwidth (h):               h = 0.05                        h = 0.15                        h = 0.25                          h = 0.35
         Specification:        1         2         3           1          2        3            1         2         3           1          2            3

                                                                   Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
         τ̂                   -.038     -.039     -0.03
                             (.031)    (.031)    (.027)

                                                                        Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
         τ̂                                                  -.064       -.061  -0.039       -.058      -.057     -.037        .003       .004        .017
                                                            (.039)∗     (.039)  (.035)      (.032)∗    (.032)∗    (.03)       (.028)     (.028)      (.026)

                                                                       Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
         τ̂                                                  -.038      -.03    -0.016      -.081      -.076    -0.051         -.116       -.113     -0.085
                                                            (.076)     (.077)   (.072)     (.048)∗    (.048)    (.044)       (.04)∗∗∗   (.041)∗∗∗   (.037)∗∗

                                                                         Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
         τ̂                                                  -.046       -.039    -.022      .0008       .015     .032         -.054      -.05       -0.018
                                                             (.06)      (.061)   (.056)      (.082)     (.083)   (.078)       (.059)     (.059)      (.054)

                                                                       Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
         τ̂                                                                                  -.071     -.066     -0.038        .037       .051        .055
                                                                                            (.196)    (.195)     (.189)       (.098)     (.099)      (.094)

         Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
         this variable       N         Y       Y              N           Y        Y           N          Y        Y            N          Y           Y
         all variables       N         N       Y              N           N        Y           N          N        Y            N          N           Y

         Homes obs.           132       132       126         351        351      340          484       484       473         577         577         564
         Home-dates obs.     1,151     1,151     1,125       3,045      3,045    2,981        4,198     4,198     4,134       4,967       4,967       4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  vii
Table A.7: Estimated effect on percentage of residents private-pay in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifi-
cations
    Bandwidth (h):                h = 0.05                              h = 0.15                             h = 0.25                              h = 0.35
    Specification:         1         2          3             1           2          3               1          2            3            1          2           3

                                                                     Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
    τ̂                   -1.385    -2.491     -2.468
                        (2.197)   (1.47)∗    (1.324)∗

                                                                           Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
    τ̂                                                      -3.404      -4.764      -5.197          -2.93       -3.19     -2.887        -2.457     -2.406       -1.993
                                                           (2.764)     (1.92)∗∗   (1.77)∗∗∗       (2.359)      (1.63)∗  (1.425)∗∗       (1.92)    (1.418)∗     (1.226)

                                                                         Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
    τ̂                                                      8.556       2.679      1.018          -2.522     -5.139       -5.553        -2.958     -3.976      -4.178
                                                           (5.243)     (3.564)    (3.196)        (3.566)    2.507∗∗      2.212∗∗       (2.897)    (2.083)∗    (1.79)∗∗

                                                                          Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
    τ̂                                                      5.226       .636       -0.674         8.005       .657        -2.105        -.801      -5.128       -6.682
                                                           (4.217)     (2.877)    (2.543)         (5.92)     (4.006)     (3.603)       (4.313)    (3.055)∗    (2.703)∗∗

                                                                         Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
    τ̂                                                                                            26.346       14.9      13.809        10.464      3.74         -.930
                                                                                                (13.836)∗    (9.238)     (8.91)        (6.724)    (4.559)      (4.108)

    Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
    this variable        N          Y         Y               N           Y          Y               N          Y            Y            N          Y           Y
    all variables        N          N         Y               N           N          Y               N          N            Y            N          N           Y

    Homes obs.            132       132        126           351         351        340             484        484         473           577        577         564
    Home-dates obs.      1,151     1,151      1,125         3,045       3,045      2,981           4,198      4,198       4,134         4,967      4,967       4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  viii
          Table A.8: Estimated effect on acuity index in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
            Bandwidth (h):               h = 0.05                         h = 0.15                        h = 0.25                      h = 0.35
            Specification:        1         2         3            1         2         3            1        2         3         1         2         3

                                                               Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
            τ̂                   -.159    -.283      -.103
                                (.215)   (.168)∗    (0.154)

                                                                     Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
            τ̂                                                   -.136   -.306    -.158        -.129     -.201     -.069        .011       -.1      -0.06
                                                                (.265) (.217)    (.208)       (.201)    (.165)    (.152)       (.207)    (.166)    (.138)

                                                                     Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
            τ̂                                                   -.423    -.537   -0.384       -.176     -.41      -.292        -.306     -.392    -0.155
                                                                (.493) (.402)     (.365)      (.325)    (.265)    (.251)       (.295)    (.239)    (.203)

                                                                     Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
            τ̂                                                   -.343   -.473   -0.322       -.359     -.521    -0.345         -.09      -.499    -0.442
                                                                (.402) (.326)    (.294)      (.545)    (.432)    (.409)        (.408)    (.331)    (.309)

                                                                       Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
            τ̂                                                                                   -.836     -.735     -0.652     -.548     -.535    -0.262
                                                                                                (1.25) (1.051)       (.986)    (.641)    (.514)    (.475)

            Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
            this variable       N          Y        Y              N          Y        Y           N         Y         Y         N         Y         Y
            all variables       N          N        Y              N          N        Y           N         N         Y         N         N         Y

            Homes obs.           132       131       126          350        349      339          483      482       472       576       575       563
            Home-dates obs.     1,149     1,148     1,123        3,034      3,033    2,970        4,182    4,181     4,118     4,947     4,946     4,864
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  ix
          Table A.9: Estimated effect on total bed count in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
     Bandwidth (h):                 h = 0.05                           h = 0.15                            h = 0.25                             h = 0.35
     Specification:          1          2         3             1          2         3             1          2           3              1         2           3

                                                                    Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
     τ̂                    -9.88      4.001     5.571
                         (15.359)    (4.285)   (3.824)

                                                                         Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
     τ̂                                                      -8.251      5.255     5.721         -.213       1.596     2.248           3.504      1.306      1.438
                                                            (17.984)    (4.594) (4.368)        (14.274)     (3.275)   (3.147)        (11.947)    (2.642)     (2.69)

                                                                        Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
     τ̂                                                       -40.1      4.77     6.562        -11.18      3.549      4.154            -8.41       2.45      3.612
                                                            (34.866)    (9.031) (8.338)       (21.948)    (6.145)    (6.018)         (18.565)    (5.096)    (4.897)

                                                                         Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
     τ̂                                                       -31.3       4.91     6.339        -54.989    11.782    15.304           -21.493     5.438      5.679
                                                            (28.688)     (7.53)   (7.023)      (36.537) (10.739) (10.889)            (26.079)    (6.928)    (6.932)

                                                                        Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
     τ̂                                                                                        -50.208     -18.236    -16.413         -54.796    12.229      16.356
                                                                                              (71.822) (22.551) (21.211)              (41.82)   (11.364)    (11.625)

     Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
     this variable         N          Y         Y               N          Y         Y             N          Y           Y             N           Y          Y
     all variables         N          N         Y               N          N         Y             N          N           Y             N           N          Y

     Homes obs.             132        132       126           351        351       340           484        484         473           577         577        564
     Home-dates obs.       1,151      1,151     1,125         3,045      3,045     2,981         4,198      4,198       4,134         4,967       4,967      4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  x
Table A.10: Estimated effect on percentage of beds occupied in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
       Bandwidth (h):                h = 0.05                           h = 0.15                           h = 0.25                            h = 0.35
       Specification:         1         2          3            1          2          3            1          2           3             1         2         3

                                                                    Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
       τ̂                   1.138      1.58      1.764
                           (3.222)   (2.848)    (2.285)

                                                                         Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
       τ̂                                                     1.815       1.825    1.640         -.975       1.364       2.475        -.396      .209      1.344
                                                             (3.774)     (3.349) (2.708)        (2.827)     (2.473)     (2.122)      (2.398)   (2.087)    (1.826)

                                                                        Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
       τ̂                                                     4.463      3.774     3.190        2.634       1.729     1.382            -.54     1.659      2.219
                                                              (6.83)    (6.037) (5.034)         (4.63)     (4.142)   (3.354)         (3.878)   (3.382)    (2.835)

                                                                         Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
       τ̂                                                     3.731       3.24     2.768         7.828       5.41        3.896        6.013     3.568      2.608
                                                             (5.752)     (5.122) (4.176)        (7.505)    (6.554)      (5.547)      (5.429)   (4.886)    (4.041)

                                                                        Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
       τ̂                                                                                        -.441      3.216     5.886          7.264      3.184      1.137
                                                                                               (14.585) (12.024) (11.049)            (8.37)    (7.354)    (6.314)

       Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
       this variable        N          Y        Y               N           Y        Y             N          Y           Y            N          Y         Y
       all variables        N          N        Y               N           N        Y             N          N           Y            N          N         Y

       Homes obs.            132       132       126           351         351       340          484         484        473           577       577       564
       Home-dates obs.      1,151     1,151     1,125         3,045       3,045     2,981        4,198       4,198      4,134         4,967     4,967     4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  xi
Table A.11: Estimated effect on market concentration (HHI county) in post-election panel under various bandwidth and
specifications
            Bandwidth (h):               h = 0.05                         h = 0.15                        h = 0.25                     h = 0.35
            Specification:         1        2         3          1           2         3            1        2        3         1         2         3

                                                               Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
            τ̂                   .021      .002      .004
                                (.033)    (.005)    (.006)

                                                                        Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
            τ̂                                                  .022        .005     .005          -.008    .006     .007      .003      .005      .005
                                                               (.042)      (.007)   (.008)        (.035) (.006) (.006)        (.031)    (.006)    (.006)

                                                                       Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
            τ̂                                                 .079        -.004    -0.001       .051     .008      .009       .017      .008       .01
                                                               (.09)      (.016)    (.021)      (.051) (.008) (.009)          (.045)    (.008)    (.008)

                                                                        Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
            τ̂                                                 .063       -.00121 0.0004          .057    -.015     -.014      .045     -.0008     -.002
                                                               (.07)       (.012)   (.016)       (.102) (.016)      (.02)     (.061)     (.01)    (.011)

                                                                     Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
            τ̂                                                                                  .15      .001      .01        .148      -.007      -.002
                                                                                              (.238) (.043) (.047)            (.12)     (.02)     (.024)

            Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
            this variable       N         Y       Y              N           Y         Y           N         Y        Y         N         Y         Y
            all variables       N         N       Y              N           N         Y           N         N        Y         N         N         Y

            Homes obs.           132       132       126        351          351      340          484      484       473      577       577       564
            Home-dates obs.     1,151     1,151     1,125      3,045        3,045    2,981        4,198    4,198     4,134    4,967     4,967     4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                  xii
      Table A.12: Estimated effect on union density (county) in post-election panel under various bandwidth and specifications
 Bandwidth (h):                   h = 0.05                                h = 0.15                                 h = 0.25                                   h = 0.35
 Specification:         1           2              3              1         2             3              1           2             3                1            2                3

                                                                         Panel A: Expected value does not depend on vote share
 τ̂                    9.302      11.298         11.337
                     (4.845)∗   (3.363)∗∗∗     (2.922)∗∗∗

                                                                               Panel B: Expected value linear in vote share
 τ̂                                                             6.741      9.224        9.64          10.643        11.21         12.45          11.403         12.46       12.693
                                                               (5.865)    (4.31)∗∗   (3.448)∗∗∗      (4.58)∗∗    (3.458)∗∗∗    (2.896)∗∗∗      (4.007)∗∗∗    (2.936)∗∗∗   (2.506)∗∗∗

                                                                              Panel C: Expected value square in vote share
 τ̂                                                            4.376       9.338       6.112          4.312        9.111         8.005            8.912       10.055        10.854
                                                              (11.128)    (8.476)     (7.186)        (7.23)      (5.287)∗        (4.4)∗          (6.112)     (4.411)∗∗    (3.757)∗∗∗

                                                                              Panel D: Expected value cubic in vote share
 τ̂                                                            5.025       9.306      7.086           3.297       5.725          3.445            -.915         6.408        5.367
                                                               (9.09)     (6.789)    (5.731)        (12.241)     (8.987)        (7.979)          (8.652)       (6.275)      (5.264)

                                                                              Panel E: Expected value quartic in vote share
 τ̂                                                                                                   6.254        17.906        12.671           8.676        10.832        5.575
                                                                                                     (26.821)     (20.749)      (17.445)        (13.985)      (10.231)      (9.128)

 Conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
 this variable         N            Y              Y             N           Y           Y               N           Y             Y                N            Y                Y
 all variables         N            N              Y             N           N           Y               N           N             Y                N            N                Y

 Homes obs.            132         132            126            351        351         340             484          484          473              577          577           564
 Home-dates obs.      1,151       1,151          1,125          3,045      3,045       2,981           4,198        4,198        4,134            4,967        4,967         4,884
Coefficient. Within-site-correlation corrected SE. Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5%        ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%. Only observations from homes with vote share within h of the 0.50 threshold
 are used. Panels vary the assumed form of the outcome’s expected value function, varying assumptions on f0 and f1 in E[yit |Xi , Di ] = τ Di + f1 (Xi )Di + β0 + f0 (Xi ). For
                           each bandwidth and functional form, estimates of the discontinuity parameter from each of 3 specifications are presented.




                                                                                                                                                                                       xiii
                                                                                               xiv



                                               Estimates                          Home-dates/Homes obs.
 Specification                          1           2              3              1         2         3

 Staffing
 NA HPRD                          -0.311    -0.360           -0.329          5,319/626    5,250/616   5,220/611
                                  (.126)** (.119)***         (.108)***
 LPN HPRD                         -0.072    -0.048            -0.04          5,334/626    5,302/622   5,234/611
                                 (0.112)   (0.072)          (0.071)
 RN HPRD                          -0.278    -0.299            -0.27          5,332/626    5,279/617   5,236/611
                                 (0.225)    (.146)**         (.131)**

 Quality
 Total Deficiency count            1.326        0.841         1.571          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                                 (0.974)      (0.939)        (.875)*
 1(severe deficiency)             -0.051       -0.049        -0.036          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                                 (0.055)      (0.056)       (0.048)
 Prct. Private pay                 2.634        -0.97        -1.986          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                                 (3.598)      (2.177)       (2.234)

 Other strategic margins
 Acuity index                     -0.279       -0.438        -0.198          5,329/626    5,328/625   5,221/610
                                 (0.336)      (0.256)       (0.252)
 Number of beds                   -24.31        4.885         5.249          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                                 (25.67)      (5.017)       (4.840)
 Prct. Beds occupied               3.144         2.34         1.861          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                                 (4.812)      (4.050)       (3.724)

 Market characteristics
 Market HHI-same county        0.051            0.003         0.004          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                             (0.052)          (0.009)       (0.011)
 Union density, private only   5.545            9.688        10.840          5,353/627    5,353/627   5,245/611
                             (7.649)          (5.347)*      (3.840)***
 Conditional on homes
 Pre-election mean of:
 this outcome variable             N                Y             Y
 all variables                     N                N             Y
 Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.
 Each cell presents discontinuity estimate from a separate local linear regression.
 Number of home-dates observed varies due to missing outcomes or conditioning values.

Table A.13: Estimated effects on nursing homes characteristics using post-election panel and
local linear estimator using a fixed bandwidth (h=0.12)
                                            Table A.14: Details of optimal bandwidth (h), number of homes, number of
                                            home-dates, and outcome mean within optimal h of threshold, and outcome
                                            mean in h = 0.5 for each local linear regression in Tables 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, and 10


                                         Specification 1                                   Specification 2                                   Specification 3
                                          In optimal h            Mean                     In optimal h              Mean                     In optimal h           Mean
                           Optm.   Home-                             in    Optm.     Home-                              in     Optm.   Home-                            in
Variable                       h    dates    Homes      Mean    h = 0.5        h      dates Homes         Mean     h = 0.5         h    dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5
Table 3
NA HPRD                     0.09    2034       234      2.14       2.12      0.12      2009       230      2.14       2.12      0.09    1998       227     2.14      2.12
LPN HPRD                    0.10    2041       234      0.79       0.78      0.10      2022       232      0.79       0.77      0.10    2004       227     0.78      0.77
RN HPRD                     0.10    2038       234      0.52        0.5      0.08      2015       229      0.49       0.48      0.08    2005       227     0.49      0.48
Total deficiency count      0.09    2046       235      6.41       6.87      0.09      2046       235      6.41       6.87      0.10    2008       227     6.45       6.9
1(severe deficiency)        0.20    3645       423      0.26       0.27      0.20      3645       423      0.26       0.27      0.22    3581       412     0.26      0.27
Pct. private pay            0.10    2046       235     20.22      21.59      0.10      2046       235     20.22      21.59      0.10    2008       227    20.33     21.67
Total beds                  0.08    2046       235    131.51     124.74      0.08      2046       235    131.51     124.74      0.07    1125       126   133.34    124.93
Pct. beds occupied          0.10    2046       235     84.77      85.28      0.10      2046       235     84.77      85.28       0.1    2008       227     85.3     85.53
Acuity index                0.16    3034       350     10.23      10.22      0.16      3033       349     10.23      10.22       0.1    2002       226    10.25     10.20
HHI, in county              0.08    2046       235      0.17       0.16      0.08      2046       235      0.17       0.16      0.08    2008       227     0.17      0.16
Union density               0.12    2046       235     34.81      35.45      0.12      2046       235     34.81      35.45      0.12    2008       227    34.98     35.31

Table 4
Pct. urethral catheter      0.28    4620       537      7.17       7.13      0.28      4620       537      7.17       7.13      0.09    2008       227     7.01      6.99
Pct. mobility restrained    0.17    3045       351      9.24        9.5      0.17      3045       351      9.24        9.5      0.11    2008       227     9.15      9.53
Pct. spc. tube feed         0.12    2046       235       6.9       6.86      0.12      2046       235       6.9       6.86      0.17    2981       340     6.84      6.67
Pct. psycho-active meds.    0.08    2046       235     56.43      55.64      0.08      2046       235     56.43      55.64      0.08    2008       227    56.64     55.89
Pct. pressure sores         0.08    2007       235      7.77       7.79      0.08      1369       179      8.07       8.22      0.08    1969       227      7.6      7.69
Pct. Bedfast                0.12    2046       235      4.83       4.79      0.12      2046       235      4.83       4.79      0.13    2981       340     4.65      4.65
Pct. mobility chair         0.19    3645       423     52.85      53.39      0.19      3645       423     52.85      53.39       0.2    3581       412    53.11     53.55

Table 7: Upper panel
NA HPRD                     0.09    1094       126      2.16       2.13       0.1      1079       124      2.16       2.12      0.09    1070       122     2.17      2.13
LPN HPRD                    0.15    1712       192      0.79       0.78      0.23      2215       250       0.8       0.78      0.15    1674       187     0.78      0.78
RN HPRD                     0.09    1094       126      0.56        0.5      0.08      1072       122       0.5       0.47      0.08    1072       122      0.5      0.47
Total deficiency count      0.21    2008       227      6.78       7.06      0.21      2008       227      6.78       7.06      0.26    2190       246     6.92      7.13
1(severe deficiency)        0.44    2725       312      0.26       0.26      0.44      2725       312      0.26       0.26      0.32    2422       275     0.26      0.26
Pct. private pay             0.1    1097       126     19.60      21.13       0.1      1097       126     19.60      21.13      0.11    1072       122    19.63     21.15
Total beds                  0.23    2228       251    119.12     119.05      0.23      2228       251    119.12     119.05      0.19    1970       222    118.3    118.96
Pct. beds occupied          0.27    2228       251     83.82       84.3      0.27      2228       251     83.82       84.3      0.13    1676       187    84.95     84.64




                                                                                                                                                                             xv
                                                                                                                                                   Continued on next page
Continues from previous page
                                            Specification 1                               Specification 2                               Specification 3
                                             In optimal h           Mean                  In optimal h            Mean                   In optimal h           Mean
                          Optm.       Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in
Variable                      h        dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates Homes         Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5
Acuity index                   0.09    1094       126    10.11     10.16     0.09    1094       126    10.11     10.16     0.09    1069       122    10.14     10.18
HHI, in county                 0.07     595        68      0.2      0.22     0.07     595        68      0.2      0.22     0.07     582        66     0.21      0.22
Union density                  0.08    1097       126    22.37     21.18     0.08    1097       126    22.37     21.18     0.08    1072       122    22.45     21.28

Table 7: Lower panel
NA HPRD                        0.24    1956       232     2.13      2.12     0.22    1602       191     2.11      2.11     0.21    1600       190     2.11      2.11
LPN HPRD                       0.17    1326       158     0.79      0.77     0.17    1317       157     0.79      0.76     0.17    1302       153     0.79      0.76
RN HPRD                        0.14    1325       158     0.51      0.51     0.13    1318       156     0.51       0.5      0.2    1607       190     0.52      0.49
Total deficiency count         0.18    1637       196     6.38      6.67     0.18    1637       196     6.38      6.67     0.45    2510       299     6.66      6.66
1(severe deficiency)           0.17    1331       159     0.28      0.27     0.17    1331       159     0.28      0.27     0.16    1305       153     0.27      0.28
Pct. private pay               0.09     949       109    20.94     22.07     0.09     949       109    20.94     22.07      0.1     936       105    21.13     22.22
Total beds                     0.07     556        64   136.34    130.67     0.07     556        64   136.34    130.67     0.07     543        60   137.33    131.25
Pct. beds occupied             0.17    1331       159    86.02     86.31     0.17    1331       159    86.02     86.31     0.15    1305       153    86.16     86.47
Acuity index                   0.21    1634       195    10.32     10.28     0.21    1633       194    10.32     10.28      0.2    1608       189    10.32     10.23
HHI, in county                 0.05     556        64     0.10      0.10     0.05     556        64     0.10      0.10     0.05     543        60     0.11      0.10
Union density                  0.15    1331       159    49.69     50.33     0.15    1331       159    49.69     50.33     0.14    1305       153    49.87     50.14

Table 8: Upper panel
NA HPRD                        0.25    1884       230     2.18      2.17     0.21    1547       191     2.19      2.16     0.29    2084       256     2.19      2.16
LPN HPRD                       0.14    1352       165     0.81      0.79     0.14    1343       164     0.81      0.78     0.13    1333       161     0.81      0.78
RN HPRD                        0.15    1354       165     0.53       0.5     0.07     468        58     0.53      0.49     0.15    1335       161     0.52      0.49
Total deficiency count         0.12     885       110     7.08      7.56     0.12     885       110     7.08      7.56     0.19    1549       190     7.23      7.58
1(severe deficiency)            0.1     885       110      0.3      0.29      0.1     885       110      0.3      0.29     0.11     871       106     0.29      0.29
Pct. private pay               0.09     885       110    19.66     22.38     0.09     885       110    19.66     22.38     0.09     871       106    19.71      22.5
Total beds                     0.09     885       110   136.14    130.30     0.09     885       110   136.14    130.30     0.08     871       106   136.83    130.66
Pct. beds occupied             0.09     885       110    85.21     84.98     0.09     885       110    85.21     84.98      0.1     871       106    85.16     85.04
Acuity index                   0.17    1353       166    10.35     10.34     0.17    1352       165    10.35     10.34     0.15    1333       161    10.36     10.31
HHI, in county                 0.07     473        60     0.03      0.03     0.07     473        60     0.03      0.03     0.07     459        56     0.03      0.03
Union density                  0.14    1357       166       33     35.46     0.14    1357       166       33     35.46     0.13    1337       161       33     35.24

Table 8: Lower panel
NA HPRD                        0.08    1153       125      2.11      2.08    0.08    1138       123      2.11      2.08    0.08    1130       121      2.11      2.08
LPN HPRD                       0.24    2301       253      0.78      0.77    0.19    2062       227      0.78      0.76    0.11    1136       121      0.79      0.76
RN HPRD                        0.08    1156       125      0.56      0.51    0.09    1136       121      0.51      0.47    0.09    1136       121      0.51      0.48




                                                                                                                                                                        xvi
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
Continues from previous page
                                            Specification 1                               Specification 2                               Specification 3
                                             In optimal h           Mean                  In optimal h            Mean                   In optimal h           Mean
                          Optm.       Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in
Variable                      h        dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates Homes         Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5
Total deficiency count         0.09    1161       125     5.89      6.25     0.09    1161       125     5.89      6.25     0.09    1137       121     5.97      6.29
1(severe deficiency)           0.09    1161       125     0.22      0.24     0.09    1161       125     0.22      0.24     0.09    1137       121     0.22      0.24
Pct. private pay               0.07     678        72    20.46     20.88     0.07     678        72    20.46     20.88     0.07     666        70    20.52     20.92
Total beds                     0.09    1161       125   127.98    119.76     0.09    1161       125   127.98    119.76     0.08    1137       121   127.17    119.77
Pct. beds occupied             0.19    2076       228    84.77     85.56     0.19    2076       228    84.77     85.56     0.14    1644       179    85.98     85.97
Acuity index                   0.08    1157       124    10.23     10.11     0.08    1157       124    10.23     10.11     0.08    1133       120    10.26     10.11
HHI, in county                 0.07     678        72     0.24      0.27     0.07     678        72     0.24      0.27     0.07     666        70     0.25      0.27
Union density                   0.1    1161       125    37.16     35.44      0.1    1161       125    37.16     35.44     0.09    1137       121    37.46     35.38

Table 9: Upper panel
NA HPRD                         0.1    1356       174     2.16      2.13      0.1    1337       172     2.17      2.13      0.1    1332       170     2.16      2.13
LPN HPRD                       0.11    1362       174     0.82      0.79     0.11    1343       172     0.82      0.79     0.11    1338       170     0.81      0.79
RN HPRD                        0.23    2798       355     0.55      0.52     0.26    2779       351     0.53      0.51     0.25    2760       349     0.54      0.51
Total deficiency count         0.19    2444       311     6.74      7.09     0.19    2444       311     6.74      7.09     0.37    3294       420     7.06       7.1
1(severe deficiency)           0.15    2048       262     0.24      0.26     0.15    2048       262     0.24      0.26     0.14    2006       255     0.25      0.26
Pct. private pay                0.1    1364       175    21.76     23.09      0.1    1364       175    21.76     23.09      0.1    1339       170    21.85     23.12
Total beds                     0.07     803       102   129.26    123.32     0.07     803       102   129.26    123.32      0.1    1339       170   127.38    123.11
Pct. beds occupied              0.1    1364       175    82.96     84.04      0.1    1364       175    82.96     84.04     0.09    1339       170    83.58     84.24
Acuity index                    0.1    1361       175    10.15     10.15      0.1    1361       175    10.15     10.15      0.1    1336       170    10.17     10.13
HHI, in county                  0.1    1364       175     0.12      0.12      0.1    1364       175     0.12      0.12      0.1    1339       170     0.12      0.12
Union density                  0.14    2048       262    32.45     33.80     0.14    2048       262    32.45     33.80     0.15    2006       255    32.63     33.77

Table 9: Lower panel
NA HPRD                        0.09     678       102     2.09       2.1     0.14     978       148     2.05       2.1     0.09     666        99     2.09      2.09
LPN HPRD                       0.23    1389       213     0.75      0.75     0.22    1197       183     0.75      0.74     0.11     666        99     0.73      0.73
RN HPRD                        0.09     677       102     0.48      0.46     0.08     667       100     0.42      0.43     0.08     666        99     0.42      0.42
Total deficiency count         0.07     348        49     6.11      6.41     0.07     348        49     6.11      6.41     0.07     347        48     6.12      6.48
1(severe deficiency)           0.07     348        49     0.24      0.28     0.07     348        49     0.24      0.07     0.08     669        99     0.28      0.28
Pct. private pay               0.07     348        49    16.51      18.5     0.07     348        49    16.51      18.5     0.08     669        99    17.28     18.65
Total beds                     0.17     997       152   130.57    127.66     0.17     997       152   130.57    127.66      0.1     669        99   139.34    128.74
Pct. beds occupied             0.13     997       152     88.9     87.84     0.13     997       152     88.9     87.84     0.09     669        99    88.73     88.22
Acuity index                   0.13     991       151    10.44     10.37     0.13     990       150    10.44     10.37     0.13     969       146    10.45     10.35
HHI, in county                 0.08     682       102     0.27      0.23     0.08     682       102     0.27      0.23     0.08     669        99     0.27      0.23




                                                                                                                                                                        xvii
Union density                  0.08     682       102    39.03     38.84     0.08     682       102    39.03     38.84     0.08     669        99    39.35     38.52
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
Continues from previous page
                                            Specification 1                               Specification 2                               Specification 3
                                             In optimal h           Mean                  In optimal h            Mean                   In optimal h           Mean
                          Optm.       Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in   Optm.   Home-                            in
Variable                      h        dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates Homes         Mean   h = 0.5       h    dates    Homes      Mean   h = 0.5

Table 10: Upper panel
NA HPRD                        0.13    1480       349     2.12       2.1     0.14    1455       342     2.12       2.1     0.13    1445       339     2.12       2.1
LPN HPRD                       0.19    1791       422     0.79      0.76     0.25    2056       481     0.77      0.76     0.11     986       227     0.78      0.75
RN HPRD                        0.09    1007       234     0.62      0.57     0.12     992       229     0.58      0.55      0.1     987       227     0.58      0.55
Total deficiency count          0.1    1014       235     6.04      6.85      0.1    1014       235     6.04      6.85     0.09     990       227      6.1      6.89
1(severe deficiency)           0.19    1798       423     0.29       0.3     0.19    1798       423     0.29       0.3     0.19    1760       412     0.29       0.3
Pct. private pay               0.07     568       132    21.19     22.14     0.07     568       132    21.19     22.14     0.07     553       126     21.2     22.16
Total beds                      0.1    1014       235   132.82    126.53      0.1    1014       235   132.82    126.53     0.09     990       227   133.09    126.81
Pct. beds occupied             0.13    1493       351    84.35     84.97     0.13    1493       351    84.35     84.97     0.13    1455       340    84.74     85.23
Acuity index                   0.17    1482       350    10.24     10.21     0.17    1481       349    10.24     10.21     0.16    1444       339    10.25     10.20
HHI, in county                 0.12    1014       235     0.16      0.15     0.12    1014       235     0.16      0.15     0.15    1455       340     0.15      0.15
Union density                  0.18    1798       423    32.59     34.68     0.18    1798       423    32.59     34.68     0.19    1760       412    32.71     34.51

Table 10: Lower panel
NA HPRD                        0.12    1032       206     2.16      2.14     0.14    1526       302     2.14      2.13     0.14    1525       301     2.14      2.13
LPN HPRD                       0.12    1032       206     0.79       0.8     0.12    1021       204     0.79      0.78     0.12    1018       202     0.79      0.79
RN HPRD                        0.22    1846       369     0.46      0.44     0.14    1541       304     0.42      0.42     0.09    1018       202      0.4      0.42
Total deficiency count         0.13    1552       308     6.82      6.89     0.13    1552       308     6.82      6.89     0.12    1018       202     6.78       6.9
1(severe deficiency)           0.26    2127       424     0.23      0.23     0.26    2127       424     0.23      0.23     0.17    1526       301     0.23      0.23
Pct. private pay               0.11    1032       206    19.49     21.04     0.11    1032       206    19.49     21.04     0.11    1018       202    19.55     21.18
Total beds                     0.08    1032       206   130.23    122.95     0.08    1032       206   130.23    122.95     0.08    1018       202   129.68    123.07
Pct. beds occupied             0.17    1552       308    85.83     85.59     0.17    1552       308    85.83     85.59     0.13    1526       301    86.19     85.83
Acuity index                   0.17    1552       308    10.22     10.23     0.17    1552       308    10.22     10.23     0.17    1526       301    10.23     10.20
HHI, in county                 0.08    1032       206     0.17      0.17     0.08    1032       206     0.17      0.17     0.08    1018       202     0.18      0.17
Union density                  0.12    1032       206    36.71     36.21     0.12    1032       206    36.71     36.21     0.12    1018       202    36.85     36.11




                                                                                                                                                                        xviii
                                                                             xix




Sample:                       All observations   Post-election only
Variable                      Mean         SD     Mean          SD

Census variables
Payroll (millions of Y2000$)    5.4      14.9       6.1       17.0
Employment                      216     414.6     220.9      427.1
Avg annual earnings (Y2000$) 20,871    19,965    24,212     28,391

OSCAR variables
NA HPRD                         2.12     0.74      2.12       0.70
RN HPRD                         0.60     0.79      0.50       0.74
LPN HPRD                        0.71     0.48      0.77       0.46
Total deficiency count          6.76     6.36      6.76       5.79
1(severe deficiency)            0.23               0.26
Prct. private pay               23.1     17.5      21.9       16.1
Acuity index                    10.2     1.54      10.2        1.5
Number of beds                 123.2     68.8       122       63.3
Prct. beds occupied             85.6     18.6      85.9       16.7
Market HHI same county          0.15     0.19      0.16       0.19
Union density, private only     30.7     26.1      34.7       26.8

       Table A.15: Means of Census and OSCAR variables in Census subsample
                                                                                               xx




                                               Estimates                Home-dates obs.
      Specification                           1      2            3     1     2      3

      Staffing
      NA HPRD                           -0.191     -0.169    -0.154    3627   3575    3559
                                          (.165)    (.137)    (.104)

      LPN HPRD                           0.009     -0.026    -0.020    3637   3606    3569
                                         (0.124)   (0.068)   (0.070)

      RN HPRD                           -0.289     -0.103    -0.173    3634   3610    3568
                                         (0.265)   (0.128)   (0.114)



      Quality
      Total deficiency count             0.765     0.904     1.330     3646   3646    3576
                                         (1.040)   (0.941)   (0.985)

      1(severe deficiency)              -0.064     -0.065    -0.031    3646   3646    3576
                                         (0.051)   (0.051)   (0.036)

      Prct. private pay                  7.898     3.383     1.230     3646   3646    3576
                                         (4.860)   (3.140)   (2.550)



      Other strategic margins
      Acuity index                       0.005     -0.162    0.017     3630   3629    3560
                                         (0.438)   (0.277)   (0.211)

      Number of beds                   -12.170     1.696     4.800     3646   3646    3576
                                        (24.020)   (4.850)   (3.270)

      Prct. beds occupied                1.460     0.682     2.230     3646   3646    3576
                                         (5.750)   (3.360)   (2.950)



      Market characteristics
      Market HHI                        -0.015     0.000     0.000     3646   3646    3576
                                         (0.056)   (0.008)   (0.003)

      Union density                      6.190     6.190     9.630     3646   3646    3576
                                         (7.580)   (5.650)   (3.440)



      Specification conditional on home’s pre-election mean of:
      This outcome variable              N        Y       Y
      All other outcome variables        N        N       Y
      Coefficient (within-home cluster bootstrap SE). Significance: ∗: 10% ∗∗: 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.
      Each cell presents discontinuity estimate from a separate local linear regression.

Table A.16: Estimated effects on nursing homes characteristics using post-election OSCAR
panel and local linear estimator in the Census subsample
A.2     Figures

                                         Outcome: Acuity index                                                                                                       Outcome: Total beds
                           Pre-election                                             Post-election                                                      Pre-election                                      Post-election




                                                                                                                                     200
           12
           11




                                                                                                                                     150
           10
           9




                                                                                                                                     100
           8




                                                                                                                                     50
           7




                -.5                0                   .5         -.5                       0                  .5                          -.5                 0                 .5         -.5                   0                 .5
                              Vote Share                                               Vote Share                                                         Vote Share                                         Vote Share

                      Disc. estim. (SE): -.1 (.4)                         Disc. estim. (SE): -.2 (.3)                                            Disc. estim. (SE): -19.8 (37.9)                  Disc. estim. (SE): -24.3 (25.8)

        Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.161.                                                Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.08.


                                                            (a)                                                                                                                       (b)

                                                                                                 Outcome: Pct. beds occupied
                                                                                          Pre-election                                           Post-election
                                                                        100
                                                                        80
                                                                        60
                                                                        40
                                                                        20
                                                                        0




                                                                              -.5                 0                 .5         -.5                       0                  .5
                                                                                             Vote Share                                             Vote Share

                                                                                    Disc. estim. (SE): 2.86 (6.8)                    Disc. estim. (SE): 3.14 (4.58)

                                                                   Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.104.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         xxi
                                                                                                                         (c)

Figure A.1: Other strategic margins: expected acuity index, total number of beds, and percentage of beds occupied by vote
share bin in the pre- and post-election periods are plotted. Estimated expectations from local-linear regression on either side of
the threshold using the IK-optimal bandwidth as in specification 1 of Table 3 is graphed.
                                                                                                                   xxii


                                                        Outcome: HHI
                                   Pre-election                                     Post-election



                 1
                 .8
                 .6
                 .4
                 .2
                 0




                       -.5                 0                  .5       -.5                     0              .5
                                      Vote Share                                          Vote Share

                             Disc. estim. (SE): .032 (.052)                  Disc. estim. (SE): .051 (.051)

               Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.081.



Figure A.2: Expected market concentration (HHI in county) by vote share bin in the pre-
and post-election periods are plotted. Estimated expectations from local-linear regression on
either side of the threshold using the IK-optimal bandwidth as in specification 1 of Table 3
is graphed.


                                               Outcome: Union density
                                   Pre-election                                     Post-election
                 100
                 80
                 60
                 40
                 20
                 0




                       -.5                 0                  .5       -.5                     0              .5
                                      Vote Share                                          Vote Share

                             Disc. estim. (SE): -4.18 (5.16)                 Disc. estim. (SE): 5.54 (7.33)

               Note: both use the IK-optimal bandwidth for post-election sample: 0.12.



Figure A.3: Expected union density (private-sector only) by vote share bin in the pre- and
post-election periods are plotted. Estimated expectations from local-linear regression on
either side of the threshold using the IK-optimal bandwidth as in specification 1 of Table 3
is graphed.
