                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CLIMATE CHANGE, CROP YIELDS, AND INTERNAL MIGRATION IN THE UNITED
                                STATES

                                         Shuaizhang Feng
                                        Michael Oppenheimer
                                         Wolfram Schlenker

                                        Working Paper 17734
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17734


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We cordially acknowledge the contribution to this paper by Alan Krueger before he started his government
position as the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. We appreciate comments from participants
at the Norface Migration Conference at University College London. All remaining errors are ours.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Shuaizhang Feng, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Change, Crop Yields, and Internal Migration in the United States
Shuaizhang Feng, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker
NBER Working Paper No. 17734
January 2012
JEL No. N3,N5,Q1,Q54

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate the link between agricultural productivity and net migration in the United States using
a county-level panel for the most recent period of 1970-2009. In rural counties of the Corn Belt, we
find a statistically significant relationship between changes in net outmigration and climate-driven
changes in crop yields, with an estimated semi-elasticity of about -0.17, i.e., a 1% decrease in yields
leads to a 0.17% net reduction of the population through migration. This effect is primarily driven
by young adults. We do not detect a response for senior citizens, nor for the general population in
eastern counties outside the Corn Belt. Applying this semi-elasticity to predicted yield changes under
the B2 scenario of the Hadley III model, we project that, holding other factors constant, climate change
would on average induce 3.7% of the adult population (ages 15-59) to leave rural counties of the Corn
Belt in the medium term (2020-2049) compared to the 1960-1989 baseline, with the possibility of
a much larger migration response in the long term (2077-2099). Since there is uncertainty about future
warming, we also present projections for a range of uniform climate change scenarios in temperature
or precipitation.


Shuaizhang Feng                                    Wolfram Schlenker
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics       School of International and Public Affairs
Shanghai China                                     Columbia University
shuaizhang.feng@gmail.com                          420 West 118th Street, MC 3323
                                                   New York, NY 10027
Michael Oppenheimer                                and NBER
Department of Geosciences                          wolfram.schlenker@columbia.edu
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
448 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
omichael@princeton.edu
Like the rest of the world, the United States has already experienced climate change. Over
the past 50 years, U.S. average temperature has risen more than 1◦ C and precipitation
has increased an average of about 5 percent (Karl, Melillo & Peterson 2009). Human-
induced emissions of heat-trapping gases have been largely responsible for such changes
on a worldwide basis, and will lead to additional warming in the future (Solomon et al.
2007). By the end of the century, the average U.S. temperature is projected to increase by
approximately 2.2 to 6◦ C under a range of emission scenarios. Precipitation patterns are also
projected to change, with northern areas becoming wetter and southern areas, particularly
in the West, becoming drier. In addition, some extremes of weather and climate, such
as droughts, heavy precipitation and heat waves, are expected to increase in frequency or
geographic extent (Karl, Melillo & Peterson 2009).
    Such changes will inevitably bring substantial challenges to the U.S. economy and society.
In this paper, we investigate one such effect - how climate change might alter economic con-
ditions through changes in agricultural productivity and ultimately mobility of individuals
in rural agricultural areas of the Corn Belt. We focus on the agricultural linkage because,
unlike sudden events such as hurricanes and flooding, changes in agricultural productivity
are expected to have an enduring effect on the geographic distribution of the U.S. popula-
tion. We utilize an instrumental variables approach where average 5-year county-level crop
yields are instrumented with observed weather shocks to estimate the effect of changes in
agricultural productivity (crop yields) on migration patterns. One potential concern of such
an approach is that weather might directly impact migration patterns. When we replicate
the analysis for areas where agriculture is a smaller fraction of the local economy, i.e., urban
areas or rural areas in the eastern United States outside the Corn Belt, we find no significant
migration response to yield changes. Moreover, we find the largest migration response for
young people, and none for retired people, despite the fact that there is a sizable retirement
community in the southern United States due to a preference for climate. This suggests to us
that the response to changes in 5-year weather averages is driven by economic opportunities
and not the result of a direct preference for climate, e.g., a preference to live in areas with
cool summer and less precipitation.
   Recent research has suggested that climate change might have a significant adverse impact
on U.S. agriculture, specifically due to an increase in extremely warm temperatures (Lobell
& Asner 2003, Schlenker & Roberts 2009). There are two possible responses to changes in
agricultural productivity: Individuals can either engage in beneficial adaptive responses or
vote with their feet by leaving a county. Large-scale migration resulting from agricultural


                                               1
failures not only impacts people that move away and those who stay put. Some recent
studies have also shown that the influx of migrants adversely affects economic prospects of
local residents in destination areas and could stimulate further outmigration, thus producing
a ripple effect (McIntosh 2008, Boustan, Fishback & Kantor 2010).
    The associations among changes in climatic conditions, agricultural productivity, and hu-
man migration have been most vividly illustrated by the famous “American Dust Bowl,” one
of the greatest environmental catastrophes in U.S. history. In the 1930s, exceptional droughts
(Schubert et al. 2004), amplified by human-induced land degradation (Cook, Miller &
Seager 2009) greatly depressed agricultural productivity in the Great Plains and led to large-
scale and persistent net outmigration from those regions. Between 1935 and 1941, around
300,000 people migrated from the southern Great Plains to California (McLeman 2006).
Hornbeck (2009) compares counties with different levels of soil-erosions in the Great Plains,
and finds that the 1930s “Dust Bowl” generated persistent population loss in the following
decades. In addition, the overall decline in population did not occur disproportionately for
farmers, but had ramifications beyond the agricultural sector. This suggests a general eco-
nomic decline that extends beyond the direct effect on agriculture. Many other businesses in
agricultural areas, e.g., banking and insurance, are directly linked to the agricultural sector
as they serve the agricultural community. Hornbeck (2009) argues that the economy mainly
adapted through outmigration, not adjustment within the agricultural sector or increases in
industry.
   The “American Dust Bowl” happened under very different conditions from today’s. It
overlapped the Great Depression and a lack of credit may have limited the local capacity for
adaptation. Since then, the American agricultural sector has undergone immense changes.
On the one hand, it is much more mechanized and uses great amounts of chemical fertilizer
and pesticides. As a result, it now accounts for a much smaller part of the overall economy
and a smaller fraction of the population directly depends on agricultural outcomes. On
the other hand, better communication and transportation networks may make the present
generation of Americans more mobile. In either case, one might expect today’s relationship
between migration and agricultural productivity to be different from the 1930s. To assess
the possible magnitudes of migration flows under future climate change, it is necessary to
base empirical work on more recent experience, which we do in this paper.
   Specifically, we draw on U.S. county-level data for 1970-2009, a period characterized by
highly mechanized agriculture, to estimate the semi-elasticity of net outmigration to crop
yields. We find that for areas where corn and soybeans are the major crop (hereafter referred


                                              2
to as “counties in the Corn Belt,” which include all Midwestern states and Kentucky),
the estimated semi-elasticity of outmigration with respect to climate-induced crop yields is
about -0.17, i.e., holding everything else constant, a 1% decline in crop yields would induce
approximately 0.17% of the adult population to out-migrate. To circumvent the possible
endogeneity of crop yields, we instrument crop yields with observed weather patterns and
hence only use deviations from yield trends that are due to observable weather patterns.
This is crucial, as a simple OLS regression that does not instrument yields with observed
weather finds a much smaller and generally insignificant relationship.
    In view of the relatively small proportion of people directly employed in agriculture,1 our
estimated elasticity of migration with respect to yield may seem large. However, there might
be considerable spillover effects from agriculture to other sectors of the economy, similar to
what Hornbeck (2009) observed for “Dust Bowl” migrants. To shed further light on this
issue we examine the responsiveness of overall employment to crop yields using state-level
data for the period of 1970-2009. Consistent with the literature on the “DustBowl,” we
find that weather-induced yield shocks significantly impact non-farm employment. During
years when agriculture is doing well, non-farm employment is expanding, while years with
bad yields imply contractions in non-farm employment. The semi-elasticity for non-fram
employment is larger than for farm employment.
   Our estimated semi-elasticities are specific to the period of 1970-2009 and may change in
the future depending on many factors, such as the structures of the economy, demographic
profiles, and government policies. Nevertheless, we believe it is an informative exercise to use
the best estimate available to make projections, in order to illustrate the possible magnitudes
of future outmigration flows for counties of the Corn Belt, as further warming is expected
to directly affect these agricultural areas in the United States. Our projections are ceteris
paribus in nature and should not be regarded as predictions of what will actually happen in
the future. Based on the Hadley III model B2 scenario, with other factors held constant, we
find that climate change would on average induce around 3.7 percentage points of the adult
(15-59) population in non-urban counties (less than 100,000 inhabitants) to migrate out of
Corn Belt counties in the medium term (2020-2049) compared to a baseline of 1960-1989.
The estimated outmigration effect increases to 11% in the long-term (2070-2099) as extreme
heat is predicted to significantly increase under continued warming and adversely impact
crop yields. Of course, long run projections should be interpreted with greater caution as
  1
    For counties in the Corn Belt, the median fraction of employment in agriculture is 4.6% according
to the 2000 decennial Census, based on data from Table QT-P30 of the Census 2000 summary file 3
(factfinder.census.gov).


                                                 3
people’s migration responses in the longer term might be considerably different from short-
term responses.
   Since predicted changes in the climate of the Corn Belt vary more between climate model
runs than within a given model run, we also provide projections under uniform climate change
scenarios, i.e., assuming only one aspect of climate (either temperature or precipitation)
changes, and that the change is uniform across the whole Corn Belt. Specifically, we produce
projected outmigration rates for each degree increase in temperature (up to 5◦ C) as well
as increases and decreases of precipitation up to 50%. These can be used to construct
corresponding migration estimates for any combination of temperature and precipitation
forecasts made for any future time period by any General Circulation model under any
emission scenario.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 reviews general internal U.S.
migration patterns and the role of U.S. agriculture. Section 2 introduces our empirical
methodology and data sources. The main estimation results are reported in Section 3.
Section 4 presents projections of future migration flows, and is followed by our conclusions
in section 5.


1     Background
Migration is a defining feature in the history of the United States, not just in terms of ar-
rival of immigrants, but also in terms of internal population movements. Europeans first
colonized the Northeast United States. Ever since, the U.S. population has been gradually
shifting westward and southward (Alvarez & Mossay 2006). During the last century, the
mean center of the U.S. population moved about 324 miles west and 101 miles south (Hobbs
& Stoops 2002). Studies suggest that one of the most important determinants of migration
flows is relative economic opportunities in source and destination regions (see e.g., Borjas,
Bronars & Trejo (1992)). For example, during the “great migration” in 1910-1970, millions
from the South were attracted to the Northeast and Midwest, as farm and non-farm economic
opportunities dwindled in the South while demand for labor increased in the industrializing
destination regions (Eichenlaub, Tolnay & Alexander 2010). Empirical research also identi-
fied important effects of industry composition (Beeson, DeJong & Troesken 2001), natural
characteristics such as oceans and rivers (Beeson, DeJong & Troesken 2001), and weather
(Rappaport 2007, Alvarez & Mossay 2006) on domestic migration flows.
    Agriculture has traditionally been an important driver of U.S. domestic migration flows.


                                             4
Early internal migrants were typically farmers seeking better farming opportunities, e.g.,
those who moved to the Ohio River Valley in the late eighteenth century and to the Great
Plains before the middle of the nineteenth century (Ferrie 2003). Later on, developments in
the manufacturing and service industries, together with technological changes in the agri-
culture sector, have prompted sustained rural-to-urban migration. Consequently, the rural
proportion of the U.S. population has declined from 60% in 1900 to around 20% in 2000
(Hobbs & Stoops 2002).
   Besides all the urban “pull” forces such as increased availability of employment oppor-
tunities in non-agricultural sectors and the possibly more attractive urban lifestyle, several
“push” factors in the agricultural sector have been important in shaping this rural flight.
First of all, long-run increases in farm productivity due to changes in the economic structure,
technological progress, and better access to domestic and international markets, have dimin-
ished demand for labor in farms. Since the late 19th century, subsistence farming gradually
gave way to commoditized agriculture, with increased access to credit and transportation
(for example, railroads). This trend was further accelerated by mechanization starting in
the 1940s, and more recently, the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Previous studies
showed that mechanization has had a significant impact on the relationship between agricul-
ture and migration. For example, White (2008) studied the Great Plains region for the period
of 1900-2000, and found that counties that witnessed an increased dependence on agriculture
were also more likely to experience positive population growth in the pre-mechanization era,
but the relationship reversed in the post-mechanization era (post-1940s).
  Second, agricultural policy has also played an important role in rural-urban migration.
New Deal policies in the 1930s, such as the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), the Works
Progress Administration (WPA) and the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) proved critical
in preventing even larger outmigration in certain areas of the Great Plains (McLeman et al.
2008). Even after the 1930s, income support programs have likely slowed the movement of
labor out of the agricultural sector (Dimitri, Effland & Conklin 2005). On the other hand, the
risk-reduction effects of price supports and the planting rigidities imposed by supply controls
encouraged specialization, and may have facilitated outflow of farm labor. Since there has
been a long history of interventionist policies to manage migration patterns, policy makers
may be able to utilize migration forecasts under climate change to enhance local adaptive
capabilities to reduce unnecessary outmigration and manage any remaining migration flows
(Adger 2006, McLeman & Smit 2006).
   Last but not least, variations and changes in environmental and climatic conditions affect


                                              5
agricultural productivity and can induce significant migration responses. The most extreme
case we have witnessed so far occurred during the “Dust Bowl” in the 1930s. In those years,
productivity in the Great Plains dropped precipitously because of sustained droughts. This
triggered significant and sustained outmigration from the affected regions (Hornbeck 2009).
At the same time, local adaptive capacity was already at a very low level before the “Dust
Bowl” because of falling commodity prices and a general economic depression (McLeman
et al. 2008). Adjustments within the agricultural sector and between different economic sec-
tors were very limited due to a lack of credit, and the economy adjusted primarily through
mass outmigration (Hornbeck 2009). Nevertheless, it is important to note that people with
different demographic and socio-economic characteristics experienced very different levels of
vulnerabilities and exhibited different adaptation responses. For example, McLeman (2006)
found that migrants from rural Eastern Oklahoma to California in the 1930s were dispro-
portionately young tenant farmers.
    While the “Dust Bowl” experience may be unique in American history, the extreme
climatic conditions witnessed in the 1930s may become more frequent in current century as
a consequence of global climate change. Recent researches suggests that climate change is
expected to have significant negative impacts on crop yields in the United States. Lobell &
Asner (2003) report that for each degree increase in growing season temperature, both corn
and soybeans yields would decline by roughly 17%. Similarly, Schlenker & Roberts (2009)
identify serious nonlinearities in the temperature-yield relationship. Increasing temperatures
are beneficial for crop growth up to a point when they switch to becoming highly detrimental.
These breakpoints vary by crop: 29◦ C or 84◦ F for corn, 30◦ C of 86◦ F for soybeans and
32◦ C or 90◦ F for cotton. The effect of being 1 degree above the optimal breakpoint is
roughly ten times as bad as being 1 degree below it. Area-weighted average yields are
predicted to decrease by 30-46% before the end of this century under the slowest (B1)
warming scenario and by 63%-82% under the most rapid warming scenario (A1F1) based on
the Hadley III model. These newly available estimates were considerably larger than what
previous modeling studies have suggested (Brown & Rosenberg 1997, Reilly 2002, Cline
2007).2 It should also be noted that these estimates are based on the existing statistical
   2
    To assess the impact of climate change on U.S. agriculture, three different approaches have been used
in the literature, each with its own merits and shortcomings. The first one is the production function
approach, in which the impact of weather/climate on crop yields is derived using controlled laboratory or field
experiments. Some sort of CGE (Computed General Equilibrium) model is sometimes used to incorporate
price feedbacks. This approach is usually adopted by agronomists, see for example Rosenzweig & Hillel
(1998). The second one is the so called Ricardian approach, which estimates a cross-sectional relationship
between land values and climate while controlling for other factors. The underlying assumption is that the



                                                      6
relationship between yield and climate/weather, and have not incorporated CO2 fertilization
effects and adaptation possibilities beyond what is found in the historic time series. At
the same time, recent evidence suggests that the actual CO2 effect on crop yield is still
uncertain and may be considerably less significant than previously thought (Long et al. 2006).
Assuming no breakthroughs in technology, potential gains from adaptation may also be
limited and may require considerable financial investments.
   The magnitudes of the possible impact of changing climate conditions on yields warrants
careful examination of the yield-migration relationship. The emerging empirical literature
on climate-driven migration, as reviewed by Leighton (2009), is interdisciplinary in nature.
Most studies rely on qualitative analyses of fairly small scale local phenomena. This paper
contributes to the existing literature by utilizing a statistical approach to estimate the semi-
elasticity of outmigration with respect to crop yields. Our approach is similar to Feng,
Krueger & Oppenheimer (2010) who examine the effect of climate-driven yield declines in
Mexico on Mexico-U.S. cross-border migration.


2     Methodology and Data
2.1     Empirical Methodology
We model the relationship between net outmigration rate mit in county i during the five-year
interval started with year t as follows (consecutive observations in our panel are five years
apart as the population data is reported every five years).

                                    mit = α + βxit + f (t) + ci + ǫit                                    (1)

Our baseline model examines the ratio mit of all people that were aged 15-59 at the begin-
ning of interval t that outmigrated over the next five years, net of any new arrivals. Our key
parameter of interest is β, the semi-elasticity of net outmigration with respect to the aver-
value of farmland reflects the sum of discounted expected future earnings. This approach was originally due
to Mendelsohn, Nordhaus & Shaw (1994). It utilizes the fact that farmers have adapted to local climatic
conditions. The third and more recent approach is to use time series variations in climate to identify effect
of climate on agricultural profit (Deschênes & Greenstone 2007) or crop yields (Schlenker & Roberts 2009).
The advantage of this approach is that identification comes only from within variation. Other determinants
of yield, such as soil quality and land management practices, which are usually correlated with climate and
difficult to measure, would not bias the estimated weather-yield relationship.




                                                     7
age log yield during the 5-year period xit .3 A set of unrestricted county dummy variables,
represented by ci , are included to capture time-invariant county factors, such as proximity
to urban centers and natural amenities. Time controls f (t) capture all aggregate-level fac-
tors that affect migration trends, such as technological progress in agriculture, changes in
agricultural policies, as well as changes in overall economic fundamentals in both source and
destination counties. Our baseline regression use quadratic time trends, i.e., f (t) = γ1 t+γ2 t2 .
Finally, ǫit is the error term. Since ǫit might be spatially correlated, we cluster at the state
level, which adjusts for arbitrary within-state correlations along both the cross-sectional and
time-series dimensions.4 In a sensitivity check, we also present results of an unweighted
regression where we use a grouped bootstrap routine and draw all data for a 5-year interval
with replacement, i.e., all counties that report in a given 5-year interval.
   Because xit may be correlated with ǫit , we only use corn and/or soybean yield shocks that
are due to presumably exogenous variation in weather. In a sensitivity check, we present
results from a simple OLS regression for comparison. The results are different from the IV
regression. Yields have been trending upward over time, and we hence include again time
controls f (t). For example, Figure A1 in the appendix displays annual corn and soybean
yields for the 13 states in the Corn Belt.5 The figure displays actual yields as well as predicted
yields using the four weather variables Wit of Schlenker & Roberts (2009): two degree
days variables as well as a quadratic in total precipitation.6 Yield growth is approximately
piecewise linear in temperatures: Moderate heat, as measured by degree days 10-29◦C for
corn and degree days 10-30◦C for soybeans, is beneficial for plant growth. Extreme heat, as
measured by degree days above 29◦ C for corn and degree days above 30◦ C for soybeans are
very harmful for crops.
       Formally, our IV regression is

                                    xit = δ + πWit + f (t) + ki + νit                                       (2)

As stated above, xit are log crop yields for county i during the 5-year interval starting in t.
We again include county fixed effects ki to control for baseline differences and cluster the
   3
     We first take the log of annuals yields (or adjusted average of more than one crop, see below) and then
average over the five years of each interval.
   4
     In a yearly panel regression of yields on weather, clustering by state or adjusting for spatial correlation
using Conley’s (1999) nonparametric routine gives comparable estimates (Fisher et al. Forthcoming).
   5
     We aggregated to the state level as it is impossible to display the time series for each county.
   6
     Degree days are simply truncated daily temperature variables summed over the growing season (March-
August). For example, degree days above 30◦ C measure temperatures above 30◦ C, i.e., a temperature of
32◦ C would give 2 degree days. The daily measure is summed over all days of the growing season.


                                                       8
error term νit at the state level. Since we use the same time controls f (t) in both the first
and second stage, the coefficient β is identified by deviations of the four weather variables
Wit from their time trends, which are presumably exogenous.
    In our empirical analysis below we use three yield shocks: log corn yields, log soybean
yields, and the log of the adjusted average of the two. Both corn and soybeans yields are
measured in bushels/acre, yet average productivity is significantly different. Corn yields are
on average roughly three times as high. Since changes in average yields should not be driven
by changing compositions of soybean and corn production, we need to adjust the yields to
make them comparable. Regressions that use the log of the adjusted average yield therefore
transform soybean yields into corn equivalents by multiplying them with the soybean to
corn price ratio.7 This makes the two crops comparable on a dollar/acre basis. Ultimately,
agricultural returns are the difference between revenues and cost. By prorating yields with
the average price ratio, we make them comparable on a revenue/acre basis, which would
be an exact conversion under the assumption that the revenue/cost rato is comparable for
the two crops. After making the yields comparable, we take the area-weighted average
of the equivalent yields. Similarly, we take the area-weighted average of the crop-specific
weather variables Wit . However, in case there is concern about the weighting of the two, we
also present results using only corn yields (and the temperature thresholds specific to corn)
as well as only soybean yields (and the temperature thresholds specific to soybeans), and
consistently get comparable results.
   We estimate the model separately for (i) counties in the Corn Belt; and (ii) counties in
the eastern United States outside the Corn Belt and the state of Florida. Areas in the Corn
Belt predominately grow corn and soybeans. Our null hypothesis is that β is negative for
the Corn Belt, but approximately equals zero for areas outside the Corn Belt, where corn
and soybean production are less important as a fraction of overall economic activity. Eastern
areas outside the Corn Belt serve as a control group in our research design - if changes in
climate affect changes in outmigration through channels other than crop yield (i.e., the error
term ǫit is correlated with the instrument xit ), then β would also be non-zero for the sample
of counties outside the Corn Belt.


2.2       Data and Summary Statistics
Since there is no reliable county-level migration data for the 40-year time period that we
are focusing on, we use the residual approach to derive the outmigration ratio mit for each
  7
      We use average prices over our sample period 1970-2009, so there is no endogenous price feedback.


                                                      9
county for each five-year period between 1970 and 2009.8 For example, for the 15-59 age
group, the baseline model in our analysis, we use
           mit[15,60) : net outmigration rate for those aged [15, 60) at time t in county i.
              pit[15,60) :   total population aged [15, 60) in county i at the beginning of the
                             5-year interval that started in t.
          pi[t+5][20,65) :   total population aged [20, 65) in county i at the end of the 5-year
                             interval that started in t.
              dit[15,60) :   number of people aged [15, 60) in county i at the beginning of the
                      5-year interval t that died by the end of it.
To construct the net outmigration ratio

                                              pit[15,60) − pi[t+5][20,65) − dit[15,60)
                               mit[15,60) =                                                          (3)
                                                             pit[15,60)

We use publicly-available population data from U.S. Census Bureau for pit[15,60) and pi[t+5][20,65)
and state- and age-group-specific mortality data from National Center for Health Statistics
to estimate dit[15,60) .
    Annual yields for corn and soybeans between 1970 and 2009 are from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistical Service (USDA-NASS), where yields equal
county-level production divided by harvested acres. For our main analysis, we use the log of
the adjusted average of corn and soybeans yields. Climate variables are constructed over the
growing season of corn and soybeans (March-August). We calculate total growing-season
degree days instead of mean temperatures to capture the nonlinear effect of temperature on
crop yields, as well as total precipitation in the growing period. More details on the sources
and reliabilities of yield and climate data can be found in Schlenker & Roberts (2009).
   We follow Schlenker & Roberts (2009) and exclude all counties west of the 100 degree
meridian and the state of Florida, as agriculture in those areas is heavily dependent on sub-
sidized irrigation (see Reisner (1993) and Schlenker, Hanemann & Fisher (2005)). Figure 1
graphically displays all counties in our study. We label counties in the following 13 states
“Corn Belt” counties: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Mis-
   8
    There are two alternative approaches: First, the Census Bureau has county-level migration information
in each Decadal Census. Individuals are asked where they lived 5 years ago. Since the Census occurs every
10 years, there is no migration information for the 5-year period directly following the previous Census.
The Census data hence is not a full panel but misses every other 5-year interval. Second, the Internal
Revenue Service has yearly migration data between pairs of counties. The advantage of this data is that
it has information on the destination county. The downside is that the data are only available since 1992
(Duquette 2010). Moreover, it is based on tax returns, and hence might under-represent the poor and the
elderly.


                                                         10
souri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.9 Counties outside these
states as well as Florida that lie east of the 100 degree meridian are labeled the “non-Corn
Belt” areas.
   Table 1 presents sample summary statistics. We exclude all counties with more than
100,000 population in 2000 in our baseline analysis as those counties are more likely to
be urban centers and less dependent on agriculture.10 There are 1,697 counties in our
sample, 892 in the Corn Belt sample and 805 in the non-Corn Belt sample.11 For comparison
purposes, we have averaged all variables over each five-year period during 1970-2009. Panels
A and B present sample means and standard deviations for the Corn Belt and non-Corn
Belt samples, respectively. There is substantially more net outmigration for the Corn Belt
sample than the non-Corn Belt sample as the Midwest has lost population over the last 40
years. Average county-level crop acreages in the Corn Belt states are also larger, especially
for corn, as are average crop yields. For example, during the most recent recent 5-year
period (2005-2009), both corn and soybean yields are around 30% higher in the Corn Belt
sample than in the non-Corn Belt sample. This likely reflects effects of various factors such
as geographic/climatic conditions, technology, and policies. Non-Corn Belt areas experience
more extreme heat above 29◦ C or 30◦ C and more precipitation.


3       Results
3.1     The Weather-Yield Relationship
We first replicate the weather-yield relationship of Schlenker & Roberts (2009), with two
notable exceptions: we aggregate the data to 5-year intervals and present separate analyses
for the Corn Belt and non-Corn Belt samples. Since year-to-year weather shocks are random,
there is considerably more variation in the yearly data than in 5-year averages. Still, Table 2
    9
      According to USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service (http://quickstats.nass.usda.gov/), the fol-
lowing states have the largest combined planted acreages of corn and soybeans in 2000: Iowa (23 mil), Illinois
(21.7 mil), Minnesota (14.5 mil), Nebraska (13.15 mil), Indiana (11.2 mil), South Dakota (8.7 mil), Missouri
(8 mil), Ohio (8 mil), Kansas (6.4 mil), Wisconsin (5.05 mil), Michigan (4.25 mil), Arkansas (3.53 mil),
North Dakota (2.98 mil), and Kentucky (2.51 mil), i.e., we include all with the exception of Arkansas, which
is not part of the Corn Belt. However, our results are robust if we include Arkansas in the Corn-Belt sample.
   10
      We present sensitivity checks where counties with more than 100,000 inhabitants are included in the
appendix. The results are unchanged in unweighted regressions, but do change if we weight by the population
in a county.
   11
      In some alternative specifications we use either corn yields or soybean yields instead of the weighted
average of the two, which results in a slightly lower number of counties in our sample as sometimes only one
of the two crops is grown.


                                                     11
reports significant results using 5-year averages of log yields and climate data from 1970 to
2009. The first three columns of Table 2 show results for counties in the Corn Belt. The
dependent variable in column (1) of Table 2 is the log of adjusted corn and soybean yields.
Results for the four climate variables are shown in the Table, while the quadratic time trends
as well as county fixed effects are suppressed. The climate variables including two growing
season degree days variables: moderate heat and extreme heat, as well as growing season total
precipitation and its square term. The results confirm the significant nonlinear relationship
between weather/climate and yields (see e.g.: Schlenker & Roberts (2009); Rosenzweig et al.
(2002)). An increase of 10 degree days in moderate heat (between 10 and 29◦ C for corn and
between 10 and 30◦ C for soybeans) during the growing season would increase crop yields by
approximately 0.57%. On the other hand, extremely hot temperatures are very harmful -
each 10 degree day increase in extreme heat decreases yields by around 6.76%. More rainfall
is initially beneficial for crops, but at a decreasing rate, and becomes detrimental when it
exceeds some optimum level. The null hypothesis that all coefficients of climate variables are
jointly zero is rejected at even the 0.1% significance level. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2
replicate the analysis of column (1) with different dependent variables: log corn yields and
log soybean yields, respectively. Results are similar to those in column (1).
    The last three columns of Table 2 display regression results for counties in the non-
Corn Belt sample. Although regression coefficients are somewhat different, the relationships
between climate and yields are similar to that in the Corn Belt. In all three regressions, we
strongly reject the null that climate variables are jointly insignificant. The F-statistic as well
as the p-value are shown at the bottom of the table.
    Since 5-year averages have less variation than annual data, measurement error might be
amplified. We therefore also replicate the analysis using annual data on yields and weather
in Table A1 of the appendix. We find comparable relationships between weather and yield to
what is reported in Table 2 for both the Corn Belt and non-Corn Belt samples. Limiting the
number of observations from 40 to 8 when we aggregate the annual data to 5-year intervals
does not seem to impact the results.12 This is especially true for the coefficient on extreme
heat, which explains most of the year-to-year variation in yields.
  12
   The other difference is that the first-stage regression in Table 2 are population-weighted as are the
migration regression in the second stage, while the annual results in the appendix are unweighted regression.




                                                     12
3.2    The Effect of Yield Shocks on Net Outmigration
We estimate equation (1) by two-stage-least-squares (2SLS) and show the results in Table 3.
Panels differ by included time controls to capture overall trends in migration as well as yields.
Panel A uses a simple linear time trend (one variable), while Panel D uses flexible state-
specific restricted cubic splines with 3 knots (26 variables, 13 states × two spline variables per
state). Our baseline regression uses quadratic time trends (Panel B of Table 3) as state-level
yield trends in Figure A1 in the appendix apear to be well approximated with quadratic
time trends. The results, however, are more or less robust with respect to different time
controls. We choose not to control for year fixed effects, which would absorb most of the
variation as 5-year weather averages are highly correlated within the Corn Belt, more so than
annual data. The reason is that the 5-year averages are driven by large-scale phenomena
like El Nino / La Nina as idiosyncratic annual weather shocks average out. If a half-decade
is hotter than usual, it is so for most of the Corn Belt. For example, the seven year (i.e.,
5-year interval) fixed effects absorb more variation than the 26 state-specific cubic splines.
Year fixed effects absorb variation that we would like to use in our identification and amplify
measurement error in the weather data as most of the common signal is removed (Fisher
et al. Forthcoming). If weather is truly exogenous, it should be orthogonal to other measures
and hence not require period fixed effects.
   Column (1) reports results for the Corn Belt sample when the net migration ratio is re-
gressed on the log of the yearly average of adjusted corn and soybean yields. The estimated
semi-elasticity of outmigration with respect to log yield changes is -0.168, which is statis-
tically significant at the 1% level based on clustered standard error. Recall that the first
stage F-statistic is 36.9, much higher than the usual cutoff point of 10 to rule out concerns
about weak instruments. To explore the effect of averaging corn and soybean yields on the
estimated semi-elasticity, we run the same regressions using either corn or soybean yields,
and report the results in columns (2) and (3) of Table 3. The estimated semi-elasticities of
outmigration with respect to corn and soybeans yields are -0.165 and -0.160 under quadratic
time trends (panel B), respectively. Both are statistically significant at the 1% level and are
very close in magnitude to the coefficient estimate in column (1).
   We also report results for the non-Corn Belt sample in the last three columns of Table 3.
Column (4) presents results using the log of the yearly average yield measure, while columns
(5) and (6) use either corn or soybean yields. Note that in all cases the estimated elas-
ticities are small in magnitudes and not statistically significantly different from zero. The
negative yield-migration relationship only exists for the Corn Belt sample, consistent with


                                               13
our hypothesis. The fact that we cannot find a significant yield-migration relationship for
the non-Corn Belt counties suggests that our results are not driven by other direct channels
between climate and migration, such as people’s living preferences.
   Table A2 in the appendix reports the results of the OLS version of Table 3 where mi-
gration rates are regressed on yields that are not instrumented on weather. The estimated
semi-elasticity are smaller in magnitude (closer to zero) and generally not significantly dif-
ferent from zero. It is consistent with a story where government policies (or other factors
like cheap energy) increase both investment in agriculture (yields) and the population in a
county. Table A2 demonstrates the importance of our IV approach where we only utilize the
variation in yields that is due to exogenous weather fluctuations.
    Our baseline regressions only include counties with a total population of less than 100,000
in the 2000 Census, for which yield information are observed for more than half of the years of
our sample period 1970-2009 (at least 21 out of the 40 years). Regressions are weighted using
the total population in a county. To explore the sensitivity of our results to these restrictions,
we conduct a set of robustness checks in the appendix. Table A3 performs unweighted
regression with the same samples as in Table 3. Table A4 again uses unweighted regressions
but also includes urban counties with more than 100,000 inhabitants. Table A5 varies the
requirement on the minimum number of yield observations in a county, ranging from 1
(i.e., any county that ever had an observation) to 40 (i.e., a balanced panel). In all cases
the estimated semi-elasticity for the Corn Belt sample are very close to what is reported in
Table 3.13 The only exceptions are population-weighted regressions including urban counties,
which show a lower sensitivity, as there are a few counties with a disproportionately larger
population (e.g., Cook County in Illinois that harbors Chicago). We find this reaffirming as it
makes it again less likely that our results are driven by direct migration responses to climate.
To explain our observed results, the rural population would have to have climate preferences
that covary with the nonlinear relationship of crops, while people in urban centers in the
same areas do not.
   Finally, we check the sensitivity of our estimated standard errors. Our baseline model
clusters by state, which adjusts for arbitrary within-state correlations along both the cross-
sectional (counties within a state) and time-series dimensions. One possible concern stems
from the fact that we are not using annual data, but 5-year averages. Idiosyncratic weather
shocks are averaged out, and the remaining variation is driven more strongly by global
phenomena like El Nino / La Nina. If a half-decade is hotter than usual, it is likely hotter
 13
      For the non-Corn Belt we do not find a statistically significant yield-migration relationship.



                                                       14
than usual for most of the Corn Belt. In a sensitivity check in Table A6 we therefore
resample 5-year intervals with replacement. The standard errors generally become larger,
but all coefficients are still significant except for the model with state-specific restricted
cubic splines.14 Since we only have eight intervals, using a clustered bootstrap has its own
drawbacks, and our baseline regression therefore clusters by state.15


3.3     Further Results
One might expect different demographic groups to have different migration responses with
respect to yield changes. For example, McLeman (2006) found that young people had a larger
migration response following the “Dust Bowl.” Table 4 therefore presents analyses for various
sex and age subgroups for the Corn Belt sample, using the same basic model specifications as
in Table 3. Different columns use various crop yields as explanatory variables for migration
responses. The first two panels (Panel A and B) show that males and females have quite
similar migration elasticities. The next four panels (Panel C-F) analyze different age groups
separately. The youngest age group, those between 15 and 29, are most sensitive to yield
shocks in their migration decisions. The estimated elasticity is -0.28 when using the log of the
average of the adjusted yearly corn and soybean yields. The 30-44 group has a semi-elasticity
of -0.154, which is significant at the 1% level. For the relatively older age group between
45 and 59, the estimated semi-elasticity is only -0.022, which is less than one-tenth of that
for the 15-29 group, and is not statistically significantly different from zero. In panel F we
perform the same analysis for those aged 60 and above, and find a zero semi-elasticity. Our
finding is consistent with the general observation that younger people are more mobile. The
results also lend additional support to the exclusion restriction in our instrumental variable
setup. If weather fluctuations directly impact migration decisions, one might expect larger
responses for the older age group as they are not tied to an area by their job, and there is a
sizable retirement community in the Southern United States.
    Our estimated semi-elasticity may seem large as the population share directly employed
in the agriculture sector is small. One possibility is that there is considerable spillover
from agriculture to other sectors of the economy, as was observed for “Dust Bowl” migrants
  14
     Cameron, Gelbach & Miller (2008) call this procedure the pairs cluster bootstrap, the “standard method
for resampling that preserves the within-cluster features of the error.” While this procedure can lead to
inestimable model if regressors take on a limited range of values, it works in our case as there is enough
variation in climate. We are not aware of a study that tests the performance of the Wild-t bootstrap, their
preferred model, in an instrumental variables setting with clustered errors.
  15
     Recall that we have 13 states in the Corn Belt sample, which is larger, but still a limited number of
clusters.


                                                    15
(Hornbeck 2009). To shed further light on this issue, we regress annual state-level farm and
non-farm log employment on weather-instrumented yields and their lagged values for the
same time period of 1970-2009. The results are shown in Table 5. We include concurrent
weather as well as four lags to make the time frame comparable to our 5-year intervals
on which migration data was measured. Note that the cumulative effect (the sum of the
individual effects of all five years) is given at the bottom of each panel. Panel A analyzes
farm employment using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and finds no
statistically significant relationship. Panel B analyzes non-farm employment data from BEA.
We find that non-farm employment is positively related to yield shocks for the Corn Belt
sample, but there’s no statistically significant relationship for the non-Corn Belt sample.
The estimated cumulative elasticity of 0.25 is also quite large. In panel C, we replicate the
analysis using non-farm employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and find
even larger impacts (0.375) for the Corn Belt sample.16 Our results suggest that although a
negative weather-induced yield shock does not directly affect farm employment, it dampens
profitability and income in the agricultural sector and negatively affects local economic
conditions, thereby triggering relatively large employment contractions in non-farm sectors.
One possible explanation for such a finding is that government programs insure farm income
(e.g., disaster payments, price floors, and crop insurance) and hence farmers receive enough
income that keeps them farming. For example, Key & Roberts (2007) have shown that larger
government transfers increase the probability of farm survival using Micro-level Census Data
that links individual farms between three Censuses. If government payments insure against
yield losses, they will dampen responses in farm labor. Especially since many of them are
conditional on the farm remaining in operation. At the same time, yield losses might induce
farmers to purchase less outside goods and result in fewer investments. Roberts & Key
(2008) have also shown that larger government payments result in consolidation in the farm
sector, thereby increasing average farm size. An increase in farm size might lead to efficiency
gains and hence reduce the demand for services and goods outside the agricultural sector.
This would explain why we pick up larger employment effects outside of agriculture. At the
same time, the U.S. agriculture sector is already highly capital-intensive with a minimum
level of farm workforce, thus it is difficult to displace farm labor even at times with negative
yield shocks.
  16
    Employment data from BEA and BLS differ in their coverage and a number of other issues. BEA covers
more workers: the average employment numbers reported by BLS are only around 80% of those reported by
BEA. More detailed explanations on the differences between BEA and BLS employment data can be found
from the BEA website.



                                                 16
4      Projecting Future Net Outmigration
Our estimate of the elasticity of migration is conditional on many factors specific to U.S.
for the period under study, such as the population share of youths who are more likely
to migrate, farming technology, the relative importance of agriculture in the economy, and
federal and state farm policies, e.g., responses to droughts and other climatic events that
adversely affect crop yields. Keeping in mind that these idiosyncratic factors may change in
the future, we find it nevertheless instructive to project the effect of climate change on future
migrant flows for the Corn Belt sample to illustrate the magnitude of potential migration
flows. Our projection exercise does not depend on whether past climate variability in the
United States was caused by greenhouse gas emissions, as long as the migration responses
are similar to those that would occur with anthropogenic climatic changes.
   We first base our projections on the B2 scenario of the Hadley III model and project
net outmigration ratios of the adult US population (aged 15 to 59) that are attributable
to predicted changes in crop yields for the medium term (2020-2049) and for the long term
(2070-2099). We follow a two step procedure. First, using average climate during the 1960-
1989 period as a baseline, we derive expected changes in log crop yields using the estimated
climate-yield relationship. Specifically, the predicted change in crop yields is the difference in
predicted yields under the observed weather record for 1960-1989 and a counterfactual one,
where we add predicted absolute changes in monthly minimum and maximum temperature as
well as relative changes in precipitation to the historic baseline. In a second step, we project
population migration ratios using the semi-elasticity of -0.168. Table 6 presents the summary
of the results for individual counties. The first column displays the mean impact among
counties, while the second through fourth column give the standard deviation, minimum,
and maximum of the impacts for the 892 counties in the Corn Belt. The last four columns
summarize how many counties will have increased outmigration (displayed in green, yellow,
and red in Figure 2) as well as how many counties have decreased outmigration rates (shown
in blue).17
    The first row reports projections for the medium term. On average, by 2020-2049, 5-
year outmigration rates are expected to increase by 3.67 percentage points for the adult
population for rural counties in the Corn Belt. Not all counties are expected to experience
similar changes in outmigration. At the 5% significance level, we can project that 761
  17
    We use 10,000 bootstrap draws from the first and second stage coefficients of the baseline regression
(errors are clustered by state) to translate predicted changes in weather variables to a distribution of changes
in outmigration rates.



                                                      17
counties would experience increased net outmigration due to climate change. On the other
hand, 37 counties would witness less outmigration, mostly those in the north as shown in
panel A of Figure 2.
   The second row of Table 6 reports long term projections. Compared to the medium
term, the projected increase in outmigration ratios are on average much larger. By 2070-
2099, 5-year outmigration rates of rural counties in the Corn Belt are expected to increase by
11.3 percentage points. This reflects much more severe declines of crop yields as continued
warming significantly increases the occurrence of extremely warm days that are detrimental
to crop growth. At the same time, the long-term projections are also associated with more
variability of the predicted impacts among counties. Some cold places continue to benefit
from warming, and the minimum predicted impact - the biggest decline in outmigration -
is larger in the second row. As shown in Panel B of Figure 2, counties in the southwestern
part of the Corn Belt are most likely to experience substantial increases in net outmigration,
while those in the northeastern part would be affected less. Only 2 counties are projected
to have less outmigration in the long term.
   To complement our use of the Hadley III model, which is just one of roughly 20 GCMs
(General Circulation Model, or Global Climate Model), we also provide migration projections
under uniform climate change scenarios, assuming temperature or precipitation changes are
the same across all the Corn Belt region. The sensitivity of our results to predicted changes
in climatic conditions can then be approximated from the uniform changes, especially since
there is more variability in predicted changes between models than within runs for the
Corn Belt.18 We predict outmigration rates corresponding to each Celsius degree rise in
temperatures up to 5◦ C (holding precipitation constant) and between -50% and +50% change
in precipitation (holding temperature constant) in 20% intervals. Results are summarized in
Table 6, and graphically shown in Figures A2 and A3 in the appendix. Consistent with our
previous projections, we use 1960-1989 as the baseline to which we compare future scenarios.
Our results show that outmigration increases nonlinearly with temperature increases. This
is due to the fact that predicted yield impacts are highly nonlinear in temperature. If
temperature rises by 1◦ C, on average about 0.6% of each rural county in the Corn Belt
would out-migrate, yet a 5◦ C rise in temperature would on average induce 9.3% of the adult
population to leave their county. This nonlinear relationship is in accordance with the general
  18
     One approach is to sample model predictions from different global climate models to approximate climate
uncertainty (Burke et al. 2011). Since these models are not stochastic in nature, we prefer to display the
range of predicted climate impacts using uniform scenarios as there is limited variation within each model
for a geographically confined area like the Corn Belt.



                                                    18
finding of the impact literature that warming is likely to be increasingly harmful for human
society in virtually all aspects.
    The impacts of precipitation changes on outmigration are relatively small. The projected
change in outmigration rates never exceeds 2% although precipitation levels change between
a decline of 50% and an increase of 50%. Although future changes in temperature and
precipitation are expected to be related, agricultural-related outmigration is much more
driven by the former. Our results suggest that focusing on predicted temperature changes
will give the bulk of the predicted impact.


5    Conclusions
We have examined the sensitivity of U.S. internal migration to weather-induced changes in
crop yields using data for the most recent period of 1970-2009. Consistent with previous
theoretical studies that link migration decisions to economic opportunities in source and
destination counties, we find that county-level outmigration is negatively associated with
crop yields in the Corn Belt. The effect is largest for young adults, and we observe no
response for people 60 years or older. If we do not instrument yield shocks with weather,
the estimated relationship becomes much closer to zero, demonstrating the importance of
relying on yield shocks that are due to exogenous weather patterns.
    Our results suggest a nontrivial effect of climate change on future internal U.S. population
movements. Based on the Hadley III model B2 scenario, with other factors held constant
and using the 1960-1989 period as a baseline, climate change is expected to increase 5-year
net outmigration rates on average by 3.7 percentage points for the population aged 15-59 in
the medium term (2020-2049). Long run effects are likely to be considerably greater but also
much more uncertain due to growing uncertainty in climate projection with progressively
larger climate changes. While there is uncertainty about the exact amount of future warming,
the consensus estimate suggest that we will experience at least some warming. We present
uniform climate change scenarios to show the possible range of migration responses.
   Historically, policy makers have tried to disuade large scale migration to preserve rural
communities. Our research suggest that climate change will likely put further pressure on
outmigration from predominately agricultural rural areas. We believe that future research
should explore in more detail the underlying determinants of the yield-migration relationship
for the areas we highlighted. Our tentative evidence suggest that adjustments in non-farm
employment, rather than farm employment, might be the main mechanism through which


                                              19
weather-related yield shocks generate outmigration. One possible explanation is that farmers
themselves are already insured by government programs (e.g., crop insurance). In addition,
to accurately forecast future outmigration flows, a range of climate models (in addition to
Hadley III) should be used to improve confidence. Nevertheless, short-run projections are
likely to be similar because much of the warming under any model is already committed
by past emissions, and the inter-model differences due to differing climate sensitivities grow
strongly with time.



References
Adger, W. Neil. 2006. “Vulnerability.” Global Environmental Change, 16(3): 268–281.

Alvarez, Javier, and Pascal Mossay. 2006. “Estimation of a continuous spatio-temporal
    population model.” Journal of Geographical Systems, 8(3): 307–316.

Beeson, Patricia E., David N. DeJong, and Werner Troesken. 2001. “Population
    growth in U.S. counties, 18401990.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31(6): 669–
    699.

Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo. 1992. “Self-selection
    and internal migration in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics, 32(2): 159–
    185.

Boustan, Leah Platt, Price V. Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2010. “The Effect of
   Internal Migration on Local Labor Markets: American Cities during the Great Depres-
   sion.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(4): 719–746.

Brown, Robert A., and Normal J. Rosenberg. 1997. “Sensitivity of crop yield and
   water use to change in a range of climatic factors and CO2 concentrations: a simulation
   study applying EPIC to the central USA.” Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 83(3-
   4): 171–203.

Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker
   Satyanath. 2011. “Incorporating Climate Uncertainty Into Estimates of Climate
   Change Impacts, With Applications to US and African Agriculture.” NBER Working
   Paper 17092.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-
   Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 90(3): 414–427.



                                             20
Cline, William. 2007. Global warming and agriculture: Impact estimates by country. Wash-
    ington, DC:Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal
   of Econometrics, 92(1): 1–45.

Cook, Benjamin I., Ron L. Miller, and Richard Seager. 2009. “Amplification of
   the North American Dust Bowl drought through human-induced land degradation.”
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
   106(13): 4997–5001.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Climate
    Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.”
    American Economic Review, 97(1): 354–385.

Dimitri, Carolyn, Anne Effland, and Neilson Conklin. 2005. The 20th Century Trans-
   formation of U.S. Agriculture and Farm Policy. United States Department of Agricul-
   ture - Economic Research Service: Economic Information Bulletin Number 3.

Duquette, Eric N. 2010. “Dissertation: Choice Difficulty and Risk Perceptions in Envi-
   ronmental Economics.” University of Oregon.

Eichenlaub, Suzanne C., Stewart E. Tolnay, and J. Trent Alexander. 2010. “Moving
    Out but Not Up: Economic Outcomes in the Great Migration.” American Sociological
    Review, 75(February): 101–125.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. 2010. “Linkages
    among climate change, crop yields and MexicoUS cross-border migration.” Proceedings
    of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 107(32): 14257–14262.

Ferrie, Joseph P. 2003. Internal Migration. Vol. Historical Statistics of the United States:
    Millennial Edition, New York:Cambridge University Press.

Fisher, Anthony C., W. Michael Hanemann, Michael J. Roberts, and Wolfram
    Schlenker. Forthcoming. “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from
    Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather: Comment.” American Eco-
    nomic Review.

Hobbs, Frank, and Nicole Stoops. 2002. Demographic trends in the 20th century. U.S.
   Census Bureau, Census 2000 Special Reports, Series CENSR-4,.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2009. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short
   and Long-run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” NBER Working Paper No.
   15605.

Karl, Thomas R., Jerry M. Melillo, and Thomas C. Peterson. 2009. Global Climate
    Change Impacts in the United States. New York:Cambridge University Press.

                                            21
Key, Nigel D., and Michael J. Roberts. 2007. “Do Government Payments Influence
    Farm Size and Survival?” Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 32(2): 330–
    348.

Leighton, Michelle. 2009. Migration and Slow-Onset Disasters. Vol. Migration and Envi-
    ronment: Assessing the Evidence, Geneva, Switzerland:International Organization for
    Migration.

Lobell, David B., and Gregory P. Asner. 2003. “Climate and Management Contribu-
   tions to Recent Trends in U.S. Agricultural Yields.” Science, 299(5609): 1032.

Long, Stephen P., Elizabeth A. Ainsworth, Andrew D. B. Leakey, Josef Nos-
   berger, and Donald R. Ort. 2006. “Food for Thought: Lower-Than-Expected Crop
   Yield Stimulation with Rising CO2 Concentrations.” Science, 312: 1918–1921.

McIntosh, Molly Fifer. 2008. “Measuring the Labor Market Impacts of Hurricane Katrina
   Migration: Evidence from Houston, Texas.” American Economic Review, 98(2): 54–57.

McLeman, Richard, and Barry Smit. 2006. “Migration as an Adaptation to Climate
   Change.” Climatic Change, 76(1-2): 31–53.

McLeman, Robert. 2006. “Migration Out of 1930s Rural Eastern Oklahoma: Insights for
   Climate Change Research.” Great Plains Quarterly, 26(1): 27–40.

McLeman, Robert, Dick Mayo, Earl Strebeck, and Barry Smit. 2008. “Drought
   adaptation in rural eastern Oklahoma in the 1930s: lessons for climate change adapta-
   tion research.” Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(4): 379–400.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. “The Impact
   of Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis.” American Economic Review,
   84(4): 753–771.

Rappaport, Jordan. 2007. “Moving to nice weather.” Regional Science and Urban Eco-
   nomics, 37(3): 375–398.

Reilly, John M. 2002. Agriculture: the potential consequences of climate variability and
    change for the United States. Cambridge University Press.

Reisner, Marc. 1993. Cadillac Desert: The American West and Its Disappearing Water,
    Revised Edition. Penguin.

Roberts, Michael J., and Nigel Key. 2008. “Agricultural Payments and Land Concentra-
   tion: A Semiparametric Spatial Regression Analysis.” American Journal of Agricultural
   Economics, 90(3): 627–643.

Rosenzweig, Cynthia, and Daniel Hillel. 1998. Climate change and the global harvest.
   Oxford University Press.

                                           22
Rosenzweig, Cynthia, Francesco N. Tubiello, Richard Goldberg, Evan Mills, and
   Janine Bloomfield. 2002. “Increased crop damage in the US from excess precipitation
   under climate change.” Global Environmental Change, 12(3): 197–202.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature Effects
    Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 106(37): 15594–15598.

Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. “Will
    U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the
    Hedonic Approach.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 395–406.

Schubert, Siegfried D., Max J. Suarez, Philip J. Pegion, Randal D. Koster,
    and Julio T. Bacmeister. 2004. “On the Cause of the 1930s Dust Bowl.” Science,
    303(5665): 1855–1859.

Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen andM. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.
    Tignor, and H.L. Miller, ed. 2007. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
    Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press.

White, Katherine J. Curtis. 2008. “Population change and farm dependence: Temporal
   and spatial variation in the U.S. great plains,19002000.” Demography, 45(2): 363–386.




                                           23
                               Figure 1: Counties Used in Regressions

                              Panel A: Counties with Corn Yields




                           Panel B: Counties with Soybean Yields




Notes: Figure displays counties in the eastern United States (east of the 100 degree meridian) where migration
and yield data are available. States covering the Corn Belt are shown in blue, while other states are shown
in red. Different shading indicate the number of yield observations in the county for corn in the top panel
and soybeans in the bottom panel.




                                                     24
Figure 2: Predicted Changes in Net Outmigration Under Climate Change (Hadley III - B2
Scenario)

               Panel A: Predicted Impact by Mid-Century (2020-2049)




             Panel B: Predicted Impact by End of Century (2070-2099)




Notes: Figure displays predicted changes in net outmigration rates for counties in the Corn Belt with at
least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009 that had less than 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 (colored blue in
Figure 1) under the Hadley III - B2 scenario. Panel A shows predicted impacts by the middle of the century
(2020-2049) compared to a 1960-1989 baseline. The bottom panel shows predicted impacts by the end of
the century (2070-2099) compared to 1960-1989.      25
                                           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                        Data Over 5-Year Periods
                                           1970-74   1975-79    1980-84   1985-89   1990-94    1995-99 2000-04   2005-2009
                                                                  Panel A: 892 Counties in Corn Belt
      Migration Rate Age [15,60) (%)         -1.34     0.69        4.96      4.75      -1.22     -0.60    1.35     2.53
        (s.d.)                              (7.75)   (6.97)      (4.72)    (5.97)     (5.63)    (6.70)  (5.75)    (4.59)
      Migration Rate Males [15,60) (%)       -1.90     0.88        5.16      4.98      -1.09     -1.33    1.34     2.56
        (s.d.)                              (8.10)   (7.06)      (5.21)    (6.37)     (6.02)    (7.62)  (5.94)    (5.50)
      Migration Rate Females [15,60) (%)     -0.88     0.46        4.74      4.53      -1.35      0.15    1.34     2.46
        (s.d.)                              (7.57)   (7.04)      (4.60)    (5.74)     (5.48)    (6.41)  (5.78)    (4.59)
      Migration Rate Age [15,30) (%)          0.10     4.84      10.25     11.08        4.25      5.68    3.09    15.17
        (s.d.)                             (10.81)   (9.81)      (7.11)    (9.12)     (8.23)   (11.30) (13.93)    (9.64)
      Migration Rate Age [30,45) (%)         -3.48    -2.56        2.37      1.36      -4.24     -5.30   -0.12     -3.99
        (s.d.)                              (6.94)   (6.84)      (4.42)    (4.95)     (6.41)    (7.15)  (3.93)    (6.28)
      Migration Rate Age [45,59) (%)         -1.49    -2.49       -0.77     -0.49      -4.18     -1.17    1.24     -3.44
        (s.d.)                              (6.78)   (6.49)      (5.39)    (5.82)     (6.36)    (7.96)  (2.70)    (5.79)
      Migration Rate Age [60,oo) (%)          2.80     1.52        2.29      3.01       2.72      1.14    2.78     1.22
        (s.d.)                              (3.65)   (3.14)      (2.59)    (2.93)     (3.00)    (3.63)  (2.94)    (3.98)
      Corn Area (1000 acres)                  48.8     55.2        54.0      52.5       56.0      57.7    60.1     65.9
        (s.d.)                              (49.4)   (56.0)      (54.2)    (52.1)     (56.4)    (56.9)  (56.5)    (61.2)
      Corn Yield (bushel/acre)                77.0     86.9        89.7    101.7      107.7      114.5  128.8     139.9
        (s.d.)                              (18.1)   (19.7)      (20.4)    (21.0)     (22.1)    (20.5)  (24.6)    (27.0)
      Degree Days 10-29◦ C                   1432     1462        1434      1515       1417      1422    1453      1464
        (s.d.)                              (250)    (248)       (240)     (243)      (262)      (241)  (265)     (256)
      Degree Days Above 29◦ C                 35.0     35.7        44.8      42.1       27.1      31.5    32.3     32.3
        (s.d.)                              (27.0)   (26.1)      (33.6)    (21.8)     (22.6)    (22.5)  (29.2)    (24.9)
      Soybean Area (1000 acres)               33.9     38.8        44.5      44.9       47.8      58.4    65.6     63.4
        (s.d.)                              (40.2)   (44.7)      (46.6)    (45.4)     (46.3)    (51.0)  (53.2)    (50.7)
      Soybean Yield (bushel/acre)             25.5     28.8        29.0      32.1       35.5      37.3    37.8     41.6
        (s.d.)                               (5.2)    (5.8)       (6.3)     (5.8)      (6.9)     (6.7)   (7.2)     (7.8)
      Degree Days 10-30◦ C                   1460     1485        1455      1533       1434      1443    1472      1483
        (s.d.)                              (251)    (249)       (245)     (247)      (263)      (241)  (266)     (256)
      Degree Days Above 30◦ C                 23.1     23.5        32.2      28.6       17.6      20.6    21.6     21.2
        (s.d.)                              (21.0)   (20.3)      (27.7)    (16.2)     (16.8)    (16.7)  (23.0)    (18.6)
      Precipitation (cm)                      54.6     55.5        55.4      49.5       57.7      58.6    55.5     56.4
        (s.d.)                              (11.0)    (9.6)      (10.1)     (8.1)      (8.3)    (10.4)   (9.9)    (10.9)
                                                               Panel B: 805 Counties Outside Corn Belt
      Migration Rate Age [15,60) (%)         -3.22     -2.72       0.37      1.94      -2.02     -5.46   -0.81      -0.99
        (s.d.)                              (8.56)   (14.90)     (7.00)    (8.35)     (6.96)    (8.81)  (6.85)     (7.05)
      Migration Rate Males [15,60) (%)       -3.47     -2.23       0.54      2.22      -1.96     -6.86   -0.73      -1.00
        (s.d.)                              (9.11)   (15.14)     (7.67)    (8.78)     (8.37)   (12.07)  (7.39)     (8.73)
      Migration Rate Females [15,60) (%)     -3.06     -3.24       0.19      1.70      -2.06     -4.14   -0.82      -0.98
        (s.d.)                              (8.30)   (14.83)     (6.66)    (8.10)     (6.52)    (8.17)  (6.79)     (6.76)
      Migration Rate Age [15,30) (%)         -0.21      2.37       4.58      6.82       2.58     -0.79   -3.14     10.13
        (s.d.)                             (11.94)   (16.52)     (9.37)   (11.91)    (10.43)   (14.07) (14.08)    (11.33)
      Migration Rate Age [30,45) (%)         -6.52     -7.51      -2.03     -1.41      -5.48     -8.34   -0.69      -5.34
        (s.d.)                              (8.13)   (17.49)     (7.09)    (6.79)     (6.86)    (9.02)  (5.94)     (8.05)
      Migration Rate Age [45,59) (%)         -4.61     -6.45      -4.22     -1.77      -4.10     -7.57    0.69      -7.93
        (s.d.)                              (6.35)   (12.34)     (6.21)    (6.80)     (6.61)    (8.56)  (3.36)     (8.12)
      Migration Rate Age [60,oo) (%)          0.65      0.36       2.46      2.62       1.93     -0.07    2.53      -0.53
        (s.d.)                              (4.35)    (9.03)     (3.96)    (4.33)     (4.05)    (5.21)  (3.83)     (5.44)
      Corn Area (1000 acres)                  7.4       8.3         7.5       6.6       6.3        6.9     7.3       8.6
        (s.d.)                              (10.5)    (11.9)     (10.8)     (9.5)      (9.0)     (9.5)  (10.1)     (11.7)
      Corn Yield (bushel/acre)                52.9      59.9       67.9      76.4       84.4      88.5  105.5      108.5
        (s.d.)                              (16.4)    (17.7)     (16.7)    (16.8)     (17.3)    (18.8)  (23.1)     (27.1)
      Degree Days 10-29◦ C                   1888      1917       1894      1948       1917      1926    1944       1944
        (s.d.)                              (387)     (382)      (389)     (380)      (378)      (395)  (401)      (392)
      Degree Days Above 29◦ C                 61.9      69.7       85.5      81.1       69.7      84.1    71.5      85.4
        (s.d.)                              (43.9)    (43.6)     (54.7)    (46.4)     (43.7)    (56.7)  (51.1)     (53.7)
      Soybean Area (1000 acres)               21.1      28.1       28.8      19.8       17.1      18.6    16.7      18.4
        (s.d.)                              (39.2)    (46.0)     (43.5)    (34.2)     (32.3)    (34.4)  (30.2)     (32.7)
      Soybean Yield (bushel/acre)             21.9      22.9       21.3      23.5       26.3      25.7    30.6      31.4
        (s.d.)                               (2.7)     (2.9)      (3.8)     (3.9)      (5.0)     (4.4)   (6.1)      (6.7)
      Degree Days 10-30◦ C                   2012      2045       1990      2047       2020      2025    1975       1989
        (s.d.)                              (253)     (260)      (295)     (281)      (280)      (287)  (360)      (343)
      Degree Days Above 30◦ C                 42.2      52.2       63.8      57.3       49.8      59.8    46.0      57.1
        (s.d.)                              (25.8)    (28.3)     (34.7)    (25.8)     (23.3)    (31.2)  (30.2)     (31.6)
      Precipitation (cm)                      71.0      70.2       67.7      60.5       69.5      63.6    65.3      61.3
        (s.d.)                               (9.4)    (10.8)     (10.3)     (8.1)      (8.5)     (9.8)   (9.3)     (10.1)



Notes: Sample means and standard deviations by 5-year periods for which we have migration data (1970-
2009). Counties with less than 100,000 people in 2000 that have at least 21 yield observations for either corn
or soybeans are included.




                                                                26
                                                          Table 2: Weather and Crop Yields

                                                                  Counties in Corn       Belt            Counties     Outside Corn Belt
                                                            Corn+Soy       Corn          Soybeans      Corn+Soy          Corn     Soybeans
              Moderate Heat (1000 degree days)               0.572∗∗∗    0.613∗∗∗         0.483∗∗∗       -0.044         -0.133     0.618∗∗∗
                                                              (0.085)     (0.133)         (0.099)       (0.179)        (0.251)     (0.114)
                                                                    ∗∗∗
              Extreme Heat (100 degree days)                 -0.676      -0.589∗∗∗       -0.747∗∗∗       -0.099       -0.286  ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                  -0.483∗∗∗
                                                              (0.069)     (0.093)         (0.049)       (0.067)        (0.074)     (0.082)
                                                                    ∗∗∗
              Precipitation (m)                              1.325       1.664∗∗∗         1.357∗∗∗       0.651          0.452        0.525
                                                              (0.301)     (0.277)         (0.225)       (0.461)        (0.754)     (0.464)
              Precipitation Squared (m2 )                    -1.182 ∗∗∗
                                                                         -1.465∗∗∗       -1.187∗∗∗       -0.366         -0.558      -0.245
                                                              (0.249)     (0.250)         (0.202)       (0.306)        (0.545)     (0.310)
27




              F-stat (1st stage)                               36.98       24.52           169.98         6.93           9.97        18.14
              p-value (1st stage)                             1.2e-06     1.1e-05         1.9e-10        .0023         3.9e-04     3.1e-05
              R-squared                                       0.8205      0.8376           0.7849       0.5999         0.6636       0.5233
              Observations                                     7086        7078             6413          6102           5628        4442
              Counties                                          892         892              810          805             746         595
              Min. Yield Obs. per County                         21         21               21            21             21          21
              Maximum Population                              100000      100000          100000        100000         100000      100000

     Notes: Table displays first stage results of Panel B in Table 3, i.e., log yields are regressed on four weather variables as well as a quadratic time
     trend and county fixed effects. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1. Regressions include all counties with at most
     100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that had at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009 and are population weighted. Errors are clustered at the state
     level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
 Table 3: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States

                                 Counties in Corn Belt      Counties Outside Corn Belt
                           Corn+Soy      Corn     Soybeans Corn+Soy Corn       Soybeans
                                            Panel A: Linear Time Trend
   Log Yield                -0.184∗∗∗ -0.182∗∗∗ -0.186∗∗∗    -0.074    -0.014    -0.038
                             (0.046)    (0.027)    (0.065)  (0.134)   (0.070)   (0.057)
   F-stat (1st stage)         36.90      23.43      35.90     5.66     10.12     28.48

                                             Panel B: Quadratic Time Trend
   Log Yield                -0.168∗∗∗     -0.165∗∗∗ -0.160∗∗∗   -0.010  0.007                     0.004
                             (0.037)       (0.023)   (0.050)   (0.141) (0.060)                   (0.073)
   F-stat (1st stage)         36.98         24.52    169.98      6.93    9.97                     18.14

                                    Panel C: Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield                -0.167∗∗∗ -0.165∗∗∗ -0.160∗∗∗   -0.001     0.007    0.007
                             (0.036)    (0.022)   (0.048)  (0.142)    (0.061)  (0.072)
   F-stat (1st stage)         35.62      24.59    146.93     6.96       9.97    17.83

                           Panel D: State-specific Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield               -0.155∗∗∗ -0.137∗∗∗ -0.149∗∗∗    -0.032   -0.033    -0.035
                            (0.043)   (0.028)    (0.049)   (0.081)  (0.099)   (0.058)
   F-stat (1st stage)       155.33     24.20     276.92     18.02     9.17     22.71

   Observations               7086          7078           6413          6102         5628         4442
   Counties                   892            892           810           805          746          595

Notes: Tables regresses net outmigration on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as county fixed
effects. Panels differ by included time controls. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1.
Regressions include counties with at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that had at least 21 yield observations
in 1970-2009 and are population weighted. Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance:
    , , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
∗∗∗ ∗∗




                                                      28
Table 4: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration - Heterogeneity between
Subgroups

                                                  Counties in Corn Belt
                                            Corn+Soy      Corn     Soybeans
                                                Panel A: Females Only
                          Log Yield          -0.173∗∗∗ -0.177∗∗∗ -0.167∗∗∗
                                              (0.039)    (0.024)    (0.052)

                                                 Panel B: Males Only
                          Log Yield          -0.161∗∗∗ -0.154∗∗∗ -0.155∗∗∗
                                              (0.035)   (0.023)   (0.049)

                                                Panel C: Ages [15,30)
                          Log Yield          -0.283∗∗∗ -0.284∗∗∗ -0.268∗∗
                                              (0.091)   (0.069)  (0.107)

                                                Panel D: Ages [30,45)
                          Log Yield          -0.154∗∗∗ -0.152∗∗∗ -0.152∗∗∗
                                              (0.020)   (0.016)   (0.034)

                                                 Panel E: Ages [45,60)
                          Log Yield            -0.022     -0.017   -0.006
                                              (0.024)    (0.023)  (0.021)

                                                 Panel F: Ages [60,oo)
                          Log Yield            -0.004     -0.002   0.001
                                              (0.011)    (0.011)  (0.009)

                          Observations          7086          7078          6413
                          Counties               892          892            810

Notes: Tables regresses net outmigration on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as a quadratic time
trend and county fixed effects (Panel B in Table 3). Columns correspond to first three columns of Table 3, but
panels limit the data set to population subgroups. Panels A and B look separately at the migration decisions
of males and females, while Panels C-F look at different age ranges (both sexes combined). Regressions
include counties with at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 and are population weighted. Errors are clustered
at the state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.




                                                       29
Table 5: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Employment: Annual State-Level Regression

                                      Counties in Corn Belt        Counties Outside Corn Belt
                               Corn+Soy        Corn    Soybeans Corn+Soy       Corn    Soybeans
                                                Panel A: Farm Employment BEA
        Log Yieldt              -0.048∗∗      -0.037     -0.042   -0.038      -0.040    -0.130∗∗
                                 (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.029)  (0.087)     (0.038)     (0.050)
        Log Yieldt−1              -0.023      -0.015     -0.019   -0.025      -0.041     -0.113∗
                                 (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.034)  (0.085)     (0.036)     (0.058)
        Log Yieldt−2              -0.006      -0.002      0.004   -0.013      -0.070     -0.094∗
                                 (0.016)     (0.017)    (0.027)  (0.076)     (0.046)     (0.053)
        Log Yieldt−3              -0.020      -0.013     -0.013   -0.003      -0.062    -0.064∗∗
                                 (0.019)     (0.017)    (0.027)  (0.050)     (0.048)     (0.032)
        Log Yieldt−4               0.009       0.012      0.009    0.043      -0.004      0.005
                                 (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.021)  (0.042)     (0.036)     (0.027)
        Cumulative Effect         -0.088      -0.055     -0.061   -0.036      -0.217     -0.396∗
          (s.e.)                 (0.090)     (0.088)    (0.131)  (0.334)     (0.187)     (0.206)
        Observations                520         520        514      672        672         563

                                            Panel B: Non-Farm Employment BEA
        Log Yieldt              0.055∗∗     0.046∗∗    0.044   -0.100∗∗ -0.085∗∗∗               -0.077∗∗∗
                                 (0.026)     (0.022)  (0.031)   (0.050)  (0.021)                  (0.025)
        Log Yieldt−1            0.057∗∗∗    0.048∗∗∗  0.056∗∗    -0.083 -0.060∗∗∗                -0.072∗∗
                                 (0.020)     (0.016)  (0.025)   (0.051)  (0.020)                  (0.030)
        Log Yieldt−2            0.056∗∗∗    0.051∗∗∗ 0.050∗∗∗    -0.041   -0.037                   -0.037
                                 (0.017)     (0.013)  (0.018)   (0.047)  (0.030)                  (0.031)
        Log Yieldt−3            0.048∗∗∗    0.040∗∗∗ 0.051∗∗∗     0.014   -0.000                    0.021
                                 (0.013)     (0.009)  (0.017)   (0.028)  (0.024)                  (0.021)
        Log Yieldt−4            0.035∗∗∗    0.028∗∗∗  0.037∗∗    -0.006   -0.021                    0.019
                                 (0.013)     (0.007)  (0.016)   (0.022)  (0.020)                  (0.015)
        Cumulative Effect       0.251∗∗∗    0.213∗∗∗  0.239∗∗    -0.217  -0.204∗                   -0.146
          (s.e.)                (0.082)      (0.059)  (0.101)   (0.190)  (0.104)                  (0.113)
        Observations               520         520      514        672     672                       563

                                             Panel C:   Non-Farm      Employment BLS
        Log Yieldt              0.083∗∗      0.067∗∗     0.080∗        -0.091∗ -0.086∗∗∗        -0.079∗∗∗
                                 (0.034)     (0.028)     (0.045)       (0.051)  (0.023)           (0.030)
        Log Yieldt−1            0.079∗∗∗     0.066∗∗∗   0.086∗∗∗        -0.076 -0.064∗∗∗         -0.078∗∗
                                 (0.026)     (0.021)     (0.033)       (0.052)  (0.022)           (0.037)
        Log Yieldt−2            0.087∗∗∗     0.075∗∗∗   0.086∗∗∗        -0.027   -0.035            -0.033
                                 (0.024)     (0.018)     (0.025)       (0.048)  (0.034)           (0.038)
        Log Yieldt−3            0.074∗∗∗     0.061∗∗∗   0.084∗∗∗         0.025    0.002             0.025
                                 (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.024)       (0.029)  (0.027)           (0.025)
        Log Yieldt−4            0.051∗∗∗     0.042∗∗∗   0.055∗∗∗         0.003   -0.019             0.026
                                 (0.016)     (0.011)     (0.019)       (0.021)  (0.023)           (0.017)
        Cumulative Effect       0.375∗∗∗     0.311∗∗∗   0.390∗∗∗        -0.165  -0.201∗            -0.140
          (s.e.)                (0.113)      (0.083)     (0.139)       (0.191)  (0.117)           (0.137)
        Observations               520          520        514            672      672               563

Notes: Tables regresses annual state-level employment on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as a
quadratic time trend and state fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance:
   , , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
∗∗∗ ∗∗
                                                        30
          Table 6: Predicted Changes in Net Outmigration Under Climate Change

                                                                       Increased            Decreased
                                  Predicted Outmigration Rate        Outmigration         Outmigration
                                  Mean SDev       Min    Max       Total N Sign. N      Total N Sign. N
  Hadley III-B2 (2020-2049)        3.67 (2.85) -1.38 11.02             820       761         72        37
  Hadley III-B2 (2070-2099)       11.32 (5.50) -1.81 22.38             877       854         15         2
  Uniform +1◦ C                    0.61 (0.74) -0.80     2.92          655       530        237        87
  Uniform +2◦ C                    1.79 (1.60) -1.48     6.51          761       608        131        49
  Uniform +3◦ C                    3.60 (2.56) -1.98 10.81             829       736         63        20
  Uniform +4◦ C                    6.08 (3.62) -2.19 15.87             862       809         30         4
  Uniform +5◦ C                    9.30 (4.78) -2.02 21.73             884       846          8         1
  Uniform -50% Precipitation       1.43 (0.43) -0.01     2.04          891       813          1         0
  Uniform -30% Precipitation       0.50 (0.36) -0.65     1.07          796       543         96         6
  Uniform -10% Precipitation       0.05 (0.16) -0.43     0.31          551       317        341       146
  Uniform +10% Precipitation       0.07 (0.19) -0.28     0.65          542       383        350       184
  Uniform +30% Precipitation       0.58 (0.69) -0.73     2.60          680       559        212       102
  Uniform +50% Precipitation       1.56 (1.34) -1.05     5.41          744       679        148        49

Notes: Tables displays predicted increases in net outmigration under various climate change scenarios for the
baseline model (First column of Panel B in Table 3). The first two rows use medium and long-term projections
under the Hadley III - B2 scenario. The remaining columns display predicted changes under uniform climate
change scenarios. The first four columns summarize the predicted change in net outmigration rates. The
last four columns give the number of counties that are predicted to have an increase or a decrease in net
outmigration rates. For each category we give the total number of counties as well as the number of counties
that have a statistically significant increase or decrease. The spatial distribution of impacts is given in
Figures 2 for the first two rows and Figures A2 and A3 in the appendix for the remaining uniform scenarios.




                                                     31
                                                               Figure A1: State-level Log Yields and Weather

                                                   Illinois                                                                                                Indiana                                                                                   Iowa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.5
                                                                                                                        5
                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
   Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                           Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)
                                                                                                                                4.5
                       4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.5
                                                                                                                      4
             4




                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                          3.5
  3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.5
                 3




                                                                                                                        3
                                  1970   1980       1990       2000                                2010                                 1970      1980       1990      2000           2010                                          1970   1980       1990       2000   2010
                                                    Year                                                                                                     Year                                                                                     Year


                                                  Kansas                                                                                                   Kentucky                                                                                 Michigan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                 5




                                                                                                                        5
                            4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4.5
   Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                          Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)
                                                                                                                                4.5
                   4




                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
          3.5




                                                                                                           3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.5
  3




                                                                                                                        3
                 2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                  1970   1980       1990       2000                                2010                                 1970      1980       1990      2000           2010                                          1970   1980       1990       2000   2010
                                                    Year                                                                                                     Year                                                                                     Year


                                                 Minnesota                                                                                                 Missouri                                                                                Nebraska
                                                                                                                        5
                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
   Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                          Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)
                                                                                                                                4.5
                        4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4.5
                                                                                                                      4
             4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                          3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.5
  3.5




                                                                                                                        3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                 3




                                  1970   1980       1990       2000                                2010                                 1970      1980       1990      2000           2010                                          1970   1980       1990       2000   2010
                                                    Year                                                                                                     Year                                                                                     Year


                                                North Dakota                                                                                                Ohio                                                                                  South Dakota
                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                        5
                           4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4.5
  Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                           Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)
                                                                                                                                4.5
                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                     4
        3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.5
                                                                                                          3.5
                 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                 2.5




                                                                                                                        3




                                  1970   1980       1990       2000                                2010                                 1970      1980       1990      2000           2010                                          1970   1980       1990       2000   2010
                                                    Year                                                                                                     Year                                                                                     Year


                                                                                                                                               Wisconsin
                                                                                    5
                                                                      Log Yields (Bushel / Acre)
                                                                                            4.5




                                                                                                                                                                              Log Corn Yield
                                                                                                                                                                              Predicted Log Corn Yield

                                                                                                                                                                              Predicted Yield Trend
                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                              Log Soybeans Yield
                                                                                                                                                                              Predicted Log Soybeans Yield

                                                                                                                                                                              Predicted Yield Trend
                                                                      3.5           3




                                                                                                   1970                                 1980     1990       2000      2010
                                                                                                                                                 Year


                                                                                                                                                           A1
Notes: State-level yields, yield trend, and predicted yields for states in the Corn Belt.
   Figure A2: Predicted Changes in Net Outmigration (Uniform Temperature Scenarios)

             Panel A: Uniform Temperature Increase (+1◦ C and +2◦ C)




             Panel B: Uniform Temperature Increase (+3◦ C and +4◦ C)




                     Panel C: Uniform Temperature Increase (+5◦ C)




Notes: Figure displays predicted changes in net outmigration rates for counties in Corn Belt that had less
than 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 and at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009 (colored blue in Figure 1)
under uniform temperature increases ranging from +1◦ C to +5◦ C.

                                                   A2
  Figure A3: Predicted Changes in Net Outmigration (Uniform Precipitation Scenarios)

              Panel A: Uniform Precipitation Change (-50% and -30%)




              Panel B: Uniform Precipitation Change (-10% and +10%)




             Panel C: Uniform Precipitation Change (+30% and +50%)




Notes: Figure displays predicted changes in net outmigration rates for counties in Corn Belt that had less
than 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 and at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009 (colored blue in Figure 1)
under uniform precipitation changes ranging from -50% to +50%.

                                                   A3
                 Table A1: Weather and Crop Yields - Panel of Annual Yields

                                             Counties in Corn Belt        Counties Outside Corn Belt
 Log Yield                                     Corn      Soybeans            Corn       Soybeans
                                                   ∗∗∗
 Moderate Heat (1000 degree days)            0.421        0.497∗∗∗          0.024        0.278∗∗∗
                                              (0.101)     (0.048)          (0.099)       (0.072)
                                                    ∗∗∗
 Extreme Heat (100 degree days)              -0.738      -0.659∗∗∗        -0.592 ∗∗∗
                                                                                        -0.557∗∗∗
                                              (0.110)     (0.039)          (0.094)       (0.030)
                                                   ∗∗∗
 Precipitation (m)                           1.636        1.627∗∗∗          0.329        1.302∗∗∗
                                              (0.381)     (0.247)          (0.389)       (0.267)
 Precipitation Squared (m2 )                 -1.477∗∗∗   -1.315∗∗∗          -0.323      -0.860∗∗∗
                                              (0.346)     (0.220)          (0.278)       (0.158)
 R-squared                                    0.6139       0.5379          0.5186         0.4094
 Observations                                  34788       31154            26124         20492
 Counties                                       892         810              746           595

Notes: Table replicates Table 2 except that it uses annual log yields and the regressions are unweighted.
Moderate heat is measured by degree days 10-29◦C for corn and 10-30◦C for soybeans, extreme heat by
degree days above 29◦ C for corn and 30◦ C for soybeans. Regressions include all counties with at most
100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that had at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009. Counties in the Corn Belt
sample are shown in Figure 1. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                    A4
Table A2: Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States - OLS Regressions

                            Counties in Corn Belt        Counties Outside Corn Belt
                        Corn+Soy Corn Soybeans Corn+Soy Corn                Soybeans
                                        Panel A: Linear Time Trend
     Log Yield           -0.028∗    -0.018    -0.012    -0.011     0.010    -0.037∗∗∗
                         (0.015)   (0.015) (0.018)     (0.016)    (0.014)    (0.014)

                                           Panel B: Quadratic Time Trend
                                 ∗∗
     Log Yield            -0.030         -0.016   -0.024    -0.008   0.004                      -0.024
                          (0.013)       (0.013) (0.016)    (0.014)  (0.013)                    (0.017)

                                 Panel C: Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
     Log Yield            -0.030∗∗   -0.016   -0.024    -0.007    0.004     -0.024
                          (0.013)   (0.013) (0.016)    (0.014)   (0.013)   (0.016)

                        Panel D: State-specific Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
     Log Yield            -0.014   0.001    -0.019      0.001    0.011     -0.023
                         (0.016)  (0.016) (0.018)      (0.015)  (0.013)   (0.019)

     Observations           7086         7078         6413           6102          5628          4442
     Counties               892          892           810            805           746          595

Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that yields are not instrumented with observed weather shocks. Panels
differ by included time controls. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1. Regressions
include counties with at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that had at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009
and are population weighted. Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and
∗
  stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                      A5
Table A3: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States -
Unweighted Regressions

                                 Counties in Corn Belt      Counties Outside Corn Belt
                           Corn+Soy      Corn     Soybeans Corn+Soy Corn       Soybeans
                                            Panel A: Linear Time Trend
   Log Yield                -0.193∗∗∗ -0.195∗∗∗ -0.192∗∗∗    -0.120    -0.047    -0.055
                             (0.042)    (0.027)    (0.063)  (0.119)   (0.065)   (0.049)
   F-stat (1st stage)         13.67       9.10      85.82    12.54     20.06     29.82

                                             Panel B: Quadratic Time Trend
   Log Yield                -0.186∗∗∗     -0.185∗∗∗ -0.178∗∗∗   -0.082  -0.023                    -0.023
                             (0.036)       (0.025)   (0.055)   (0.131) (0.055)                   (0.064)
   F-stat (1st stage)         13.21          9.33     86.29     18.79   13.87                     19.63

                                    Panel C: Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield                -0.186∗∗∗ -0.185∗∗∗ -0.179∗∗∗   -0.075     -0.023   -0.019
                             (0.035)    (0.025)   (0.054)  (0.132)    (0.056)  (0.064)
   F-stat (1st stage)         13.04      9.23      79.50    19.07      13.95    19.12

                           Panel D: State-specific Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield               -0.169∗∗∗ -0.143∗∗∗ -0.167∗∗∗    -0.052   -0.046    -0.067
                            (0.045)   (0.027)    (0.054)   (0.083)  (0.094)   (0.056)
   F-stat (1st stage)        76.18     16.91      66.89     17.87     7.27     25.28

   Observations               7086          7078          6413           6102         5628         4442
   Counties                   892            892          810            805          746          595

Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that regressions are unweighted. Table regresses net outmigration on
weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as county fixed effects. Panels differ by included time controls.
Regressions include all counties with at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that had at least 21 yield observa-
tions in 1970-2009. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1. Errors are clustered at the
state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                     A6
Table A4: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States -
Unweighted Regressions Including Urban Counties

                                  Counties in Corn Belt      Counties Outside Corn Belt
                            Corn+Soy      Corn     Soybeans Corn+Soy Corn       Soybeans
                                             Panel A: Linear Time Trend
   Log Yield                 -0.179∗∗∗ -0.183∗∗∗ -0.179∗∗∗    -0.050    -0.032    -0.042
                              (0.037)    (0.025)    (0.057)  (0.108)   (0.065)   (0.044)
   F-stat (1st stage)          13.83       9.62      90.79    19.99     20.28     35.41

                                               Panel B: Quadratic Time Trend
   Log Yield                 -0.172∗∗∗      -0.173∗∗∗ -0.166∗∗∗   -0.002  -0.007                       -0.004
                              (0.032)        (0.023)   (0.049)   (0.112) (0.056)                      (0.057)
   F-stat (1st stage)          13.47           9.72     95.66     17.29   16.01                        24.65

                                     Panel C: Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield                 -0.172∗∗∗ -0.173∗∗∗ -0.166∗∗∗   0.004      -0.007   -0.002
                              (0.031)    (0.023)   (0.048)  (0.111)    (0.056)  (0.056)
   F-stat (1st stage)          13.30      9.68      87.01    17.28      16.04    24.10

                            Panel D: State-specific Restricted Cubic                    Splines (3 knots)
   Log Yield                -0.160∗∗∗ -0.140∗∗∗ -0.157∗∗∗    0.011                       0.003     -0.043
                             (0.042)   (0.026)    (0.049)   (0.079)                     (0.094)   (0.051)
   F-stat (1st stage)         76.46     17.17      75.26     26.85                       12.43     34.60

   Observations                8077           8069           7397           7571          6986         5440
   Counties                    1016           1016           933            995           921          732

Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that regressions are unweighted and also include counties with more
than 100,000 inhabitants. Counties still had to have at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009 to be
included. Tables regresses net outmigration on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as county fixed
effects. Panels differ by included time controls. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1.
Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                        A7
Table A5: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States -
Sensitivity to Minimum Number of Yield Observations

                                    Counties in Corn Belt               Counties Outside Corn Belt
                                  (1a)      (1b)      (1c)               (2a)     (2b)      (2c)

                                Panel A: Using Average of Corn and Soybean Yield
      Log Yield                -0.167∗∗∗ -0.168∗∗∗ -0.142∗∗∗ -0.009 -0.010   -0.129
                                (0.036)   (0.037)   (0.033) (0.093) (0.141) (0.128)
      F-stat (1st stage)         40.90     36.98     41.37   13.76   6.93     8.67
      Observations               7258      7086      5976     6771   6102     2696
      Counties                    935       892       747     985     805     337

                                                 Panel B: Using Corn Yield
      Log Yield                -0.163∗∗∗     -0.165∗∗∗ -0.146∗∗∗ 0.015   0.007                   -0.112
                                (0.023)       (0.023)   (0.025) (0.054) (0.060)                 (0.068)
      F-stat (1st stage)         25.82         24.52     43.76   14.67   9.97                     7.14
      Observations               7244          7078      5608    6468    5628                     1808
      Counties                    935           892       701     973     746                     226

                                               Panel C: Using Soybean Yield
      Log Yield                -0.156∗∗∗     -0.160∗∗∗ -0.184∗∗∗ 0.016   0.004                   -0.046
                                (0.044)       (0.050)   (0.056) (0.060) (0.073)                 (0.080)
      F-stat (1st stage)        135.47        169.98     47.68   19.71   18.14                    6.10
      Observations               6732          6413      4728    5173    4442                     1232
      Counties                    892           810       591     806     595                     154
      Min. Yield Obs.              1             21       40       1      21                       40

Notes: Table replicates Panel B of Table 3 but changes the cutoff when counties are included. Columns
(a)-(c) limit the analysis to counties that have progressively larger numbers of yield observations per county
in 1970-2009. Counties were only included if they had at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000. Tables regresses
net outmigration on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as county fixed effects. Panels differ by crop
yield measures used and all regressions include quadratic time controls. Counties in and outside the Corn
Belt are shown in Figure 1. Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗
stand for significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                       A8
Table A6: Weather-Induced Yield Shocks and Net Outmigration in Eastern United States -
Unweighted Regressions with Bootstrapped Errors

                              Counties in Corn Belt        Counties Outside Corn Belt
                         Corn+Soy      Corn    Soybeans Corn+Soy Corn         Soybeans
                                          Panel A: Linear Time Trend
      Log Yield           -0.193∗∗   -0.195∗∗ -0.192∗∗     -0.120    -0.047     -0.055
                          (0.084)    (0.085)    (0.079)   (0.204)   (0.106)    (0.112)

                                            Panel B: Quadratic Time Trend
                                  ∗∗
      Log Yield            -0.186        -0.185∗∗ -0.178∗∗    -0.082  -0.023                       -0.023
                           (0.090)       (0.084)   (0.077)   (0.216) (0.096)                      (0.110)

                                  Panel C: Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
      Log Yield            -0.186∗∗  -0.185∗∗ -0.179∗∗    -0.075    -0.023   -0.019
                           (0.089)   (0.085)   (0.078)   (0.219)   (0.096)  (0.108)

                         Panel D: State-specific Restricted Cubic Splines (3 knots)
      Log Yield            -0.169    -0.143   -0.167∗     -0.052   -0.046    -0.067
                          (0.114)   (0.128)   (0.087)    (0.182)  (0.146)   (0.127)

      Observations           7086          7078          6413           6102          5628          4442
      Counties               892           892           810            805           746            595

Notes: Table replicates Table 3 except that regressions are unweighted and standard errors are obtained
using 100 clustered bootstrap runs where we randomly draw entire 5-year intervals with replacement. Table
regresses net outmigration on weather-instrumented yield shocks as well as county fixed effects. Panels differ
by included time controls. Regressions include all counties with at most 100,000 inhabitants in 2000 that
had at least 21 yield observations in 1970-2009. Counties in and outside the Corn Belt are shown in Figure 1.
Errors are clustered at the state level. Stars indicate significance: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ stand for significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                        A9
         Table A7: Predicted Changes in Net Outmigration Under Climate Change

                                                                Increased       Decreased
                                 Predicted Outmigration Rate  Outmigration    Outmigration
                                 Mean SDev       Min    Max Total N Sign. N Total N Sign. N
                                      Panel A: Log Yields Instrumented with Corn Yields
  Hadley III-B2 (2020-2049)       3.14 (2.66) -1.57 10.19       794       680    98        39
  Hadley III-B2 (2070-2099)       9.78 (5.10) -2.26 20.05       860       828    32         3
  Uniform +1◦ C                   0.45 (0.70) -0.89     2.48    605       417   287        89
  Uniform +2◦ C                   1.41 (1.51) -1.68     5.54    717       524   175        52
  Uniform +3◦ C                   2.93 (2.41) -2.32     9.24    791       620   101        27
  Uniform +4◦ C                   5.05 (3.40) -2.71 13.60       828       720    64         8
  Uniform +5◦ C                   7.80 (4.48) -2.78 18.74       860       798    32         1
  Uniform -50% Precipitation      1.84 (0.51)    0.12   2.55    892       874     0         0
  Uniform -30% Precipitation      0.67 (0.44) -0.72     1.33    819       681    73         5
  Uniform -10% Precipitation      0.08 (0.19) -0.50     0.40    583       394   309       119
  Uniform +10% Precipitation      0.07 (0.23) -0.35     0.77    526       345   366       243
  Uniform +30% Precipitation      0.65 (0.84) -0.91     3.09    663       531   229       160
  Uniform +50% Precipitation      1.81 (1.62) -1.29     6.47    735       663   157        75

                                     Panel B: Log Yields Instrumented with Soybean Yields
  Hadley III-B2 (2020-2049)        3.59 (2.88) -0.98 11.31      754     669       56       14
  Hadley III-B2 (2070-2099)       11.26 (5.49) -1.01 22.51      803     789        7        0
  Uniform +1◦ C                    0.61 (0.75) -0.63   2.90     610     452      200       48
  Uniform +2◦ C                    1.76 (1.61) -1.12   6.47     689     537      121       21
  Uniform +3◦ C                    3.54 (2.59) -1.37 10.76      759     655       51        7
  Uniform +4◦ C                    6.00 (3.68) -1.29 15.80      788     726       22        0
  Uniform +5◦ C                    9.20 (4.86) -0.77 21.65      803     768        7        0
  Uniform -50% Precipitation       1.48 (0.39)  0.15   2.03     810     778        0        0
  Uniform -30% Precipitation       0.54 (0.33) -0.53   1.06     756     578       54        0
  Uniform -10% Precipitation       0.07 (0.14) -0.39   0.31     556     332      254       54
  Uniform +10% Precipitation       0.05 (0.18) -0.28   0.59     475     229      335      184
  Uniform +30% Precipitation       0.49 (0.64) -0.72   2.40     610     449      200      121
  Uniform +50% Precipitation       1.40 (1.23) -1.02   5.04     676     576      134       47

Notes: Table replicates Table 6 if migration is instrumented by corn yields or soybean yields only. Tables
displays predicted increases in net outmigration under various climate change scenarios for the baseline
model (Columns 2 and 3 of Panel B in Table 3). The first two rows use medium and long-term projections
under the Hadley III - B2 scenario. The remaining columns display predicted changes under uniform climate
change scenarios. The first four columns summarize the predicted change in net outmigration rates. The
last four columns give the number of counties that are predicted to have an increase or a decrease in net
outmigration rates. For each category we give the total number of counties as well as the number of counties
that have a statistically significant increase or decrease.




                                                   A10
