                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LAND USE CONTROLS AND THE PROVISION OF EDUCATION

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                           Kuzey Yilmaz

                                        Working Paper 17730
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17730


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We are grateful to the comments and suggestions of Charles Leung, and the seminar participants at
the Fed-Philadelphia , at the 2002 Econometric Society North American Summer Meeting , at theWorkshop
on Macroeconomics, Real Estate, and Public Policy at Koc University, and several conferences. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Eric A. Hanushek and Kuzey Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Land Use Controls and the Provision of Education
Eric A. Hanushek and Kuzey Yilmaz
NBER Working Paper No. 17730
January 2012
JEL No. H4,H7,I2,J6,R2

                                               ABSTRACT

Considerable prior analysis has gone into the study of zoning restrictions on locational choice and
on fiscal burdens. The prior work on zoning - particularly fiscal or exclusionary zoning - has provided
both inconclusive theoretical results and quite inconsistent empirical support of the theory. More importantly,
none of this work addresses important questions about the level and distribution of public goods that
are provided under fiscal zoning. Since fiscal issues and Tiebout demands are central to much of the
motivation for exclusionary zoning, we expand the theoretical analysis to encompass the interplay
between land use restrictions and public good provision. In this, we focus on schooling outcomes,
since the provision of education is one of the primary activities of local jurisdictions. We develop a
general equilibrium model of location and the provision of education. Some households create a fiscal
burden, motivating the use by local governments of exclusionary land-use controls. Then, the paper
analyzes what the market effects of land-use controls are and how successful they are. The policies
considered (minimum lot size zoning, local public finance with a head tax, and fringe zoning) demonstrate
how household behavior directly affects the equilibrium outcomes and the provision of the local public
good.


Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Kuzey Yilmaz
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
kuyilmaz@hotmail.com
1     Introduction

The primary purpose of local political jurisdictions is the provision of public goods tailored

to the needs and desires of their resident populations. In his classic paper on the efficiency

of local jurisdictions, Tiebout (1956) shows how choice among local areas allows households

to sort themselves on the basis of demand for the public good that is provided. But this

simple solution breaks down when various realities such as limited numbers of jurisdictions

and finance through local property taxes are acknowledged.       One important extension of

the modeling of residential choice and the provision of various packages of taxes and public

goods in the face of these realities has been the introduction of another empirical reality –

the existence of various zoning regulations. Zoning constrains the choices of households and

alters the equilibrium outcomes, potentially improving the Tiebout equilibrium. By focus-

ing entirely on the locus of taxes and expenditures across jurisdictions, this literature has,

however, neglected other important aspects of the residential choices of households. Con-

sideration of these leads to fundamental changes in the equilibrium solutions by households.

This paper introduces accessibility as a second basic facet of residential location and then

highlights how endogenous zoning affects the equilibrium demands for schools, the primary

public good offered by local jurisdictions.

    In the world of head taxes and large numbers of jurisdictions, Tiebout sorting leads

to an efficient revelation of public good demands and thus supports the optimal provision

of the public good.   Yet, as has long been recognized, the financing of local jurisdictions

through the property tax changes this solution. Some taxpayers, by buying less expensive

houses within a jurisdiction, can enjoy public expenditures that exceed their contribution

to revenues, creating a fiscal burden on wealthier households who must make up for this

revenue shortfall. If, however, various zoning devices can be employed, it may be possible

to exclude the households that create the fiscal burdens.

    Considerable prior analysis has gone into the study of various zoning restrictions on


                                              1
locational choice and on fiscal burdens. In an influential early paper, Hamilton (1975) in-

corporates endogenous zoning in a model where property taxes finance a local public good,

and he shows that zoning allows individuals to perfectly separate themselves by income.

Durlauf (1992) considers a dynamic community model in which communities impose a min-

imum income restriction as a requirement for residence in a community. Henderson (1980)

and Epple, Romer, and Filimon (1988) analyze the endogenous choice of zoning regula-

tions in multicommunity models, but they have no public goods. Fernandez and Rogerson

(1997) study the effect of zoning regulations on allocations and welfare in a two community

model. Recent theoretical work by Calabrese, Epple, and Romano (2007) and Magliocca et

al. (2012) provide new theoretical structures and interesting insights. Nonetheless, the prior

work on zoning - particularly fiscal or exclusionary zoning - has provided both inconclusive

theoretical results and quite inconsistent empirical support of the theory (Evans (1999)).

The review of the evidence by Quigley and Rosenthal (2005) provides not only a summary

of the issues but ideas on how to resolve the conflicting evidence.

      Three important things have been missing from this past discussion. First, it is generally

assumed that residential choices are solely a function of the fiscal characteristics of a location.

This yields perfect sorting across communities in terms of income and very sharp, and

implausible, reactions to changes in the price of local public goods. This conclusions about

homogeneous communities, however, conflicts with observations about the nature of U.S.

communities. Across the school districts (communities) in the U.S., communities are quite

heterogenous in terms of income (much more so than in terms of race).1             Moreover, the

heterogeneity of households should not be taken as evidence that Tiebout sorting is not

going on.

      Second, while past work has been motivated by the provision of public goods, little is

actually said about the outcomes. The demand by households for schooling outcomes drives
  1
      See Pack and Pack (1977,1978), Persky (1990), Hanushek and Yilmaz (2011).




                                                    2
not only a portion of local residential choice but also determines the spending for schools

and the variation across districts. Both spending variations and the resultant achievement

differences have themselves been objects of direct public policy interventions.2

      Third, a limited number of jurisdictions necessarily implies that some households will not

have their ideal provision of public goods met. Additionally, restrictions on households such

as the exclusionary zoning considered here will not in general move the locational equilibrium

to the full Tiebout optimum.

      This paper addresses each of these issues. It imbeds endogenous zoning within a multi-

faceted model of locational choice that allows for nonfiscal elements of location. Additionally,

it focuses on the most important local public good - schools - and considers how zoning affects

the level and distribution of educational outcomes.

      In order to understand the interactions among these different influences on choices by

households, we develop a general equilibrium model of household location and education

spending decisions.       This model permits new insights into the implications of fiscally-

motivated land use controls. While exclusive communities can improve their educational

quality through land use controls on entry, they do so at the cost of increase the overall

variation in educational quality.

      This paper addresses two basic questions about the exclusionary land use controls. First,

to answer why cities use exclusionary land use controls, we develop a general equilibrium

model of location and educational choice in which some households impose a fiscal bur-

den on the local government. Our work is based on Hanushek and Yilmaz (2007, 2011),

which provides a unified treatment of classical urban location models and Tiebout models of

community choice, and finds equilibrium outcomes that are more consistent with empirical

observations on community heterogeneity. Second, the paper considers the market effects

of exclusionary land use controls and their distributional implications for both educational
  2
      Hanushek and Lindseth (2010)




                                                3
outcomes and welfare. The policies considered in the paper are zoning, local public finance

with a head tax, and fringe zoning that limits city expansion.

    We present a baseline model of a monocentric city that contains two school districts whose

households differ in income and tastes that reflect the value of accessibility, lot size, and public

amenities (education) of a location. An absentee landlord holds an auction at each location

in which households bid for that location. Each jurisdiction provides education, which is

financed through property taxes on residential land. Property taxes are determined by

majority voting. Households can move without a cost between jurisdictions. In equilibrium,

communities are heterogenous, and some households impose a fiscal burden on the local

government.

    With this structure, we conduct policy experiments with different types of exclusionary

land use, and then assess the outcomes in terms of the level and distribution of education.

Having a more realistic model of urban structure proves to be especially important in this

analysis. Public services are tied to specific locations and communities, but locations also

differ in their accessibility and in their housing prices.    Ignoring these aspects of location

introduces a distortion in the analysis of policy alternatives, leading to very different con-

clusions.

    This paper is organized as follows.     We first develop the theoretical framework within

a basic two-jurisdiction, monocentric city model. Because this model is not amenable to

analytical solutions, we then calibrate this model to a protypical city and present benchmark

results. Finally, we introduce local governmental involvement through land use controls and

describe the impacts of the alternative policies on households in each of the jurisdictions.


2     A Model of Accessibility and Local Public Goods

Consider a monocentric city on a featureless xy plane, with a Central Business district

(CBD) at the origin. The firms at the CBD employ skilled and unskilled labor to produce


                                                 4
a composite commodity. The firms are small so that wages in the CBD are exogenous.

Moreover, the city is divided into two jurisdictions (the East School district and the West

School District), and each jurisdiction operates its own schools. The y-axis, passing through

the CBD, forms the boundary between the two jurisdictions. Each jurisdiction finances its

schools through property taxes on residential property. Education is the only service that

the local government provides in each jurisdiction.

       The more common depiction of a monocentric city that has a circular central city sur-

rounded by a donut shaped suburban ring is problematic for our analysis.3 For our purposes,

however, this circular structure is problematic, because all locations at any given distance

from the employment center are served by a common school district, making it difficult to

see the separate influences of location and school quality. Additionally, there are empirical

reasons to consider alternative depictions.           The circular city is more of an analytical de-

scription than a realistic portrayal of American cities. The variety of cities that result from

natural boundaries such as lakes, rivers, and mountains or from historical development pat-

terns makes the stylized ”von Thunen pattern” more a simplifying device than an accurate

generalization of city structures (see Rose 1989). While it is possible to correct estimation

of density gradients for missing quadrants (see Mills(1972) or Rose(1989)), the simple de-

piction fails in a significant number of metropolitan areas.4 Our simple city structure here

is seen, for example, in Minneapolis and St. Paul, where a river divides two jurisdictions

(and two school districts). This structure is not meant as a portrayal of any specific area,

however, but instead is employed as the simplest way to illustrate how accessibility and
   3
     With a circular city structure, the radial symmetry permits straightforward analytical solutions of loca-
tion where it is necessary only to trace locational choices along any ray from the employment center. It has
also motivated a large number of empirical analysis of urban form that are based on estimating household
density functions and price gradients emanating from the center (see, for example, Mills(1972, Rose(1989),
and Kim(2007)). See also de Bartolome and Ross (2003) or Cassidy, Epple, and Romer (1989). Note that
our cities have some similar structure in that there is ”ring-separation” of different household types within
each jurisdiction.
   4
     Kim(2007) describes a number of situations where the standard depiction does not work including, im-
portantly, the significant numbers of U.S. metropolitan areas with multiple central cities or other anomalies.
Bertaud and Malpezzi (2003) also find a number of international cities are inaccurately described by smooth
density gradients.


                                                      5
public goods interact in determining the locational equilibrium. The characterization of a

two-city metropolitan area also permits highlighting the implications of a limited range of

jurisdictional alternatives.

       One member of each household works and makes all the economic decisions in the house.

Based on their earnings, households are categorized as skilled and unskilled worker house-

holds. Skilled workers make ws dollars per hour while unskilled workers make wu dollars

per hour. Also, households place different values on the quality of education a jurisdiction

provides. Some value education more (high valuation types), some less (low valuation types).

Thus, we have four different types of households in the city i ∈ {SL, SH, UL, UH} – namely

Skilled Low Valuation Households (SL), Skilled High Valuation Households (SH), Unskilled

Low Valuation Households (UL), and Unskilled High Valuation Households (UH). As will

be clear, with just two different preference levels for education, a household that has a low

valuation of education necessarily has a high valuation of accessibility.

       Consider a type i ∈ {SL, SH, UL, UH} household seeking a residence at a location,

that is r miles from the CBD in jurisdiction j. The time endowment for the household is

24 hours. The city has a dense radial transportation system. Households commute between

workplaces and residences. Commuting has both pecuniary and time costs.5 Formally,

commuting requires a/2 dollars and b/2 hours per mile. Income is derived solely from labor.

Thus, the household’s income, net of transportation costs, is Yi (r) = 24wi − (a + bwi )r.

The preferences for households are represented by a Cobb-Douglas utility function given by

U (αi , ηi ; q, s, z, l) = qjαi sηi z γ lδ , where αi + ηi + γ + δ = 1, qj is the quality of education in

community j∈ {w, e}, s > 0 is the lot size which proxies residential quality6 , z > 0 is the

numeraire composite commodity, l ∈ [0, 24] is leisure, αi ∈ {αH , αL } is the taste parameter

for education and, ηi ∈ {ηH , ηL } is the taste parameter for lot size. The budget constraint
   5
     Pecuniary costs of commuting are not negligible in U.S. See Altman and Desalvo (1981) for an early
estimate. Internet sites offer commuting cost calculators that put the 2011 cost per mile at over $1 (see, for
example, http://commutesolutions.org/external/calc.html [accessed December 26, 2011].
   6
     It is implicitly assumed that each household manages the construction of his house by himself and that
the lot size indexes the overall quality of the residential services.

                                                      6
of the household is given by


                z(r) + (1 + τj )R(r)s(r) + wi l(r) = Yi (r) = 24wi − (a + bwi )r


   where τj is the property tax rate, Rj (r) is the equilibrium rent per unit of land paid to a

landlord for his land in community j. Notice that this formulation suggests that households

sell all available time to employers and buy back some leisure at the prevailing market wage

rate.

   We can define the bid-rent function of the household, which shows the household’s ability

to pay given a fixed utility level. The bid-rent function can be expressed mathematically as
                                                     n                                                      o
                                                         Yi (r)−z−wi l
                 Ψ(r, ui , qj , τj ) =maxs,z,l              (1+τj )s
                                                                          | U (αi , ηi ; q, s, z, l) = ui


   The bid-rent and bid-max lot size functions are given as
                                                          1/ηi                        ηi +γ+δ
                                                         ki          α /ηi
                                                                      i                          −1/ηi
                          Ψ(r, ui , qj , τj ) =               δ/ηi qj        Yi (r)      ηi
                                                                                                ui
                                                   (1+τj )wi
                                                         ηi           Yi (r)
                          s(r, ui , qj , τj ) =   (ηi +γ+δ)(1+τj ) Ψ(r,ui ,qj ,τj )

                      η
                     ηi i γ γ δ δ
   where ki =   (ηi +γ+δ)(ηi +γ+δ)
                                     is a constant. It is easy to observe that bid-rent is convex and

decreasing in distance, while bid-max lot size function is convex and increasing in distance.

The land use pattern that will arise in equilibrium is determined by the relative steepness

of bid-rent functions of the four different household types. In general, a steeper equilibrium

bid rent curve corresponds to an equilibrium location closer to the CBD.

   As in Alonso (1964), we assume a competitive land market in which households bid for

land and land owners offer the land to the highest bidder. For any given location, the

landlord receives five implicit offers. She may rent her land to any of our four different types

of households or leave the land for a non-urban purpose (e.g. agriculture). When the latter

occurs, she gets a fixed bid of ra .

   Our city is closed and home ownership relies on an absentee owner who rents houses to

all households. In other words, the population of each of our four types of households are


                                                                 7
exogenously given. There are N̄SL identical Skilled Low Valuation Households, N̄SH identi-

cal Skilled High Valuation Households, N̄U L identical Unskilled Low Valuation Households,

and N̄U H identical Unskilled High Valuation Households.

   Let L(r) be the land density at distance r. By definition, the amount of land available for

housing between the distance r and r + dr is L(r)dr. Since we have radial symmetry around

the CBD, L(r) is simply L(r) = πr in either jurisdiction. Also, let nj (r) be the equilibrium

density function of the household distribution in jurisdiction j ∈ {w, e}. That is, the number

of households between the distance r and r + dr equals nj (r)dr in jurisdiction j. Without

loss of generality, let the equilibrium residence of a location at distance r in jurisdiction j be

a type i household. Then, the marginal household population at distance r in community j
                         L(r)
is given as nj (r) =   s(r,u∗i ,.)
                                   .   Also, since N̄i i ∈ {SL, SH, UL, UH}, type i households reside

in the city, the population constraint for type i households is stated as follows:

                       R∞     L(r)                           R∞      L(r)
                        0    Sw (r)
                                       I[t∗w (r) = i] dr +   0       Se (r)
                                                                              I[t∗e (r) = i] dr = N̄i

   Where t∗j (r) j ∈ {w, e}, is a function showing the occupant of the location at distance

r in jurisdiction j, in equilibrium. The indicator function, I [t∗j (r) = i] j ∈ {w, e}, takes

the value 1 if the equilibrium resident of location at distance r in jurisdiction j is a type i

household, 0 otherwise. The population constraint implicitly assumes that the land market

clears in jurisdiction j ∈ {w, e}. Formally,

                                           Sj (r)nj (r) = L(r)            ∀r ≤ rf∗j

   From a household’s point of view, each jurisdiction is characterized by the quality of

education and property tax rate pair (qj , τj ) it provides. Now, we turn to the question of

determining (qj , τj ) in community j ∈ {w, e}. Then, the government budget constraint in

community j is
                                                              R rf∗j
                                                                       Rj (r)L(r)dr
                                           ej = τj R̄j = τj      0
                                                                        Nj




                                                             8
       where Nj is the population, ej is the expenditure per pupil, and R̄j is the tax base per

pupil in community j. Characterizing the quality of education has proved difficult. Here, to

maintain comparability with the prior literature, we emphasize only educational spending,

which can be interpreted as either actual quality of the schools or simply perceived quality. 7

The perceived quality of education in community j is given by a production function


                                                    qj = c1 ecj2


       where c1 , c2 > 0 and c2 < 1 are constants. Notice that the production function is concave,

implying diminishing marginal returns to expenditure per pupil. The property taxes are

determined by majority voting in each jurisdiction. Then, a myopic type i household at

distance r in community j’s preferred tax rate is given by the following problem:

                maxτj V (.) =            ki
                                                    q αi Yi (r)ηi +γ+δ
                                R(r)ηi (1+τj )ηi wiδ j
                                                                         subject to qj = πj (.)ej
                                                                                    ej = τj R̄j

                                                                                                      αi
       Solving this problem yields the preferred tax rate for type i household, τ̃i =               ηi −αi
                                                                                                           .   Note

that the preferred tax rate is independent of income and is a function of the household’s

valuation type. Since there are only two valuation types for households, there are two

possible preferred tax rates in the economy, and high valuation types have a higher preferred

tax rate (τ̃SH > τ̃SL and τ̃U H > τ̃U L ).

       The timing of events is as follows: At the beginning of each period, Households make

community/residential choice decisions with the expectation that the last period’s education

and property tax packages would prevail in the current period. Once they move in, they are

stuck. They vote for the property tax rate in their community of residence. The public good
   7
    Prior literature has shown that it is difficult to characterize school quality when the outcome is mea-
sured by student performance (See Hanushek (1996, 2003) for empirical evidence on achievement production
functions). At the same time, households clearly use spending as a proxy for school quality and factor
that into their locational decisions. Thus, we take a positivist view of school quality as it affects consumer
behavior. In prior work, we have also considered the role of peer groups in the production function for
schools (Hanushek and Yilmaz 2007, 2011). However, that formulation unduly complicates the analysis
here without yielding an additional insights. Under most formulations, it will reinforce the basic fiscal
forces involved, and we wish to show the operation of these forces in the simplest fiscal model.



                                                           9
and tax rate package might be different from what they expected. Since they are immobile,

they do not have much choice but to consume what the community offers for this period.

At the beginning of the next period, they update their expectations, and events start over

again.

   Definition: An equilibrium is a set of utility levels u∗i ∀ i ∈ {SL, SH, UL, UH}, market

rent curves Rj (r) j ∈ {w, e}, quality of education and property tax pairs (qj , τj ) j ∈ {w, e},

household population distribution functions nj (r) j ∈ {w, e}, and types functions t∗j (r)

j ∈ {w, e} which show the equilibrium occupant of the location at distance r in community

j such that


   • Different household types bid for each location. The land at a location is developed

      for the highest bidder if the highest bid exceeds the fixed non-urban purpose bid of ra .

      Otherwise, it is not developed.

   • All job opportunities are offered by a firm located at the CBD. Wages in the CBD are

      exogenously determined. The city has a dense radial commuting system. Households

      commute to workplaces. Commuting has both pecuniary and time costs.

   • Regardless of their location or communities, households of the same type attain the

      same utility level. (I.e., in equilibrium a type i household gets u∗i everywhere)

   • The city contains two jurisdictions, each of which operates its own schools. Moreover,

      it is a closed city (i.e. populations for each types are exogenous) and the land is owned

      by absentee landlords.

   • The local public good, education, is produced through a production function, and

      is financed through local property taxes on residential land, determined by majority

      voting in each jurisdiction.

   • Labor and land markets clear.


                                               10
                           Parameter          Value     Parameter         Value
                              αH              0.016        ηH             0.034
                              αL              0.013         ηL            0.037
                               γ               0.2           δ             0.75
                               a                $1           b           0.13 hrs
                               ws              $19         wu              $10
                               c1              3.66         c2             0.84

                                   Table 1: Calibration Parameters

        • The local government budget balances in all jurisdictions.


3         Calibration of the Urban Economy

The model is calibrated to match some key stylized facts of a typical skilled high valuation

(SH) household and a typical middle size city in the U.S. in which she lives.
        The hourly wages for unskilled and skilled workers are calibrated as wu ≈ 10 and ws ≈ 18,

respectively. These number are obtained from the fact that in the U.S., average weekly hours

of persons working full time is about 40 hours8 , and the average annual earnings of 18 year or

over high school and college graduate workers are $22, 154 and $38, 112, respectively in 1997.

Assuming the household works for 40 hours a week, the share of leisure in the household’s
                  δ              40ws
budget is     ηH +γ+δ
                        = 1−   24×7×ws
                                         ≈ 0.76. The data on average annual expenditures of some

selected MSAs suggest that a household spends about one-fifth of its income on shelter.
                                                                                                       γ
Therefore, the budget share of composite commodity and land are set to be                           ηH +γ+δ
                                                                                                              =
                                       ηH
(1 − 0.76) × 0.8 ≈ 0.19 and         ηH +γ+δ
                                              = (1 − 0.76) × 0.2 ≈ 0.048, respectively. Moreover,
                                                                                            αi
recall that the preferred tax rate for a type i household is given by τ̃i =               ηi −αi
                                                                                                   and we had

two possible preferred tax rates, one for high valuation and another for low valuation type

households. The one for high (low) valuation type is set to be about 2.2 percent (1.3 percent).

These values are sufficient to permit calibration of αH , αL , ηH , ηL , γ, δ.

        The pecuniary commuting cost per round trip mile is based on the cost of owning and

operating an automobile. In 1997, pecuniary cost per mile was 53.08 cents, suggesting a
    8
    The statistical facts, unless otherwise indicated, come from the Statistical Abstract of the United States,
1998.

                                                      11
pecuniary commuting cost of a = $1 per round trip mile. Assuming the commuting speed is

15 miles per hour within the city, the time cost of commuting per round trip mile is set to

be b = 0.13 hours.

        In equilibrium, the endogenous urban fringe distance is set at about 10 miles in both

jurisdictions. The population of the city is set to be 1,500,000 households, which implies

approximately a population density of 8,000 households per square mile9 . Approximately,

40 percent of the total population is assumed to be skilled worker households. Moreover,

25 percent of skilled households are assumed to be low valuation type. As for the unskilled

households, 75 percent are low valuation types.

        The agricultural rent bid ra is set to be $6, 850 per acre per year. The parameters of the

education production function are set to be c1 = 3.66, c2 = 0.84 so that (qj , τj ) preferences of

households in jurisdiction j ∈ {w, e} are consistent with (qj , τj ) pairs that induce the desired

population distribution.


4         Benchmark Results

In equilibrium, households of each type form a concentric ring, or zone, within each of the

two jurisdictions around the employment center, and zones for all household types are ranked

by the distance from the city center in the order of steepness of their bid-rent functions. The

results for the benchmark equilibrium are shown in Table 2 and Figures 1 through 3. Our

results are quite consistent with the residential pattern observed in the United States. In

both cities, households with higher incomes typically locate farther from the CBD, occupying

larger dwellings than households with lower incomes. Moreover, for each income group, those

with high valuation of education live further from the center than those with low valuation

of education (i.e., those with high valuation of accessibility).

        These patterns are shown for the East city in figures 1 and 2. (Note that the labeling of
    9
   The median population per square mile of cities with 200,000 or more population was 3,546 in 1992.
Source: County and City Data Book, 1994.


                                                  12
                                    Types             West       East
                                  School Quality        11.5         15
                                       Tax Rate       1.35%      2.22%
                                     Skilled Low         8.2        1.8
                                    Skilled High         9.3       20.7
                                  Unskilled Low           29       16.1
                                  Unskilled High         2.3       12.6

               Table 2: Benchmark Distribution of Population and School Quality

the two cities is arbitrary). The price of land varies across locations with distance due to

commuting costs, as in a standard urban location model. The West city follows the same

general pattern (not shown), although the rents at any given distance from the employment

center will be lower because of the lower school quality (discussed below).                 Across com-

munities the quality of education and property taxes differ, and in equilibrium households

are indifferent to living in either jurisdiction. This differences in rents across jurisdictions is

nothing but the capitalization of accessibility and differing quality of education.

       The communities are heterogenous in both income and tastes, and all types are present in

both communities (Table 2).10 (The table gives the distribution of households by jurisdiction

as a percent of the total population in both jurisdictions). This heterogeneity of communities

is the result of the two components of a location: access to employment and school quality.

All households of a given type in terms of income and tastes for education are happy with

their residential location in equilibrium, but some of each type will end up purchasing more

access and less schooling in trading off the two at equilibrium prices.              This aspect of the

model introduces a realism that is important in judging policy alternatives that differentially

affect the two communities.
       In our baseline model, Table 2 shows that the East School district provides the best

education and is the community of choice for most of the high valuation households, whether

of high or low income (skill) level. This better education does come with a higher price tag,
  10
    Note that there is a trivially different equilibrium where East and West are simply switched. In each
case, however, our prior work shows that the solution converges on the same equilibrium, independent of the
starting point chosen, when there are no peer effects in the educational production function. See Hanushek
and Yilmaz (2007).

                                                    13
namely higher property taxes than the West School District, but this is the majority vote

equilibrium of the households.

   Following Hamilton (1975), we have concentrated on property taxes to fund our local

education, as consistent with U.S. school finance. Figure 3, the derived tax bill for different

households in the East community, vividly shows the issue of fiscal burden. The use of a

property tax implies a low tax liability for households in small houses (small lots), but a

high tax liability for households in big houses. As shown in Figure 3, the annual spending of

about $1,951 in the East School district is met with an annual tax liability of a small house

of about $1,500 but a corresponding liability of $2,700 for each household in a big house.

The households with the larger houses are effectively subsidizing the education of those with

smaller houses. This observation identifies powerful incentives for communities to regulate

the development of new land.

   The fiscal disparities by households imply that there are larger incentives in the East

district to exclude low income households with their lower consumption of quality housing.

In the West, where school quality is less, the fiscal disparity is also reduced so that poor

households pay about $1,120 in taxes to pay for the school expenditure of $1,423. A majority

of the residents are low income households. Further, they attract a disproportionate share

of high skilled households who have a low valuation of schooling.       The predominance of

low income and low valuation household in the West implies that they do not want to raise

school spending in the West district. As a result, the majority in West would not want to

exclude low income voters.

   For the rest of the paper, we will study the impact of some alternative land use policies

on the efficient provision of education and how successful they are in terms of excluding

households that would impose a fiscal burden on the government. In all cases, we consider

the case where the East imposes controls, while the West does not.




                                              14
5     Land-use Controls

We use this expanded locational choice model to analyze how a local government can exclude

households by some land use controls. We consider alternative kinds of restrictions (which

may or may not be permissible for use by any given jurisdiction, depending on state laws):

zoning, lump sum tax, and fringe distance zoning. Each land use control is designed by the

East in an attempt to exclude those imposing a fiscal burden on the high income residents.

The key question is effectiveness of each kind of control and the implications for household

location and school quality.

5.1     Minimum Lot Size Zoning:

To deal with the fiscal disparities, the local government in the East has an incentive to

exclude households that impose a fiscal burden by introducing zoning regulations that set a

minimum lot size (MLS) per household in residential land use, sm . With this device, it hopes

to eliminate the smallest houses, i.e., the ones imposing the largest burdens on the other

residents. To determine the minimum lot size, the local government requires poor households

in small houses to at least consume sm =4090 square feet so that their contribution to the

provision of public good would at least be about the expenditure per pupil in the East School

District at the benchmark.

    With minimum lot size zoning, the problem that the consumer in the East must solve is:
                                       n                                                           o
                                           Yi (r)−z−wi l
       Ψ(r, ui , qj , τj ) =maxs,z,l          (1+τj )s
                                                           | U (αi , ηi ; q, s, z, l) = ui             subject to s ≥ sm


    Observing that the utility function is concave, the bid-rent and bid-max lot size function

under MLS regulation is given by


                                  Ψ(.)                                                         if r ≥ rm
                                 
                                 
                                                                       γ                   1
                       Ψ (.) =
                         ∗
                                       Yi (r)−(1+ γδ          δ
                                                       )wi ( γw
                                                                i
                                                                    ) γ+δ
                                                                                u
                                                                            ( αi i ηi
                                                                             q sm
                                                                                        ) γ+δ
                                                                              j
                                                                                                if r < rm
                                 
                                 
                                                         (1+τj )sm




                                                                15
                                Types                 West     East
                              School Quality            10.3     18.3
                                   Tax Rate           1.35%    2.22%
                                 Skilled Low              10        0
                                Skilled High               0       30
                              Unskilled Low             31.5     13.4
                              Unskilled High            15.1        0

Table 3: Equilibrium Distribution of Population and School Quality under Minimum Lot
Size Zoning in the East

   and
                                           (
                                               s(.)    if r ≥ rm
                                 s (.) =
                                  ∗
                                               sm      if r < rm


    where rm is the effective distance that is determined by the intersection between the lot

size, s(.) curve and the horizontal sm line. (Consumers in the West solve the same problem

except that sm = 0). Since the lot size curve is increasing in distance, the household would

be constrained at r < rm , and the bid-rent function for closer in properties becomes the

bid-rent for the minimum lot size. As expected and seen in Figure 4, the bid-rent curve in

the East is a straight line when households are constrained. The reason for this result is

that the price of land increases as the distance to the city center decreases, and households

respond to lower land prices by consuming less land. Once they reach the minimum lot size

requirement, they cannot alter their land consumption, and it is linear. When they can alter

their consumption, the bid-rent curve is convex.

   In equilibrium, the East district continues to provide a better education, but there are

significant locational changes compared to the benchmark case. A summary of the new

equilibrium outcome is found in Table 3 and figures 4 through 6. All Skilled Low Valuation

(SL) and Unskilled High Valuation (UH) households flee from the East School District, which

no longer best serves their needs. In addition, only a relatively small portion of Unskilled

Low Valuation households stay in the East. All of the Skilled High Valuation households

now reside in the East, which has become an exclusive city with fewer residents and higher


                                                 16
average income. Many of the Unskilled Low Valuation households previously in the East

stay in the East, but they are now forced to consume an amount of land, sm that is greater

than the bid-max lot size without such a regulation. Thus, some fiscal burden of low income

households remains in the East, but it is considerably reduced by the exclusionary zoning.

       To explain the increasing amounts of annual tax liability of Skilled High Valuation House-

holds at locations closer to the CBD in Figure 6, recall that they consume the minimum lot

size and their tax liability increases towards the CBD due to increasing land prices. This

result is different from Hamilton (1975). In a given community, both land consumption and

tax liability differ across household types, while Hamilton finds that every household in a

given community consumes the same amount of housing in equilibrium and pays the same

amount of property taxes.

       By extension, it is clearly possible to form a pure Skilled High Households community in

the east by sufficiently raising the Minimum Lot Size (MLS) requirement level. This would

make it unattractive for the Unskilled Low Valuation households, who would then prefer the

West.

5.2       Head Taxes

The commonly-analyzed simple Tiebout model finances the local public goods with a con-

stant tax for all individuals in a jurisdiction. Given the homogeneous nature of each district

in the standard Tiebout model, the constant, or head, tax does not have much impact. In

our model, however, the heterogeneity of districts in terms of income and equilibrium land

consumption implies that the property tax and head tax will operate quite differently.

       As should be clear, a head tax would eliminate the fiscal burden.11              We consider the

possibility of applying a flat tax in the East School District, which is concerned with the
  11
    While head taxes are not common in the U.S., they are used partially to finance schools in California.
The introduction of a property tax limitation (Proposition 13) effectively set the property tax rate at a
constant across the state. Individual districts may, with voter approval, establish a parcel tax that is the
same for all residences in the jurisdiction regardless of their value.



                                                    17
                                     Types              West       East
                                  School Quality          9.82        15
                               Property Tax Rate        1.35%        0%
                                      Skilled Low          5.9       4.1
                                     Skilled High          1.1      28.9
                                   Unskilled Low          44.9         0
                                   Unskilled High         15.1         0

Table 4: Equilibrium Distribution of Population and School Quality under Head taxes in
the East

presence of the households that impose fiscal burdens on the local government, instead of

the property tax.      We analyze the implications of setting the head tax in the East at the

expenditure per pupil in the benchmark.

       As a result of the new policy, no unskilled workers wish to reside in the East (see Table

4 ).     A few additional skilled low valuation households move the East, compared to the

baseline, because of the increased accessibility from the East.          But, with the fall in average

property values in the West, the quality of schools declines in the West, again compared to

the baseline. In total, fewer people now find the East to be an attractive residential location

compared to the baseline, and its population is less.

5.3       Reduced Fringe Distance

An alternative land use policy frequently pursued is simply to deny new development within

a city, thus making it more exclusive. For our modeling, we consider (urban) fringe zoning

in which residential land use is restricted within a certain radius, rf from the city center.12

Here, rf is chosen to be eight miles. In order to reduce the fiscal burden of the baseline

this policy would have to drive out unskilled households, because the land that is available

for residential allocation in the East is smaller, allocated to the highest bidder, and skilled

households can afford to bid more. In the new equilibrium, however, it is not so clear.
  12
    Note that we think of this as maintaining restrictions on any expansions in the city, as is typical of
many European cities. A policy to actually move the fringe in clearly reduces the value of property that
was formerly residential and the owners would have to be compensated for such actions. Also, if the fringe
moves out, so that the population expands, the new equilibrium can imply a reduced school quality for the
East district.


                                                   18
                                Types           West        East
                              School Quality      11.8        14.7
                                   Tax Rate     1.35%       2.22%
                                 Skilled Low        10           0
                                Skilled High         0          30
                              Unskilled Low       31.5        13.4
                              Unskilled High      15.1           0

Table 5: Equilibrium Distribution of Population and School Quality after Reduced Fringe
Distance Zoning in the East

As shown in Table 5, the quality of education falls in the East compared to the baseline.

All Skilled Low Valuation households move to the West School District, less high valuation

households reside in the East, and more Unskilled Low valuation households live in the

East school district. This policy is not effective at excluding households that impose a

fiscal burden on the local government. Once again, skilled households subsidize unskilled

households, and the problem of fiscal burden in the East remains.
   To understand the failure of fringe zoning, recall that the spatial allocation of households

is determined by the relative steepness of bid-rent curves. In the model, poor households

have a steeper bid-rent curve, and they reside in locations closer to the CBD, leading to the

failure of this policy to exclude the ”right” households.

5.4    Implications for School Quality

The land use control policies all were motivated by reducing the fiscal transfers within a

subset of the jurisdictions. A particularly interesting aspect of these policies is that they

also have implications for the level and distribution of schooling. Specifically, by ending up

with a different distribution of households, some of whom are constrained by the land use

policies, the political support for schools changes in the two districts. Within each district,

the combination of majority voting on tax rates and the heterogeneity of households within

the districts means that a number of households typically are trading off school quality for

accessibility and housing prices – and the educational outcomes will depend on the mix of

households in the different communities.

                                               19
                         Policy           West     East    Mean    Std
                          Benchmark        11.5       15    13.3    2.5
                         MLS Zoning        10.3     18.3    14.3    5.6
                            Head Tax        9.8       15    12.4    3.7
                       Reduced Fringe      11.8     14.7    13.3    2.9

 Table 6: The quality of education across districts under various land use control regimes

   We first look at the results for school quality by school district, as summarized in Table

6 and Figure 7. In general, the jurisdiction imposing land use controls can maintain as high

or higher school quality for those households remaining in the district. However, the quality

in the other jurisdiction (West) tends to decline. The resulting average quality of schools

may or may not decline, but uniformly the variance in quality consistently increases.

   With minimum lot size zoning, the gains in school quality in the East district are sufficient

to offset the declines in the West so that average school quality increases. With the other

policies, however, the average quality declines, implying that these land use controls work

against public policy objectives of increasing quality and reducing variance.

   Simply looking at the results by city, however, is incomplete, because the equilibrium

outcomes of the different policies imply considerable movement across cities. An alternative

summary is to investigate the school quality outcomes for the different families in our anal-

ysis, denominated by either income or valuation of schooling. Table 7 summarizes how the

different types make out after the East district imposes the alternative land use controls.

   The skilled households and the households that highly value schooling do better in terms

of school quality with MLS zoning (compared to the benchmark case), and the skilled workers

also improve school quality with the head tax. The reduced fringe zoning (growth limita-

tions) lower school quality for both groups. The unskilled and the low valuation residents,

who are generally simply reacting to the policies of the East, find that their school quality

generally decreases – although any change is minimal with the reduced fringe zoning.




                                              20
                                  Average School Quality
                                   Benchmark MLS Zoning                   Head Tax        Reduced Fringe
 Skilled Residents                    13.5            16.3                  14.1               13.1
 Unskilled Residents                  13.2            12.1                   9.8               13.2
 High Valuation Families              14.1            15.6                  13.1               13.7
 Low Valuation Families               12.6            12.3                  10.2               12.7

Table 7: The quality of education across household types under various land use control
regimes.

6        Conclusions

The provision of educational services in the United States is tied to residential location.

A range of active governmental policies have been aimed at altering both the level and the

distribution of education across school districts, and it is clear that these policy deliberations

must consider household reactions to policies and the alternative reasons why household

choose a given location.13 This analysis focuses on the actions of individual jurisdictions to

restrict the options available to households through exclusionary zoning and thus to improve

their local fiscal situation. We embed our endogenous zoning choices within a simple model

that recognizes that a given location offers both accessibility to employment and local schools.

The quality of schools depends, however, on the preferences of local voters, something that

could change in the aggregate with different policies. Putting these basic elements together,

we can provide a general equilibrium solution to the household location problem that is

useful for policy simulations.

       We consider schools that are funded by property taxes. But, with heterogeneous commu-

nities, the presence of households purchasing different quality of homes can impose a fiscal

burden on the local government, because a household in a small house pays a relatively small

amount in taxes compared to school spending. Concerned with the fiscal burden of some

households, the local governments may try to exclude those households paying less taxes

than their cost of schooling by means of some exclusionary land use controls: minimum lot
  13
    See, for example, the early study of Feldstein (1975) on state school finance options. More recent analysis
incorporates accessibility into the analysis of governmental policy (Hanushek and Yilmaz (forthcoming)).


                                                      21
size zoning, lump sum tax, or fringe distance(growth limitation) zoning.

   We presume that the district with the highest income, the best school quality, and the

largest fiscal discrepancies imposes a given land use control, while the other district does not.

The resulting population distributions under the alternative policies differ substantially from

the open market benchmark case. In terms of the quality of education provided, minimum

lot size zoning within our parametrization actually increases average quality of education.

However, as the mean quality of education increases, so does inequality, measured by the

standard deviation. The other cases of permitting head taxes or of reduced fringe zoning

(growth controls) tend to lower average school quality while also increasing the variance in

quality across districts. It is generally true, however, that the upper income residents, who

drive the restrictive zoning, can come out ahead in terms of school quality.

   Our theoretical characterization of the equilibrium outcomes is of course dependent upon

the specific utility functions and calibration of the model.      Alternative calibrations can

obviously lead to different results. The important message from our calibrations is, however,

that the simplest models of locational choice – ones dependent on just the provision of

differing amounts of the local public good – are likely to misstate the locational outcomes

and the nature of public good provision. Specifically, models that lead to perfect sorting of

households across communities, à la Tiebout (1956), are likely to misrepresent the outcomes

that will result from local policy changes.      Moreover, the general equilibrium nature of

housing decisions means that the actions of households in one jurisdiction spill over into

other jurisdictions, leading to changes not only in the structure of housing prices but also in

the overall provision of public goods. These can be very significant when there are limited

numbers of jurisdictions as in our modeling here.




                                               22
References
Altman, J.L. and Desalvo, J. (1981). Tests and extensions of the Mills-Muth simulation
      model of urban residential land use. Journal of Regional Science 21: 1-21.

Bertraud, Alain, and Stephen Malpezzi. 2003. " The Spatial Distribution of Population in
       48 World Cities: Implications for Economies in Transition " Working paper.

Calabrese, Stephen, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano. 2007. "On the political
       economy of zoning." Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 1-2 (February): 25-49.

de Bartolome, Charles A. M., and Stephen L. Ross. 2003. "Equilibria with local
       governments and commuting: Income sorting vs income mixing." Journal of
       Urban Economics 54:1-20.

Durlauf, Steven N. 1992. "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality" Journal of
       Economic Growth 1:75-93.

Cassidy, Glenn, Dennis Epple, and Thomas Romer. 1989. "Redistribution by local
       governments in a monocentric urban area." Regional Science and Urban
       Economics 19, no. 3 (August): 421-454.

Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer. 1988. "Community development with
       endogenous land use controls." Journal of Public Economics 35:133-162.

Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer, 1993. "Existence of Voting and
       Housing Equilibrium in a System of Communities with Property Taxes." Regional
       Science and Urban Economics 23:585-610.

Evans, A.W. 1999. "The land market and government intervention" In Handbook of
       Regional and Urban Economics, edited by Paul Cheshire and Edwin S. Mills.
       Amsterdam: North Holland.

Feldstein MS. 1975. Wealth neutrality and local choice in public education. American
       Economic Review 65: 75-89

Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 1996. "Keeping people out: Income
      distribution, zoning, and the quality of public education." International Economic
      Review 38,no.1:23-42.

Fujita, Masahisa. 1986. "Urban land use theory." In Location Theory, edited by J.J.
        Gabszewics, Jacques-François Thisse, Masahisa Fujita and U. Schweizer. Chur,
        Switzerland: Char:73-149.

Hamilton, Bruce W. 1975. "Zoning and property taxation in a system of local
      governments." Urban Studies 12:205-11.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1996. "School resources and student performance." In Does money
      matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and adult success,
      edited by Gary Burtless. Washington, DC: Brookings:43-73.

———. 2003. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic Journal 113,
   no.485 (February):F64-F98.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2003. "Does
      peer ability affect student achievement?" Journal of Applied Econometrics 18,
      no.5 (September/October):527-544.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Kuzey Yilmaz. 2007. "The complementarity of Tiebout and
      Alonso." Journal of Housing Economics 16, no.2 (June):243-261.

———. 2011. "Urban education, location, and opportunity in the United States." In
   Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning, ed. N Brooks, K Donaghy,
   G-J Knaap, pp. 583-615. Oxford: Oxford University Press

———. forthcoming. "Household location and schools in metropolitan areas with
   heterogeneous suburbs: Tiebout, Alonso, and government policy." Journal of
   Public Economic Theory

Hanushek EA, Lindseth AA. 2009. Schoolhouses, courthouses, and statehouses: Solving
      the funding-achievement puzzle in America's public schools. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press

Hanushek, Eric A., Sinan Sarpca, and Kuzey Yilmaz. 2011. "Private schools and
      residential choices: accessibility, mobility, and welfare." B.E. Journal of
      Economic Analysis & Policy (Contributions) 11(1): article 44.

Rose, Louis A. 1989. "Topographical constraints and urban land supply indexes."
       Journal of Urban Economics 26 (3), pp. 335–347

Sukkoo, Kim. 2007. “Changes in the Nature of Urban Spatial Structures in the United
      States, 1890-2000,” Journal of Regional Science 47 (2): 273-287.

Magliocca, Nicholas, Virginia McConnell, Margaret Walls, and Elena Safirova. 2012.
      "Zoning on the urban fringe: Results from a new approach to modeling land and
      housing markets." Regional Science and Urban Economics 42, no. 1-2 (January):
      198-210.

Mills, Edwin S., and Bruce W. Hamilton. 1989. Urban Economics. Fourth Edition ed.
        Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company.
Mills, Edwin S. 1972. Studies in the Structure of the Urban Economy. Washington, D.C.:
        Resources for the Future, Inc.

Nechyba, Thomas J. 2006. "Income and peer sorting in public and private schools." In
      Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis
      Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland:1327-1368.

Pack, Howard, and Janet Rothenberg Pack. 1977. "Metropolitan fragmentation and
       suburban homogeneity." Urban Studies 14:191-201.

———. 1978. "Metropolitan fragmentation and local public expenditures." National Tax
   Journal 31:349-362.

Persky, Joseph J. 1990. "Suburban income inequality: Three theories and a few facts."
       Regional Science and Urban Economics 20:125-137.

Quigley, John M., and Larry A. Rosenthal. 2005. "The effects of land use regulation on
       the price of housing: What do we know? What can we learn?" Cityscape 8, no. 1:
       69-137.

Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A pure theory of local expenditures." Journal of Political
       Economy 64, no.5 (October):416-424.

Yinger, John. 1982. "Capitalization and the theory of local public finance." Journal of
       Political Economy 90, no.5 (October):917-43.

———. 1985. "Inefficiency and the median voter: Property taxes, capitalization,
   heterogeneity, and the theory of second best." In Perspectives on local public
   finance and public policy, edited by John M. Quigley. Greenwich, CT: JAI
   Press:3-30.
                                         Fig 1: Monthly Gross Rent per acre (East District)


                            12000
                            10000
                                                                                                Unskilled low(UL)
Gross rent




                             8000
                                                                                                Unskilled high(UH)
                             6000                                                               Skilled low(SL)
                             4000                                                               Skilled high(SH)
                             2000
                                0
                                     0       2          4        6       8           10
                                                 distance from CBD



                                                       Fig 2: Lot Size (East District)


                            20000
Lot Size (square foot)




                            15000                                                               Unskilled low (UL)
                                                                                                Unskilled high (UH)
                            10000
                                                                                                Skilled low (SL)
                                                                                                Skilled high (SH)
                             5000

                                0
                                     0       2           4       6           8        10
                                                     distance from CBD



                                     Fig 3: School Expenditure and Taxes Paid (East District)

                            $3,000
    Expenditure per pupil




                            $2,500                                                              Unskilled low (UL)
                                                                                                Unskilled high (UH)
                            $2,000                                                              Skilled low (SL)
                                                                                                Skilled high (SH)
                                                                                                School Expenditure
                            $1,500


                            $1,000
                                     0           2           4       6           8         10
                                                       distance from CBD
                                                  Fig 4: Monthly Gross Rent per acre with MLS Zoning
                                                                     (East District)


                                 12000
                                 10000
Gross rent




                                       8000
                                                                                                     Unskilled low (UL)
                                       6000                                                          Skilled high (SH)
                                       4000
                                       2000
                                          0
                                              0          2       4       6        8        10
                                                             distance from CBD



                                                      Fig 5: Lot Size with MLS Zoning (East District)


                                   20000
Lot Size (square foot)




                                   15000
                                                                                                     Unskilled low (SL)
                                   10000
                                                                                                     Skilled high (SH)

                                       5000

                                          0
                                              0          2       4        6       8        10
                                                             distance from CBD



                                        Fig 6: School Expenditure and Taxes Paid with MLS Zoning (East
                                                                    District)

                                       $5,000
               Expenditure per pupil




                                       $4,000                                                     Unskilled low (UL)
                                                                                                  Skilled high (SH)
                                       $3,000                                                     School Expenditure

                                       $2,000

                                       $1,000
                                                  0          2       4        6        8        10
                                                                 distance from CBD
                   Fig 7: Quality of Education

20.0
18.0
16.0
14.0
12.0
                                                                 West
10.0
 8.0                                                             East
 6.0
 4.0
 2.0
 0.0
       Benchmark   MLS Zoning     Head Tax         Reduced
                     (East)        (East)        Fringe (East)
