                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE HOUSING WEALTH EFFECT:
THE CRUCIAL ROLES OF DEMOGRAPHICS, WEALTH DISTRIBUTION AND WEALTH SHARES

                                           Charles W. Calomiris
                                           Stanley D. Longhofer
                                              William Miles

                                           Working Paper 17740
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w17740


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        January 2012




   Calomiris is Henry Kaufman Professor of Financial Institutions at Columbia Business School and
   Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. Longhofer is Stephen L. Clark Chair
   of Real Estate and Finance, and Director, Center for Real Estate, Barton School of Business, Wichita
   State University. Miles is Professor of Economics and a Barton Fellow in the Barton School of Business,
   Wichita State University. We are grateful to seminar participants at Columbia University and to Xavier
   Gabaix for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
   reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2012 by Charles W. Calomiris, Stanley D. Longhofer, and William Miles. All rights reserved. Short
   sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
   that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Housing Wealth Effect: The Crucial Roles of Demographics, Wealth Distribution and
Wealth Shares
Charles W. Calomiris, Stanley D. Longhofer, and William Miles
NBER Working Paper No. 17740
January 2012
JEL No. E21,J11

                                            ABSTRACT

Current estimates of housing wealth effects vary widely. We consider the role of omitted variables
suggested by economic theory that have been absent in a number of prior studies. Our estimates take
into account age composition and wealth distribution (using poverty rates as a proxy), as well as wealth
shares (how much of total wealth is comprised of housing vs. stock wealth). We exploit cross-state
variation in housing, stock wealth and other variables in a newly assembled panel data set and find
that the impact of housing on consumer spending depends crucially on age composition, poverty rates,
and the housing wealth share. In particular, young people who are more likely to be credit-constrained,
and older homeowners, likely to be “trading down” on their housing stock, experience the largest housing
wealth effects, as suggested by theory. Also, as suggested by theory, housing wealth effects are higher
in state-years with higher housing wealth shares, and in state-years with higher poverty rates (likely
reflecting the greater importance of credit constraints for those observations). Taking these various
factors into account implies huge variation over time and across states in the size of housing wealth
effects.


Charles W. Calomiris                               William Miles
Graduate School of Business                        Department of Economics
Columbia University                                Wichita State University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                    Wichita, KS 67260-0077
New York, NY 10027                                 mil122000@yahoo.com
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Stanley D. Longhofer
Director, Center for Real Estate
Barton School of Business
Wichita State University
Wichita, KS 67260-0077
stan.longhofer@wichita.edu
I. Introduction

       If the value of your house rose by $10,000 this year, by how much would your

consumption this year rise? It is a straightforward question, yet economists have failed to agree

on an answer to it that is consistent with the theoretical modeling of consumption wealth effects,

as evidenced by the (wide-ranging) empirical estimates of their magnitude.

       In theory, estimation of wealth effects should take into account variation related to age

and the composition of wealth. Consumers with different age and wealth characteristics should

have different housing wealth effects. Those that face binding constraints that limit their

borrowing against future income or those that plan to downsize their housing consumption

significantly should exhibit relatively large housing wealth effects, while those that neither face

binding borrowing constraints nor are planning to downsize their housing consumption in the

near term should exhibit smaller housing wealth effects.

       Empirical evidence on aggregate housing wealth effects has produced widely varying

estimates. A number of problems have made it difficult to interpret the sources of empirical

disagreements across studies. First is the challenge of finding reliable data on housing wealth,

securities wealth, consumption and other variables of interest. Although good measures of these

variables exist for the U.S. as a whole, aggregation over regions with different economic cycles

and limited degrees of freedom from time series aggregates make it difficult to obtain reliable

estimates of consumers’ responses to variation in wealth and income. In principle, the cross-

sectional variation in panel data for U.S. states would provide additional estimation power. In

practice, however, finding reliable state-level data is a challenge. For example, state-level

consumption is typically proxied using retail sales, while data on securities wealth is estimated

by allocating aggregate figures across states using household surveys on mutual fund holdings.


                                                                                                      1
This is particularly problematic because these surveys are only available for a handful of years,

forcing researchers to interpolate across many intervening quarters.

       Second, wealth effect estimates are acutely prone to bias due to omitted variables. For

example, in a regression that omits unobservable permanent income, housing wealth changes

(which likely are correlated with omitted expected future income) may proxy for the omitted

variable; thus, observed housing wealth effects may overstate true wealth effects. Calomiris, et

al. (2009), following Campbell and Mankiw (1990), employ instrumental variables to address

that problem, and find that taking account of this bias substantially reduces estimated housing

wealth effects (see also Case, et al., 2011, who adopt that same approach).

       Third, the functional forms for estimating wealth effects in prior work generally are not

consistent with some of the basic implications of the permanent-income/life-cycle model of

consumption. As Carroll and Zhou (2011) have noted, coefficient estimates from the standard

empirical functional form that regresses the log of consumption (or its difference) on the logs of

income, housing wealth, and securities wealth (or their differences) cannot be interpreted as

measuring a standard wealth effect; instead they simply measure partial correlations between

housing (or equities) and consumption.

       A particular problem with regressions using the standard functional form is that they

posit a constant elasticity of consumption with respect to housing wealth. The reasonableness of

this assumption, however, depends on the constancy of the ratio of housing wealth to securities

wealth. If the housing wealth ratio is not constant, then assuming constant elasticities in

estimation can result in severe bias. To see why, consider two individuals, A and B, both of

whom earn $50,000 per year and consume $55,000. Individual A possesses $1,000 in securities

wealth and $500,000 in housing wealth, while individual B possesses $500,000 in securities


                                                                                                     2
wealth and $1,000 in housing wealth. Suppose that actual individual behavior follows the

following pattern: consumption equals 80% of current income plus 3% of total wealth,

irrespective of whether wealth is in housing or securities.

          Suppose that one employs the standard functional form: ln                 ln      ln

  ln , where is consumption, is current income,           is housing wealth, is stock wealth, and

  ,   ,     , and   are parameters to be estimated. Suppose that one runs this specification on a

sample that pools together a population of many individuals, consisting of equal numbers of

types A and B, and further suppose that the estimated elasticity of consumption with respect to

housing wealth from that regression (parameter        ) is 0.015. That estimate suggests that a 1

percent increase in housing wealth should give rise to a 1.5 percent increase in consumption. But

that estimate is not close to accurate for either type of individual in the population. For Type A

individuals, when housing values rise by 1 percent, consumption rises by roughly 3 percent,

since almost all of type A’s wealth is in housing. For type B individuals, consumption is

virtually unaffected when housing values rise by 1 percent, since housing wealth is a trivial

fraction of total wealth. One contribution of our paper is that we address this wealth-

heterogeneity problem by allowing the elasticity of consumption with respect to different types

of wealth changes to vary with the ratios of each type of wealth to total wealth.

          Finally, as the theoretical insights of Buiter (2007) and Sinai and Souleles (2005)

emphasize, the demographic characteristics of the population should matter for housing wealth

effects. If older people are more likely to downsize and younger people are more likely to face

binding borrowing constraints against expected future income, then both young and old people

should exhibit larger housing wealth effects relative to people who are neither young nor old.




                                                                                                     3
Thus, in a panel analysis of U.S. states, heterogeneity across states or over time with respect to

age distribution should have important implications for housing and securities wealth effects.

       Along a similar line of reasoning, we posit that the distribution of wealth should matter to

the extent that borrowing constraints bind (which should raise estimated wealth effects of

consumption). Specifically, we allow wealth effects to depend on the extent of poverty in a

state. We expect that higher incidence of poverty (which, more broadly, reflects the share of the

population with low levels of per capita wealth) will be associated with higher wealth effects

because a greater proportion of low-wealth individuals (including homeowners) should be

associated with more binding constraints on borrowing against permanent income.

       In this paper, we deal with all of these considerations when estimating consumption

wealth effects for housing and securities. First, we construct a new annual dataset for the U.S.

states for the period 1981-2009. By focusing on annual data, we are able to avoid excessive

interpolation of missing values. Second, we employ the same instrumental variables approach

used in Calomiris, et al. (2009). Unlike that study, we find housing wealth effects are positive

and significant after instrumenting. We attribute this change to improvement in the quality of the

data employed in the present study.

       Third, as suggested by life-cycle consumption theory, we demonstrate that an empirical

specification that takes into account the relative amount of housing and securities wealth in a

given state-year improves the accuracy of the estimation. This reflects the fact that there is

substantial variation across states and over time in the composition of wealth.

       Fourth, taking account of demographic variation (differences in age and poverty rates)

also proves to be important, both across states and over time. As suggested by theory, housing

wealth effects tend to be larger in state-years with high proportions of young and old people, and


                                                                                                     4
those with higher poverty rates. Given the substantial variation across states and over time in

these population characteristics (reflecting, in part, the differential effects of the baby boom

across states), it turns out to be important to take demographic differences into account when

measuring wealth effects.

       Overall, we find that consumption responds positively to innovations in both housing

wealth and securities wealth, but housing wealth effects are significantly larger than stock wealth

effects. On average, a one dollar increase in the value of housing wealth raises consumption by

roughly five to eight cents. In contrast, a one dollar increase in the value of securities wealth

raises consumption by less than two cents on average. Importantly, there is substantial variation

across states and over time in both of these consumption responses to wealth changes, which are

related to changes in the age, poverty and wealth characteristics of the population over time. The

responsiveness of consumption to changes in different types of wealth should therefore be

understood within the historical context of the importance of housing wealth as a fraction of total

wealth, and the demographic and wealth composition characteristics of the population.

       Section II briefly reviews the literature on estimating the consumption elasticity of

housing and stock wealth. Section III describes our dataset. Section IV presents our empirical

findings, while Section V concludes.




II. Previous Literature


       Standard analysis of consumption decisions in a PIH framework indicates that an increase

in the value of an agent’s assets should cause the agent to increase consumption. Poterba (2000)

summarizes the issues and findings relating to consumption effects of increases in stock values.




                                                                                                    5
He points out that, even in the absence of credit constraints or other imperfections, agents that

are rational, forward-looking optimizers should increase consumption in response to the higher

wealth that stock price increases create. It is therefore unsurprising that a number of papers

(Ludvigson and Steindel, 1999, is one of many examples) find a significant, positive

consumption wealth effect from increases in stock wealth.


       Housing shares some similarity to equity in that it is an asset, and thus there may be a

wealth effect on consumption from an increase in housing values. However, housing is also a

consumption good, and a wealth effect from higher home prices is not as theoretically obvious as

in the case of stocks. Buiter (2007) quotes Bank of England Governor Mervyn King, who stated

that “housing wealth isn’t wealth.” The value of a house is simply the present value of the

housing services it delivers in the future. Those who have more housing than they plan on

consuming in the future (those who are net “long” housing) will be better off from an increase in

house prices, and may as a result increase consumption; those owning less housing than they

plan to consume in the future will be made worse off, and may decrease consumption as a result.

On average, since most residents own the houses in which they live, there should be little net

housing wealth effect. Buiter thus presents a model in which the only way a net housing wealth

effect is generated is through distributional considerations that result in small net wealth effects.


       Sinai and Souleles (2005) also develop a theoretical model in which aggregate housing

wealth effects should be relatively small for aggregate non-housing consumption. Their model,

however, takes borrowing constraints into account, which makes it possible for housing wealth

to exert a larger effect on consumption. Because future income cannot be credibly pledged to

lenders, the possession of housing wealth can increase current consumption for borrowers with

high expected future income growth. Indeed, housing wealth may be superior to stock wealth as


                                                                                                        6
collateral, since maximum permissible loan-to-value ratios on mortgages are much higher than

margin limits on stocks, and because mortgage interest is tax-deductible, while margin loan

interest is not. As in Buiter (2007), an increase in house prices causes higher housing asset

values, but also an equivalent increase in housing liabilities (the cost of future housing

consumption) ; any effect from increases in housing values on non-housing consumption,

therefore, primarily reflects the impact of the relaxation of borrowing constraints on consumers

(given housing’s special value as collateral for consumer borrowing).

       Thus, theoretically it is not at all clear that a substantial housing wealth effect on

aggregate non-housing consumption should be observed; the size of the effect depends on the

proportion of the population subject to binding borrowing constraints, and the distribution of the

wealth in the population that is either net long or net short housing. The housing wealth effect

may be greatest for younger homeowners who are most likely to suffer from credit constraints, or

for older homeowners who are contemplating imminent downsizing.


       Given the theoretical ambiguities of the housing wealth effect, a number of papers have

attempted to empirically gauge the impact of rising home prices on consumption, and compare

that housing wealth effect with the effect of stock wealth changes on consumption. Carroll, et al.

(2011) examine the housing wealth effect in the context of a habit formation model using

aggregate time series data. The authors find that consumption rises more in response to housing

than to stock wealth.


       Carroll and Zhou (2011) use a panel data set of U.S. states to examine the housing wealth

effect; the authors find a positive housing wealth effect, but no significant stock wealth effect.

They construct new data on consumption and financial wealth at the state level semi-annually

that is likely more accurate than the data used in some previous papers. As in the present study,


                                                                                                     7
the authors employ data based on the FHFA home price index.1 A major limitation of their data,

however, is that it only runs from 2001 through 2005. This is a much shorter span than prior

panel-based studies, which often have data covering three decades or more. As a result, the

Carroll and Zhou (2011) data set misses out on most of the more volatile and infamous national

and local housing cycles over the past 30 years.


        Several studies employ micro data on households. Mian and Sufi (2011) analyze data on

75,000 existing homeowners over time and across Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) and

conclude that the recent housing boom boosted consumption in the United States. Like us, Mian

and Sufi analyze how age and financing constraints affect wealth effects, finding that younger

homeowners and those with low credit scores and greater reliance on credit card borrowing

(which may proxy for financing constraints) respond more to a rise in home values by borrowing

against the value of their homes. Bostic, et al. (2009) examine data from both the Survey of

Consumer Finances and the Consumer Expenditure Survey, finding that housing wealth appears

most highly associated with non-durable consumption, while financial wealth is most closely

linked with expenditures on durables.

        One of the most highly cited studies on housing wealth effects is Case, Quigley and

Shiller (CQS, 2005). This study uses a panel of quarterly data for US states running 1982-1999,

as well as a panel of fourteen OECD countries using annual data over the same period. The

authors later updated this study (CQS, 2011); the new panel data set (for U.S. states only in this

version) runs from 1978-2009.




1
 FHFA (the Federal Housing Finance Agency) was formerly known as the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight (OFHEO).


                                                                                                            8
       CQS (2005, 2011) estimate the effects of wealth on consumption in a variety of ways.

First, they model the level of consumption as a function of the level of income, and stock and

housing wealth. Next, they model the difference in consumption as a function of differences in

housing, stock wealth and income. CQS also estimate a version of an error correction model, in

which the parameters of the cointegrating vector are imposed (income affects consumption one-

to-one). In all of these specifications, housing wealth is found to have a positive and significant

effect on consumption, and in nearly all cases, the housing wealth coefficient is larger than that

of stock wealth. While the 2005 study only covers the years 1982-1999 and misses the latest

dramatic rise and fall in house prices, the more recent study has been updated with quarterly data

spanning 1978-2009.


       In their 2005 paper, CQS regress the current change in consumption on the current

change in income, housing and stock wealth (without instrumenting). This causes a potentially

severe endogeneity problem. Aron and Muellbauer (2006) point out that studies of the housing

wealth effect tend to be plagued by “poor controls for common drivers” of both housing wealth

and consumption. One key common driver is permanent income. An increase in expected

permanent income will increase both consumption and demand for homes, and therefore house

prices. Because CQS (2005) do not control for shocks related to permanent income, it is possible

that their results are driven by correlations between permanent income shocks (which should be

the dominant source of housing price changes across time and across states) and housing price

changes. In other words, in states where housing prices are rising, that rise reflects not just past

income growth, but expectations of future income growth, which may produce improvements in

many current market indicators, including rising home values.




                                                                                                       9
       In CQS (2011), the authors do include regressions that control for omitted

variable/endogeneity bias by instrumenting wealth, following the methodology of Campbell and

Mankiw (1990). The results of the 2011 paper are qualitatively similar to the earlier paper – an

increase in housing wealth is associated with a statistically significant increase in consumption,

and this effect is larger than that of an increase in stock wealth – although the authors now report

a wider range of parameter estimates.


       Using the CQS (2005) quarterly data but applying the Campbell and Mankiw (1990)

instrumenting technique, Calomiris, et al. (2009) show that the CQS (2005) wealth effect

estimates are substantially reduced. Thus, the increased size and statistical significance of

housing wealth effects reported in CQS (2011) – in contrast to Calomiris, et al. (2009) – seem to

result from the addition of new data.


       While the attempt to measure housing wealth at the state level is a major contribution of

CQS (2005, 2011), the use of quarterly data to measure wealth effects may be problematic. If

consumption takes longer than one quarter to fully respond to a change in housing wealth then

their estimates will be biased, since, in the CQS specification, consumption must respond to a

change in home prices within the same quarter. Even if the regressors were lagged (which they

are not), it is unlikely that the full effect of housing wealth would exert itself upon consumption

in just one quarter. Indeed, Carroll, et al. (2011) estimate housing wealth effects within a habit

formation framework and point out that it could take several years for a change in wealth to fully

exert itself on consumption. Along these lines, Carroll and Zhou (2011) allow for a two year

window to capture the impact of wealth changes on consumer spending. To address this issue,

we employ annual data in our study. Annual data also allow us to avoid excessive interpolation

of stock wealth data (see the Data Appendix for a detailed discussion of this issue), and to


                                                                                                  10
employ other data that are only available at annual frequency – i.e., demographic variables that

are likely to matter for the size of housing wealth effects, as discussed above.2


         Ours is not the first study to examine the demographic aspects of housing wealth effects.

Campbell and Cocco (2007) employ micro data, and find that older homeowners (those over

forty) exhibit greater wealth effects than those under forty. This finding is consistent with older

homeowners being net long housing due to anticipated downsizing; however, the authors only

divide their age groups into “old” and “young”, making no allowance for middle age. Attanasio,

et al. (2009) divide age groups into three categories: young (under 35), middle-aged (35-60) and

old (over 60). They find that their estimated housing wealth effect is larger for the young than

the old. Since the young are not likely looking to trade down, and are more likely to include

non-homeowners, the authors believe that the estimated wealth effect likely reflects omitted

factors. In particular, consistent with Sinai and Souleles (2005), we would note that young

people are most likely to suffer from credit constraints, and thus the impact of house prices on

the consumption of the young may well represent an effect of home values on consumer

spending.


         The results of Campbell and Cocco (2007) and Attanasio, et al. (2009) are promising, and

point to important potential demographic influences. However, both restrict themselves to data

for the United Kingdom. Contreras and Nichols (2010) examine a micro panel data set for the

United States, and include controls for demographics (they include the age of the household head

and its square). They also note that the effect of housing on consumption depends on housing’s

2
  We recognize that our own annual contemporaneous modeling of the response of consumption to changes in
income and wealth may not fully capture the long-run response of consumption to these changes. Adding lagged
consumption growth to our panel estimation in the presence of state fixed effects, however, would yield inconsistent
estimates. While there are techniques that yield consistent estimates for dynamic panels with fixed effects, they are
unreliable in small samples like ours. Given that we regard state fixed effects as warranted, we choose to model
only contemporaneous annual responses.


                                                                                                                  11
proportion of total housing wealth. Dividing the country into nine regions, they find that those

areas with the most cyclical house price changes also typically display the highest housing

wealth, and often exhibit a high estimated elasticity of consumption with respect to home values,

as well as smaller ratios of consumption to housing wealth.


       The dependence of the wealth effect on the ratio of housing wealth to total wealth is an

important insight. As discussed in Section I, in a standard PIH model, the impact of housing on

consumption should depend on the relative importance of housing wealth, and on the size of total

wealth (relative to consumption). One of the contributions of our study is the development of a

model that explicitly allows housing and stock wealth effects to vary based on what fraction of

total wealth they comprise.


       In summary, the existing literature on consumption responses to changes in housing and

securities wealth has pointed in several promising directions, which we pursue below: (1) panel

estimation of wealth effects (as in CQS) can add statistical power by taking advantage of

variation across states and across time; (2) endogeneity/omitted variable bias is a concern that

can be addressed by instrumenting wealth and income, as in Campbell and Mankiw (1990); (3)

functional forms for estimating housing and securities wealth effects on consumption should take

into account the basic logic of the PIH, which requires that elasticities be allowed to vary with

differences in the relative proportions of housing and securities wealth; and (4) differences

within populations in the proportions of different age groups, and in the distribution of wealth

(the incidence of poverty), are likely to be important in influencing the magnitude of measured

wealth effects.




                                                                                                    12
III. Data


       In what follows, we provide a brief description of the data used in our analysis; a more

detailed description of our data sources is provided in the Data Appendix. Following CQS

(2005, 2011), we use retail sales as a proxy for consumption, using state-level estimates from

1977Q1 through 2010Q1 provided by Moody’s Economy.com. The underlying data for retail

sales at the state level are nominal, seasonally-adjusted annual rates at a quarterly frequency; our

annual figures are the average of the quarterly SAAR values within each year.


       Housing wealth is measured as the average value of owner-occupied housing times the

number of owner-occupants within each state. The average value of owner-occupied housing

each quarter is taken from the Land Prices by State Dataset developed by Davis and Heathcote

(2007) and provided by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy; we use 4th quarter figures as the

value for the year. The number of owner-occupied households in each state each year is derived

from the Annual Social and Economic (ASEC) Supplement to the Current Population Survey

(CPS). A detailed description of how we calculated these estimates is provided in the Data

Appendix. Total nominal housing wealth in each state year is then calculated as the average

value of owner-occupied housing times the number of owner households.


       Total U.S. stock wealth is calculated as the sum of corporate equities, mutual fund shares

and pension fund reserves for households and non-profit corporations from the Federal Reserve

Z1 statistical release; we use year-end (4th quarter) values. We allocate that measure of

aggregate annual U.S. stock wealth among states based on the estimated share of mutual fund

holdings across states. Mutual fund share estimates for each state are available only for 1986,

1987, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, 2000, 2008 and 2009. For years prior to 1986, we used 1986




                                                                                                  13
values; values for the remaining missing years of each state’s share in total mutual fund share

percentages (1988, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1996-1999, and 2001-2007) were interpolated linearly.

Estimated nominal stock wealth in each state is then calculated as the aggregate U.S. stock

wealth times each state’s share of aggregate mutual fund holdings.


        Other variables used in the analysis include real per-capita personal income from the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and annual population estimates by age group and poverty

rates from the U.S. Census. We transform our consumption, income and all three wealth

variables (housing wealth, stock wealth, and total wealth) into real, per-capita values by dividing

by population and deflating using the GDP implicit price deflator. Unless otherwise stated

below, all regressions below are run on log differences of these real, per-capita values.


        Our measures of housing and stock wealth differ from those of CQS (2011) in several

ways.3 CQS measure housing wealth using the Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss indices to capture

quarterly changes in house values at the state level. Davis and Heathcote’s measure of housing

wealth uses actual 1980, 1990, and 2000 census figures for the average value of owner-occupied

homes in those years and, as discussed in the Data Appendix, only relies on the FHFA index to

fill in intervening years. 4 In contrast, CQS use only the 2000 census year to benchmark their

housing value estimates. With respect to stock wealth, CQS use a similar approach to ours,



3
  In the discussion that follows, we mainly compare our data with CQS (2011). Differences with Carroll and Zhou
(2011) are more substantial and reflect the limited availability of state-level data on securities wealth and
consumption.
4
  Both the FHFA and the Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss indices are based on comparisons over time of transactions
involving the same house, in contrast to hedonic pricing models that attempt to control for house characteristics.
These same-sales indexes, however, can suffer from selectivity bias relating to the timing of particular types of
house sales. For example, during the 2007-2009 period, housing sales include a large proportion of distressed home
sales (foreclosures and the like), and observed values of the indexes may provide an exaggerated picture of housing
price decline. Indeed, Leventis (2009) provides evidence that this is the case. One could make a similar argument
that during the subprime housing boom of 2004-2006, transactions gave an unrepresentative and exaggerated picture
of housing price increases.


                                                                                                                14
although they lack data for 1995 and 2000 on state-level mutual fund shares, which requires that

they interpolate over the entire period from 1993 to 2008.


       Unlike CQS, we rely on annual rather than quarterly data. The sample period is long

enough for annual data to provide reasonably precise estimation of wealth effects, and we regard

annual data as more reliable for several reasons.


       First, given the limited number of observations about equity holdings and the consequent

need to interpolate states’ shares of mutual funds, we are less comfortable constructing estimated

quarterly observations for stock wealth. Quarterly interpolation is particularly problematic since

the spotty data on mutual fund shares at the state level are not associated with a particular quarter

within the year. Furthermore, forcing stock holdings to change smoothly over time while

allowing housing wealth to vary quarterly may exaggerate the relative size of housing wealth

effects (especially if the two kinds of wealth are positively correlated). While this problem

remains with our annual data, it should be less pronounced than it is with quarterly interpolation.


       Second, the selectivity bias in measuring house prices resulting from using same house

sales as a measure of underlying housing value will be more pronounced with higher-frequency

quarterly data; temporal aggregation should reduce some of the cyclical bias related to the use of

a same-sales housing price index.


       Third, the use of annual data avoids having to take a position about the appropriate means

of adjusting for seasonality in personal income and house prices; adjusting for seasonality is

especially challenging given the potential for differences in seasonal patterns across states with

very different age structure and weather patterns.




                                                                                                  15
       Finally, our population, age composition and poverty estimates are only available at an

annual frequency.




IV. Empirical Analysis


Variation across States and Over Time in Wealth and Population Composition

       Table 1 reports summary statistics for the variables used in this study, pooling data across

states and over time. As discussed above, our study emphasizes how variation in age groups,

poverty incidence, and the proportion of wealth in housing, can affect the estimation of

consumption wealth effects for housing and stock. Table 2 shows how our demographic

variables vary across states. The states with the smallest and largest average proportions of

young adults are West Virginia (27.6 percent) and Utah (39.4 percent), respectively. Alaska has

the largest percentage of middle-aged (45.2 percent), while Florida has the lowest percentage

(35.1 percent). Alaska is home to the smallest proportion of old (18.7 percent), while the state

with the highest proportion of old, Florida, had twice that proportion (37.3 percent). Mississippi

has the largest average poverty rate, at 21.2 percent, while New Hampshire’s poverty rate is the

lowest (6.7 percent).

       Figures 1A and 1B plot how the age distribution has changed over time for a sample of

eleven states, and for the U.S. as a whole. The percent of the adult population that is “young”

(ages 20-34) is plotted on the x axis, while the percent of the adult population that is “old” (ages

55+) is plotted on the y axis. Clearly, despite the differences in average population composition

across states, states followed a similar within-state pattern over time. The proportion of young

people declined steadily from 1985 to about 2000 while the proportion of old remained roughly



                                                                                                   16
constant. After 2000, the proportion of young people was roughly constant, while the proportion

of old people rose steadily. This pattern reflects the effects on population composition of the

post-World War II “baby boom.”

        Figure 2 shows the variation in the poverty rate over time for each state. States are

arrayed on the x axis, with each dot representing one year’s value for the poverty rate for that

state. From this figure it is clear that there is as much or more variation in the poverty rate over

time within states as there is across states.

        Similarly, Figure 3 plots the ratio of housing wealth to total wealth for each state over

time. As with the poverty rate, this figure shows variation in the average ratio of housing wealth

across states as well as over time within states. For example, Nebraska displays a low average

proportion of housing wealth and a relatively small amount of variation over time in the housing

wealth ratio. Hawaii displays a high average proportion of housing wealth and a relatively small

amount of variation around that mean. Other states – Louisiana, Mississippi, and West Virginia,

for example – have average ratios closer to the national mean and show much greater variation

over time in those ratios.

        Figure 4 shows that this variation over time in the proportion of housing wealth follows a

similar pattern across the various states, although some states display more pronounced variation

over time than others. The housing wealth ratio declined from 1985 to 2000, then rose during

the early 2000s, and fell again during the post-2006 subprime crisis.




                                                                                                    17
Calculating Wealth Effects

        Our full regression model allows the estimated consumption elasticities of housing and

stock wealth to vary as a function of the relative size of housing and stock wealth. We do this by

including the log difference of total wealth in the model. As we show below, this specification

allows the housing and stock wealth elasticities to vary based on their shares of total wealth. In

addition, our model includes interaction effects between the wealth variables and the

demographic variables. Our full regression specification can be written as:


 Δ ln                 Δ ln          Δ ln          Δ ln           Δ ln

                             Δ ln                   Δ ln                       Δ ln                   Δ ln

                             Δ ln                    Δ ln                       Δ ln                     Δ ln

                             Δ ln


Where       is real, per-capita consumption in state at time ,               is real, per-capita housing

wealth in state at time ,        is real, per-capita stock wealth in state at time ,              is real, per

capital total wealth in state at time ,        is real, per-capita personal income in state at time ,

   is the percent of the adult population aged 20-34 in state at time , and                  is the percent of

the adult population aged 55+ in state at time , and             is the poverty rate in state at time .


        Noting that                    and Δ ln             ln          ln            , the impact of a one

dollar change in housing wealth is calculated as:


        1             1      1             1         1           1              1           1             1




             HWE                                                                                     ,        (1)



                                                                                                                18
where bars denote sample mean values of the variable/ratio in question. We will sometimes refer

to    as the housing wealth effect (HWE), and to the analogous derivative of consumption with

respect to stock wealth        as the stock wealth effect (SWE). The consumption elasticity of

housing wealth is therefore simply


                    /
                                                                                       ;        (2)
                    /


stock wealth effects and elasticities are calculated analogously.


       Notice that in this specification, the consumption elasticities of housing and stock wealth

explicitly depend on the shares of total wealth. To see this, consider a simplified version of the

model that does not include demographic variables. In this case, the consumption elasticity of

housing wealth simplifies to                  . In other words, the consumption elasticity of

housing wealth is not constant in this model, but rather depends directly on how large a fraction

of total wealth housing wealth comprises.


       In addition to average (sample mean) housing wealth effects and elasticities, we can also

calculate predicted values for each state-year observation:


                        HWE
                                                                                                (3)



and


                                                                                           .    (4)



                                                                                                  19
Calculating predicted housing and stock wealth effects allows us to map how these effects have

changed over time due to changes in demographics and wealth ratios.


       The derivatives of the housing wealth effect with respect to , , and , are simply


                                    HWE
                                                                     ,                          (5)


                                    HWE
                                                                     ,                          (6)


and


                                    HWE
                                                                     .                          (7)


We hypothesize that all three of these derivatives should be positive. A higher proportion of

young people or people with low wealth should be associated with more binding borrowing

constraints, which should raise the wealth effect. Similarly, a larger proportion of older people

(for whom downsizing of housing consumption is more likely) should also produce a larger

wealth effect. Note that our model specification also implies that       is higher when housing

wealth (      ) is lower, ceteris paribus (because   only appears in the denominator of expression

(3) above).


       For comparison purposes, we present four additional specifications that do not include all

the effects modeled above. All estimations are specified as log differences to satisfy stationarity

requirements, and follow the Campbell and Mankiw (1990) instrumenting procedure, as in




                                                                                                  20
Calomiris, et al. (2009). In addition, all of our regressions control for state fixed effects.5

Presumably, these fixed effects capture average differences across states in expected future

income growth, human capital, and other omitted factors that influence consumption growth

rates. We do not include time effects, since much of the annual variation in wealth (especially in

stock wealth) reflects common factors that affect all the states (e.g., the stock market). Standard

errors are clustered by state. Despite some minor differences, results are quite similar across all

these specifications, as we discuss further below.


           In a supplemental appendix, we also report results from OLS log difference regressions,

for comparison purposes.6 We do not report error-correction model results, since the variables in

our model do not appear to be cointegrated, as discussed in the following brief digression.




Is an Error-Correction Model Warranted?

           Some authors (e.g., CQS, 2005, 2011) estimate error-correction models of housing wealth

effects. This approach, however, has drawn criticism. Carroll, et al. (2011) argue that changes

in interest or growth rates should change the relationships among other variables (e.g.,

consumption, income and wealth), thus eliminating a stable cointegrating vector among those

variables. If the cointegrating vector is not stable, according to the well-known Granger

representation theorem, an error correction model would not make sense.

           We tested for the possibility of cointegration among all four variables in our system

(consumption, income, housing wealth, and stock wealth) by utilizing the panel cointegration test

of Westerlund (2007). A traditional challenge in testing for cointegration is the lack of power in

5
    The state fixed effects coefficients for our full specification (Model 5) are reported in Appendix Table A1.
6
    Supplemental appendices can be found at http://realestate.wichita.edu/draft/research/academic_research.asp.


                                                                                                                   21
traditional methods such as the Johansen-Juselius technique, which posits the null hypothesis as

a lack of cointegration; a lack of power means that one will often conclude that the variables in

question are not cointegrated, when in fact there could be a stationary long-run relationship

among them.

       Fortunately, however, we are utilizing a panel dataset. The larger panel dataset increases

the power of the test, just as panel unit root tests increase the power of testing for nonstationarity

in a single series. Some early panel cointegration tests suffered from low power, which arose

from imposing restrictions, such as requiring the long-run parameters to be equal to the short run

responses in differences (see Westerlund 2007), or not allowing for cross-sectional dependence.

Note that allowing for cross-sectional dependence is vital in our study, as there are clearly

common shocks to income, stock and housing wealth across states.

       Westerlund (2007) has developed a test for panel cointegration which does not impose

such restrictions and has been demonstrated in simulations to have greater power than existing

panel cointegration tests. By applying this test, we are choosing a technique with a high

probability of finding a cointegrating relationship if one exists.

       In particular, the Westerlund technique tests for the significance of the error-correction,

or speed-of-adjustment term. Consider a simple model, where            is a variable and   is a vector of

variables:


               Δ             ,          ,              Δ     ,              Δ   ,



Here     is the error correction term, and   ,           ,       is the cointegrating vector. Again, by

the Granger representation theorem, if the variables are cointegrated, the model has an error




                                                                                                      22
correction representation as shown in the above expression. The Westerlund technique thus tests

for the significance of   ; if it is significant, then the variables are cointegrated.

         When allowing for a trend, cross-sectional dependence, and differing speed of adjustment

coefficients across the four variables, we were unable to reject the null hypothesis of no

cointegration. Specifically, the Westerlund test statistic was -2.792, implying a p-value of 0.235.

This suggests that it would not be appropriate to model wealth effects using an error-correction

model.




Estimation Results

         Table 3 reports our regression results. Model 1 is a traditional specification including

only income, housing wealth and stock wealth. Model 2 includes total wealth, allowing housing

and stock wealth elasticities to vary based on their proportions of total wealth. Model 3 adds age

and poverty demographics to the model but does not allow elasticities to vary with wealth shares.

Model 4 includes age demographics and wealth shares effects, while Model 5 is the full

specification including age demographics, the poverty rate and wealth shares effects.

         Based on the regression results reported in Table 3, Table 4 shows, for each of the five

models, the implied average housing wealth effects (HWE), average stock wealth effects (SWE),

average elasticities of consumption with respect to housing and stock wealth, and the derivatives

of HWE and SWE with respect to age composition and poverty rates. Recall that HWE and

SWE measure the effects on consumption of a $1 increase in either housing wealth or stock

wealth. Using Model 5, a $1 increase in housing wealth raises contemporaneous consumption by

roughly $0.08 on average. In contrast, the effect of a $1 increase in stock wealth on consumption




                                                                                                    23
is nil (although in the non-preferred specifications of Models 1-3, the average stock wealth effect

is just less than $0.02).

        As hypothesized above, in our preferred Model 5 the implied derivatives of HWE with

respect to ,      and     are all positive. That is, higher proportions of young people and old

people, and a higher poverty rate all act to raise the housing wealth effect for a state-year. In

contrast, the estimated derivatives of SWE with respect to              and     are negative. It is worth

noting, however, that the overall stock wealth effect is insignificantly different from zero,

making the implied derivatives less relevant. The insignificant estimated SWE reflects the

offsetting influences of seven statistically significant coefficients from Model 5 in Table 3. In

other words, the net effect of combining several statistically significant influences is an overall

stock wealth effect that is not measurably different from zero.

        Figure 5 plots the pattern of average estimated wealth effects over time (averaging across

states within each year) for our various specifications, with confidence intervals estimated under

the restrictive assumption that within-year covariances of HWEs and SWEs across states are

zero.7 In Models 4 and 5, which include both age demographics and wealth ratios, stock wealth

effects are relatively high during the stock market boom of the 1990s, when the proportion of

stock wealth was relatively high; housing wealth effects fell sharply during this period. Over

time, however, average housing wealth effects have generally been declining. The differences in

the implied time variation of wealth effects for the different model specifications has interesting

implications for understanding the factors that drive variation in housing and stock wealth effects


7
  In principle, each of the state’s HWE and SWE observations in a given year has an error component, but this can
only be calculated for a given assumption of the covariances among the states’ HWEs (or SWEs) within each year.
By making a particular assumption – here, that covariance is zero – we are able to calculate the standard error in
each year. If one assumed positive covariances among states, confidence bands would widen accordingly.



                                                                                                                 24
across different time periods. Models 2 and 3, which take into account only age variation or

wealth composition (but not both simultaneously, as in Models 4 and 5), exhibit much smaller

swings in wealth effects over time. Demographic and wealth compositional effects, therefore,

obviously are correlated, since Model 5’s time path is not a simple aggregation of the influences

of Models 2 and 3 (wealth ratios and demographics). In addition to plotting Figure 5 based on

simple averages across states, we also examined alternative versions of Figure 5 (available in a

supplemental appendix) which weigh states by consumption, total wealth, or population; all of

these versions of Figure 5 appear virtually identical to the non-weighted version reported here.

       As hypothesized, poverty rate interactions are statistically significant and the derivative

of the housing wealth effect with respect to poverty is positive (Table 4). We interpret this as

evidence that states with higher poverty also tend to experience more binding borrowing

constraints on permanent income, which tends to strengthen the housing wealth effect. Figure 5

shows that the inclusion of poverty rates does not materially affect the patterns of time variation

in the size of the two wealth effects once age effects are included, although it does increase the

magnitude of the average estimated housing wealth effect. In other words, the time patterns of

the wealth effects are qualitatively similar across Model 4 (without poverty rates) and Model 5

(with poverty rates).

       Figure 6 is plotted under our full specification, and shows the extent of variation within

each state over time in the implied housing and stock wealth effects. Stock wealth effects vary

less across states than do housing wealth effects.

       The inclusion of poverty rates affects the correlations between wealth effects and total

wealth. The top part of Figure 7 plots the relationship between total wealth and the housing and

stock wealth effects under the Model 4 specification (which does not include poverty rates). As


                                                                                                     25
implied by our specifications, both of the estimated wealth effects decline as a function of

wealth. When poverty is included in the model, however, (as shown in the bottom half of Figure

7) the association between estimated housing wealth elasticities and total wealth becomes more

pronounced, while the association between estimated stock wealth elasticities and wealth

becomes less pronounced. This reflects the fact that the inclusion of poverty rates in the

specification (which are strongly negatively correlated with real, per capita total wealth)

increases the housing wealth effect for states with higher poverty rates. Table 5 provides state-

level averages (sorted by the size of the housing wealth effect) of the housing wealth effect, the

stock wealth effect, and the key variables that determine the size of these effects, as calculated in

expression (1) above.

       In results not reported here, we explored whether the unemployment rate might serve as a

better measure of wealth distribution than the poverty rate. That is, we re-ran the specifications

reported in Table 3 using unemployment instead of poverty for the regressions in columns (3)

and (5). Coefficients on unemployment interactions with wealth measures were less statistically

significant. The results for HWE and SWE reported in Table 4, as well as the wealth elasticities

and wealth effect derivatives reported in Table 4, were quite similar. Overall, we concluded

from this analysis that unemployment is a somewhat noisier proxy than poverty rates for the

distribution of wealth.




                                                                                                   26
Why Are Stock Wealth Effects Relatively Small?

         We consistently find that stock wealth effects, elasticities, and wealth effect derivatives

are small relative to comparable effects relating to housing wealth.8 This finding is puzzling,

given that, in theory – as developed by Buiter (2007) and Sinai and Souleles (2005) – stock

wealth effects should be larger than housing wealth effects. We can think of two possible

explanations for our findings: the relatively high volatility of stock wealth, and the relatively low

proportion of the population that owns stock.

         First, it may be that the higher volatility of stock wealth causes small short-run (one-year)

responses of consumption to increases in stock wealth. If consumption decisions are costly to

reverse (e.g., if there are costs of liquidating consumer durables, “habit formation” effects, etc.)

then consumers will respond less to volatile changes in wealth. Indeed, several papers have

found that consumers’ short-run responses to stock wealth are much lower than their long-run

responses (see the discussion in Parker 2001).

         As shown in Table 6, on average, the coefficient of variation for housing wealth is

generally lower than that of stock wealth. Furthermore, for the vast majority of states, stock

wealth is much more volatile than housing wealth. There are eleven states for which the

coefficient of variation is higher for housing wealth than for stock wealth, but in six of those

eleven cases, the housing wealth coefficient of variation is no more than 11% higher than the

stock wealth coefficient of variation. Among the five cases where housing wealth is

substantially more volatile than stock wealth (Delaware, New Jersey, District of Columbia,


8
 Note that our finding of a larger wealth effect for housing compared to equities is consistent with previous studies
for the U.S. For instance, in nearly all specifications of CQS (2005), the housing wealth effect exceeds the stock
wealth effect. CQS (2011) update their study and similarly find small stock wealth effects compared to the imapct
of housing wealth. Carroll et al. (2011) find much larger housing than stock wealth effects, and Carroll and Zhou
(2011) find a positive impact of housing wealth on consumption, but no significant impact of stocks.


                                                                                                                   27
Florida, and Oregon), two of those cases (DE and DC) exhibit housing volatility more than twice

as high as stock wealth volatility. In 40 of 51 cases, stock wealth is more volatile than housing

wealth. In four of those 40 cases stock wealth volatility is no more than 11% higher, but in 36 of

the 40 cases, it is substantially more volatile, and in 15 cases, stock wealth is more than twice as

volatile as housing wealth. In summary, in ten of 51 “states” (including DC), housing wealth

and stock wealth are similarly volatile; in five states housing wealth is substantially more volatile

than stock wealth; and in the remaining 36 states, stock wealth is substantially more volatile than

housing wealth. Furthermore, in only two states is housing wealth more than twice as volatile as

stock wealth; but in 15 states stock wealth is more than twice as volatile as housing wealth.

       A second explanation for the low response of consumption to stock wealth could be

aggregation bias. If there are fixed costs to holding stocks (e.g., the cost of becoming familiar

with stock market investments and the process of establishing brokerage accounts), then many

people may simply not participate at all in the stock market. In that case, the estimated stock

wealth response for a state-year observation will be substantially downward biased, since the

aggregate response reflects the behavior of only a portion of the population.

       While virtually everyone lives in a home, and roughly two-thirds of Americans owned

their primary residence during our sample period, as shown in Table 7, only 15-21 percent of

Americans (depending on the year) owned stocks, and only 10-18 percent owned pooled

investment funds.

       Although it is beyond the scope of this paper, future empirical work using household-

level data could distinguish between these two competing hypotheses – volatility differences of

wealth and aggregation bias – to estimate their relative importance in explaining the relatively

low marginal propensity to consume from stock wealth. Nevertheless, for the purposes of our


                                                                                                    28
study, it is relevant to note that both views are plausible, given the much greater volatility of

stock wealth for most states and the much lower household participation rate in the stock market.




V. Conclusion

       Economic theory has several important implications for the empirical modeling of

consumption wealth effects: (1) The composition of wealth (the relative proportions of housing

and stock wealth) should matter for the estimation of wealth effects on consumption associated

with changes in either type of wealth; (2) age characteristics of the population should matter for

estimation of housing wealth effects, either because of anticipated downsizing of housing by

older residents, or because younger residents tend to face more binding constraints on borrowing

against permanent income; (3) the proportion of low-wealth individuals may matter for wealth

effects through its effect on the extent to which residents are likely to face binding borrowing

constraints against permanent income; and (4) permanent income and wealth variation are likely

correlated, which means that estimates of wealth effects may suffer from endogeneity/omitted

variable bias.


       This paper assembles new annual data on state-level housing wealth, stock wealth, and

other variables for the period 1981 to 2009 in order to address each of these theoretical ideas. In

contrast to Calomiris, et al. (2009) – which was based on less-reliable data – we find evidence of

a large average housing wealth effect during our sample period. Consistent with theory, housing

wealth effects vary dramatically over time and across states, reflecting variation in the proportion

of housing wealth, variation in age composition associated with varying state-level experiences

during the baby boom, and variation in the incidence of poverty. Stock wealth effects, on




                                                                                                    29
average, are much smaller than housing wealth effects, and they also vary over time and across

states. These estimates show the importance of taking account of wealth composition, age

composition, and wealth distribution when estimating housing and stock wealth effects. Wealth

effects going forward, therefore, are likely to be very different from those of the past, as they will

be contingent on a variety of demographic and economic characteristics that will change over

time.


        One advantage of our state-level aggregate analysis is that our specification may be

useful to macroeconomic forecasters to gauge the time variation in wealth effects. The most

important inputs on which we rely for our estimation – annual state-level data on the age of the

population, the poverty rate, and the amount of housing wealth – are generally available with

short lags, and therefore, could be used to update housing wealth effect forecasts annually. Given

the amount of variation over time in wealth effects, this could be a useful forecasting tool.


        Our finding that stock wealth effects are small and not highly statistically significant is at

odds with some theoretical models. In the models developed by Buiter (2007) and Sinai and

Souleles (2005), stock wealth effects, in general, should be larger than housing wealth effects,

notwithstanding the greater usefulness of housing wealth as collateral for borrowing against

permanent income. It is worth noting that Carroll and Zhou (2011) – who employ better quality

data on stock wealth for a shorter time period – also find a negligible stock wealth effect as did

Carroll, et al. (2011), and Case, et al. (2005, 2011). We conjecture that the greater volatility of

stock wealth and the lower rate of participation by households in the stock market can explain

the relatively muted response of consumption to changes in stock market wealth.




                                                                                                      30
                                        References
Aizcorbe, A,.A. Kennickell, and K. Moore (2003). “Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances:
Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
January.

Aron, J. and J. Muellbauer (2006). “Housing Wealth, Credit Conditions and Consumption.”
MPRA Working Paper 24485.

Attanasio, O., L. Blow, R. Hamilton and A. Leicester (2009). “Booms and Busts: Consumption,
House Prices and Expectations.” Economica, 76, 20-50.

Bostic, R., S. Gabriel and G. Painter (2009). “Housing Wealth, Financial Wealth, and
Consumption: New Evidence from Micro Data.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39,
79-89.

Bucks, B.,, A. Kennickell, T. Mach, and K. Moore (2009). “Changes in U.S. Family Finances
from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve
Bulletin, Feb. 12.

Bucks, B., A. Kennickell, and K. Moore (2006). “Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances:
Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
March 22..

Buiter, W. (2007). “Lessons from the North Atlantic Financial Crisis.” Center for Economic
Policy Research No. 18.

Calomiris, C., S. Longhofer and W. Miles (2009). “The (Mythical?) Housing Wealth Effect?”
NBER Working Paper 1575.

Campbell and Cocco (2007). “How do House Prices Affect Consumption?” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 54, 591-621.

Campbell, J. and G. Mankiw (1990). “Permanent Income, Current Income, and Consumption.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 8, 265-279.

Carroll, J., M. Otsuka and J. Slacalek (2011). “How Large is the Housing Wealth Effect? A
New Approach.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 55-79.

Carroll, J. and X. Zhou (2011). “Measuring Housing Wealth Effects Using U.S. State Data.”
Working Paper, John Hopkins University.

Case, K., J. Quigley and R. Shiller (2005). “Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock Market
versus the Housing Market.” Advances in Macroeconomics, 5, pp. 1-34.




                                                                                             31
Case, K., J. Quigley and R. Shiller (2011). “Wealth Effects Revisited 1978-2009.” Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1784.

Contreras, J. and J. Nichols (2010). “Consumption Responses to Permanent and Transitory
Shocks to House Appreciation.” FEDS Working Paper 2010-32.

Davis, M. and J. Heathecote (2007). “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in the United
States.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2595-2620.

Kennickell A., M. Starr-McCluer, and A. Sunden (1997). “Family Finances in the U.S.: Recent
Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, January.

Kennickell A., M. Starr-McCluer, and B. Surette (2000). “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
Finances: Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
January.

Leventis, A. (2009). “The Impact of Distressed Sales on Repeat-Transactions House Price
Indices.” Working Paper, Federal Housing Finance Agency.

Ludvigson, S. and C. Steindel (1999). “How Important is the Stock Market Effect on
Consumption?” Research Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 29-51.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2011). “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, 101, 2132-56.

Parker, Jonathan A. (2001). “The Consumption Risk of the Stock Market.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2, 279-348.

Poterba, J. (2000). “Stock Market Wealth and Consumption.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14, 99-118.

Sinai, T. and N. Souleles (2005). “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge against Risk.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 763-789.

Westerlund, J. (2007). “Testing for Error Correction in Panel Data.” Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 69, 709-748.




                                                                                            32
Table 1 – Summary Statistics
Variable                                  Obs.         Mean        Std. Dev.        Min.          Max.
Consumption                               1,275       11,997         2,186          6,887       20,973
Income                                    1,275       29,550         6,544         15,877       63,053
Housing Wealth                            1,275       45,348         21,778        17,173       170,507
Stock Wealth                              1,275       56,169         24,989         7,496       120,102
Total Wealth                              1,275       101,517        41,570        28,317       260,588
Housing Wealth Percent                    1,275        0.457          0.103         0.242        0.735
Stock Wealth Percent                      1,275        0.543          0.103         0.265        0.758
Percent Young (Ages 20-34)                1,275        0.312         0.041          0.229        0.478
Percent Middle Age (Ages 35-54)           1,275        0.384         0.034          0.292        0.499
Percent Old (Ages 55+)                    1,275        0.304         0.033          0.135        0.386
Poverty Rate                              1,275        0.127         0.038          0.029        0.272
Log Difference of
 Consumption                              1,275         0.012         0.033        -0.122         0.156
 Income                                   1,275         0.019         0.022        -0.108         0.096
 Housing Wealth                           1,275         0.029         0.061        -0.372         0.259
 Stock Wealth                             1,275         0.056         0.152        -0.423         0.429
 Total Wealth                             1,275         0.041         0.094        -0.364         0.265

Notes: Consumption, income and wealth variables are expressed in real, per-capita terms. Data are
       presented for the years 1985-2009 for all U.S. states and the District of Columbia; the years 1981-
       1984 are excluded from the analysis because of lags used for instrumenting.




                                                                                                             33
Table 2 – Average Demographic Characteristics by State
       Percent Percent Percent                              Percent Percent Percent                              Percent Percent Percent
        Ages    Ages    Ages Poverty                         Ages    Ages    Ages Poverty                         Ages    Ages    Ages Poverty
 State 20-34 35-54      55+    Rate                   State 20-34 35-54      55+    Rate                   State 20-34 35-54      55+    Rate
 AK     36.1    45.2    18.7    9.5                   KY     31.0    38.2    30.8   16.4                   NY     30.8    38.2    31.0   14.9
  AL    30.8    37.5    31.7   17.0                    LA    32.6    38.0    29.3   19.8                   OH     30.1    38.3    31.6   12.0
  AR    29.6    36.5    33.9   17.7                   MA     31.3    37.9    30.8   10.2                   OK     30.7    37.1    32.2   15.2
  AZ    32.4    36.6    31.0   15.0                   MD     31.4    40.5    28.1    9.0                    OR    29.4    39.2    31.4   11.9
  CA    34.7    38.6    26.7   14.4                   ME     28.0    39.4    32.6   11.6                    PA    28.2    37.3    34.5   10.9
  CO    32.8    41.2    26.0   10.5                    MI    30.8    39.0    30.2   12.4                    RI    30.5    36.9    32.5   10.5
  CT    29.0    39.3    31.7    8.1                   MN     31.3    39.1    29.6    9.9                    SC    32.0    38.1    30.0   14.9
  DC    36.2    35.5    28.3   18.8                   MO     30.1    37.6    32.3   12.5                    SD    30.0    36.4    33.6   13.0
  DE    31.5    37.9    30.6    9.2                   MS     32.2    36.9    30.9   21.2                    TN    30.8    38.4    30.7   15.7
  FL    27.6    35.1    37.3   13.4                   MT     28.0    39.4    32.7   14.8                    TX    34.7    38.8    26.5   16.7
 GA     34.1    39.9    26.0   14.3                    NC    32.0    38.1    29.9   13.8                    UT    39.4    35.9    24.6    9.3
  HI    32.0    38.0    30.0   10.2                    ND    31.3    35.9    32.8   12.0                   VA     32.7    39.5    27.7    9.9
  IA    29.1    36.8    34.1   10.4                    NE    30.5    37.3    32.2   10.6                    VT    29.5    40.3    30.2    9.5
  ID    31.4    38.6    30.0   12.9                   NH     30.1    41.0    28.9    6.7                   WA     31.5    40.0    28.5   10.6
  IL    31.9    38.3    29.8   12.4                    NJ    29.3    39.4    31.3    8.6                    WI    30.4    38.4    31.2    9.7
  IN    31.2    38.3    30.5   11.2                   NM     31.7    38.8    29.6   19.8                   WV     27.6    37.4    35.0   17.6
  KS    31.0    37.5    31.5   11.3                   NV     32.2    39.1    28.6   10.5                   WY     30.3    40.3    29.4   10.8

Notes: Data are averaged over the years 1985-2009 for all U.S. states and the District of Columbia; the years 1981-1984 are excluded from the analysis
because of lags used for instrumenting.




                                                                                                                                                         34
Table 3 – 2SLS Panel Data Wealth Effect Regressions
                                      Model 1          Model 2          Model 3          Model 4          Model 5
Income                                0.878 ***         0.954 ***        0.636 ***        0.548   ***      0.562   ***
                                    (0.077)           (0.074)          (0.080)          (0.068)          (0.070)
Housing Wealth                        0.183 ***        -0.019           -0.345           -6.456   ***     -8.194   ***
                                    (0.026)           (0.087)          (0.495)          (1.635)          (2.157)
Stock Wealth                          0.058 ***        -0.150            0.949 ***       -7.381   ***     -8.556   ***
                                    (0.017)           (0.095)          (0.276)          (1.513)          (2.110)
Total Wealth                                            0.398 **                         13.872   ***     16.501   ***
                                                      (0.175)                           (3.001)          (4.007)
Young Percent                                                            0.017           -0.016            0.016
                                                                       (0.078)          (0.073)          (0.080)
Old Percent                                                             -0.271 ***       -0.516   ***     -0.454   ***
                                                                       (0.084)          (0.073)          (0.092)
Poverty Rate                                                             0.001                             0.001   *
                                                                       (0.001)                           (0.001)
Young × Housing Wealth                                                   0.634            8.457 ***       12.820   ***
                                                                       (0.766)          (2.984)          (3.961)
Old × Housing Wealth                                                     1.044           11.962 ***      15.260    ***
                                                                       (1.050)          (2.653)          (3.660)
Poverty × Housing Wealth                                                 0.006                            -0.040
                                                                       (0.011)                           (0.027)
Young × Stock Wealth                                                    -1.039 *        10.217 ***       13.511    ***
                                                                       (0.607)          (2.512)          (3.606)
Old × Stock Wealth                                                      -2.279 ***      12.224 ***       15.215    ***
                                                                       (0.632)          (2.559)          (3.743)
Poverty × Stock Wealth                                                   0.008                            -0.055   **
                                                                       (0.009)                           (0.026)
Young × Total Wealth                                                                    -18.790 ***     -26.431    ***
                                                                                         (5.489)         (7.432)
Old × Total Wealth                                                                      -23.442 ***     -29.430    ***
                                                                                         (4.800)         (6.682)
Poverty × Total Wealth                                                                                     0.112   **
                                                                                                         (0.056)
Constant                             -0.011 ***        -0.010 ***        0.015            0.102 ***        0.069
                                    (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.044)          (0.038)         (0.044)
Observations                         1,275             1,275             1,275            1,275        1,275
Wald Chi-square                     388.74 ***        345.77 ***        808.97 ***       808.27 *** 1,089.48 ***
 Degrees of freedom                     53                54                62               62           66

Notes: Standard errors (clustered by state) are shown in parentheses below the estimates. The Wald Chi-square
       statistic tests for the joint significance of all of the coefficients except the constant term.
       *** Coefficient significant at the 1% level.
       ** Coefficient significant at the 5% level.
       * Coefficient significant at the 10% level.
       The dependent variable is log difference of real, per capita consumption (where consumption is proxied by
       state-level retail sales). Wealth variables are expressed in log differences of real, per capita values. Young
       Percent is the percent of the adult population ages 20-34; Old Percent is the percentage of the adult population
       ages 55 and up; Poverty is the poverty rate.
       All wealth and interaction variables are instrumented using the 2nd-4th lags of these variables.



                                                                                                                          35
Table 4 – Estimated Wealth Effects, Elasticities and Derivatives
                                      Model 1          Model 2          Model 3          Model 4         Model 5
Housing Wealth Effect (HWE)           0.055 ***        0.049 ***        0.075 ***        0.067 ***       0.081 ***
Stock Wealth Effect (SWE)             0.016 ***        0.018 ***        0.008 *          0.000          -0.005
 Difference                           0.039 ***        0.031 ***        0.067 ***        0.066 ***       0.086 ***
Housing Wealth Elasticity             0.183 ***        0.163 ***        0.250 ***        0.222 ***       0.270 ***
Stock Wealth Elasticity               0.058 ***        0.066 ***        0.030 *          0.002          -0.019
 Difference                           0.124 ***        0.097 ***        0.221 ***        0.220 ***       0.288 ***
Wealth Effect Derivatives
 d HWE / d Young Percent                                                 0.191          -0.039           0.223
 d HWE / d Old Percent                                                   0.314           0.376           0.545
 d HWE / d Poverty Rate                                                  0.002                           0.003
 d SWE / d Young Percent                                                -0.277           0.003          -0.224
 d SWE / d Old Percent                                                  -0.607          -0.135          -0.204
 d SWE / d Poverty Rate                                                  0.002                           0.002

Notes: Standard errors (clustered by state) are shown in parentheses below the estimates.
       *** Estimated value significant at the 1% level.
       ** Estimated value significant at the 5% level.
       * Estimated value significant at the 10% level.
       Housing and stock wealth effects are expressed in dollar terms and calculated at the sample mean values for all
       variables. Housing and stock wealth elasticities and wealth effect derivatives are calculated at sample means
       for all variables as well.




                                                                                                                         36
Table 5 – Factors Affecting Estimated Housing and Stock Wealth Effects
                          Cons. /   Cons. /   Young      Old      Poverty   HW /    SW /    Total
 State   HWE     SWE       HW        SW       Percent   Percent    Rate     TW      TW      Wealth
 SD      0.157   -0.002   0.548     0.288     0.300     0.336     13.008    0.347   0.653    82,818
 ND      0.138   -0.008   0.505     0.266     0.313     0.328     12.044    0.339   0.661    81,647
 MS      0.135   -0.027   0.340     0.404     0.322     0.309     21.236    0.495   0.505    64,275
 AR      0.129   0.001    0.371     0.368     0.296     0.339     17.732    0.466   0.534    66,822
 WV      0.126   -0.012   0.337     0.360     0.276     0.350     17.576    0.479   0.521    70,626
 IA      0.118   -0.010   0.405     0.215     0.291     0.341     10.432    0.340   0.660    90,098
 AL      0.112   -0.020   0.322     0.383     0.308     0.317     16.980    0.499   0.501    76,693
 LA      0.108   -0.008   0.346     0.362     0.326     0.293     19.756    0.474   0.526    70,930
 KY      0.105   -0.008   0.350     0.351     0.310     0.308     16.352    0.470   0.530    73,702
 NM      0.105   -0.015   0.278     0.302     0.317     0.296     19.752    0.501   0.499    85,708
 NE      0.104   -0.004   0.432     0.222     0.305     0.322     10.552    0.337   0.663    87,016
 TN      0.100   -0.013   0.327     0.365     0.308     0.307     15.708    0.494   0.506    80,978
 OK      0.098   0.010    0.375     0.310     0.307     0.322     15.208    0.426   0.574    70,442
 SC      0.096   -0.031   0.292     0.402     0.320     0.300     14.888    0.532   0.468    83,130
 FL      0.094   0.002    0.279     0.253     0.276     0.373     13.400    0.473   0.527   109,229
 MO      0.084   0.003    0.348     0.196     0.301     0.323     12.460    0.358   0.642   100,264
 KS      0.082   0.000    0.372     0.188     0.310     0.315     11.284    0.333   0.667    91,326
 ID      0.079   -0.006   0.299     0.277     0.314     0.300     12.896    0.474   0.526    88,820
 AZ      0.078   0.000    0.269     0.272     0.324     0.310     15.000    0.499   0.501    96,209
 MT      0.076   0.011    0.308     0.237     0.280     0.327     14.792    0.433   0.567    96,315
 IN      0.075   0.001    0.364     0.307     0.312     0.305     11.240    0.436   0.564    83,972
 NC      0.074   -0.001   0.296     0.325     0.320     0.299     13.832    0.496   0.504    87,872
 ME      0.073   -0.001   0.295     0.308     0.280     0.326     11.620    0.496   0.504    99,727
 PA      0.073   -0.002   0.276     0.209     0.282     0.345     10.868    0.428   0.572   102,995
 OR      0.072   -0.006   0.275     0.246     0.294     0.314     11.936    0.474   0.526   110,717
 GA      0.071   -0.017   0.311     0.346     0.341     0.260     14.296    0.490   0.510    86,760
 OH      0.069   0.005    0.320     0.238     0.301     0.316     12.048    0.415   0.585    92,230
 DE      0.066   -0.011   0.290     0.221     0.315     0.306     9.164     0.441   0.559   124,287
 MI      0.066   0.006    0.320     0.226     0.308     0.302     12.420    0.407   0.593    97,727
 NV      0.064   -0.013   0.288     0.349     0.322     0.286     10.456    0.526   0.474   101,637
 TX      0.061   0.021    0.421     0.336     0.347     0.265     16.676    0.420   0.580    73,066
 WI      0.060   0.002    0.328     0.221     0.304     0.312     9.680     0.393   0.607   101,515
 IL      0.059   0.000    0.257     0.214     0.319     0.298     12.372    0.445   0.555   108,790
 WA      0.053   -0.013   0.220     0.236     0.315     0.285     10.628    0.509   0.491   121,400
 CA      0.052   -0.022   0.161     0.240     0.347     0.267     14.364    0.589   0.411   132,668
 NY      0.052   0.004    0.216     0.172     0.308     0.310     14.920    0.439   0.561   114,358
 DC      0.048   0.000    0.153     0.105     0.362     0.283     18.808    0.425   0.575   150,173
 WY      0.048   0.007    0.306     0.233     0.303     0.294     10.824    0.428   0.572   102,442
 VA      0.046   -0.010   0.232     0.258     0.327     0.277     9.884     0.508   0.492   112,649


                                                                                                 37
Table 5 – Factors Affecting Estimated Housing and Stock Wealth Effects
                                   Cons. /     Cons. /     Young       Old        Poverty      HW /        SW /       Total
  State     HWE         SWE         HW          SW         Percent    Percent      Rate        TW          TW         Wealth
  VT        0.046       0.001       0.268       0.238       0.295      0.302       9.540       0.464       0.536      114,618
  MN        0.045       0.004       0.307       0.169       0.313      0.296       9.888       0.355       0.645      124,178
  MD        0.043       -0.013      0.207       0.215       0.314      0.281       9.044       0.506       0.494      129,027
  NJ        0.042       -0.007      0.193       0.173       0.293      0.313       8.584       0.472       0.528      148,834
  RI        0.042       0.014       0.216       0.225       0.305      0.325       10.480      0.498       0.502      109,141
  UT        0.042       -0.004      0.275       0.303       0.394      0.246       9.328       0.505       0.495       88,639
  MA        0.040       -0.001      0.197       0.180       0.313      0.308       10.152      0.469       0.531      146,918
  HI        0.039       -0.009      0.165       0.278       0.320      0.300       10.176      0.620       0.380      149,082
  CT        0.033       0.002       0.171       0.197       0.290      0.317       8.068       0.528       0.472      156,059
  CO        0.029       0.005       0.253       0.198       0.328      0.260       10.484      0.435       0.565      125,780
  NH        0.028       0.011       0.338       0.311       0.301      0.289       6.668       0.471       0.529      115,250
  AK        -0.001      -0.004      0.329       0.288       0.361      0.187       9.496       0.448       0.552       97,818
  Total     0.073       -0.004      0.301       0.266       0.312      0.304       12.725      0.457       0.543      101,517

Notes: Cell entries are averages of the variable over the years 1985-2009; the years 1981-1984 are excluded from the analysis
       because of lags used for instrumenting. Note that the average housing and stock wealth effects over the entire sample are
       not the same as the housing and stock wealth effects calculated at the sample means of the variables, and thus the totals
       presented in this table correctly differ from the values shown in Table 4.
       Variables are defined as follows:
         HWE = Average housing wealth effect
         SWE = Average stock wealth effect
         Cons. / HW = Average consumption-to-housing wealth ratio
         Cons. / SW = Average consumption-to-stock wealth ratio
         Young Percent = Average percent of the adult population ages 20-34
         Old Percent = Average percent of the adult population ages 55 and up
         Poverty Rate = Average poverty rate
         HW / TW = Average housing wealth-to-total wealth ratio
         SW / TW = Average stock wealth-to-total wealth ratio
         Total Wealth = Average real, per capita total wealth




                                                                                                                             38
Table 6 – Wealth Variability over Time by State
             Housing Wealth Effect              Stock Wealth Effect
                  Standard Coefficient              Standard Coefficient
 State   Mean     Deviation of Variation   Mean     Deviation of Variation
  AK     41,295      8,768      0.21       57,802     27,055      0.47
  AL     34,109      9,055      0.27       43,743     27,256      0.62
  AR     28,541      7,174      0.25       38,998     20,480      0.53
  AZ     47,693     17,363      0.36       49,355     17,412      0.35
  CA     78,003     32,092      0.41       55,395     20,867      0.38
  CO     54,135     17,228      0.32       72,435     22,571      0.31
  CT     81,524     18,319      0.22       75,325     22,580      0.30
  DC     67,885     39,643      0.58       83,348     20,341      0.24
  DE     56,321     23,865      0.42       68,283     15,104      0.22
  FL     51,554     20,584      0.40       58,066     18,230      0.31
  GA     39,086      8,885      0.23       48,587     26,109      0.54
  HI     92,622     39,362      0.42       57,310     21,994      0.38
  IA     29,462      7,961      0.27       61,677     24,487      0.40
  ID     41,098     15,785      0.38       48,624     21,496      0.44
  IL     47,111     13,045      0.28       62,439     23,564      0.38
  IN     33,855      8,886      0.26       51,010     26,480      0.52
  KS     29,809      6,617      0.22       62,152     19,061      0.31
  KY     31,486      8,143      0.26       43,044     24,383      0.57
  LA     30,545      7,007      0.23       41,101     22,351      0.54
 MA      67,688     16,885      0.25       79,744     24,474      0.31
 MD      64,649     24,275      0.38       65,346     25,679      0.39
 ME      47,254     12,687      0.27       53,610     25,019      0.47
  MI     38,870     11,434      0.29       59,656     22,247      0.37
 MN      43,849     13,310      0.30       80,936     21,859      0.27
 MO      35,325      9,310      0.26       65,389     20,434      0.31
  MS     28,154      6,991      0.25       37,059     23,007      0.62
 MT      41,731     16,148      0.39       55,510     19,166      0.35
  NC     40,933     10,682      0.26       47,779     23,246      0.49
  ND     26,545      8,150      0.31       56,133     22,544      0.40
  NE     28,678      6,752      0.24       59,200     18,955      0.32
  NH     52,028     11,409      0.22       64,550     27,369      0.42
  NJ     70,637     20,246      0.29       78,525     16,485      0.21
 NM      40,918     11,123      0.27       45,414     21,210      0.47
  NV     51,698     20,089      0.39       50,756     23,337      0.46
  NY     49,607     12,348      0.25       65,296     17,931      0.27
  OH     36,375      7,628      0.21       56,758     23,858      0.42
  OK     27,199      4,527      0.17       44,370     22,918      0.52
  OR     52,857     23,719      0.45       58,849     23,191      0.39


                                                                             39
            Table 6 – Wealth Variability over Time by State
                               Housing Wealth Effect                              Stock Wealth Effect
                                    Standard Coefficient                              Standard Coefficient
              State        Mean     Deviation of Variation                   Mean     Deviation of Variation
               PA          43,278     11,641      0.27                       60,388     20,190      0.33
               RI          52,738     15,420      0.29                       57,505     23,592      0.41
               SC          39,898     12,161      0.30                       44,109     27,964      0.63
               SD          28,467      9,972      0.35                       55,394     19,743      0.36
               TN          36,731      8,904      0.24                       44,895     24,705      0.55
               TX          28,223      5,018      0.18                       45,571     21,832      0.48
               UT          42,550     14,740      0.35                       47,040     23,752      0.50
               VA          54,753     15,840      0.29                       59,035     28,125      0.48
               VT          52,165     13,640      0.26                       63,436     21,284      0.34
              WA           60,788     21,816      0.36                       61,798     25,995      0.42
               WI          38,421     11,554      0.30                       63,882     25,674      0.40
              WV           30,221      7,442      0.25                       41,342     24,449      0.59
              WY           43,413     15,681      0.36                       59,910     21,275      0.36
            Notes: Cell entries show the mean, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation for the housing and
                   stock wealth effects across time for each state. In general, stock wealth is more variable than
                   housing wealth.




Table 7 – Household Wealth Holdings over Time
                                          1992          1995          1998         2001          2004          2007         2009
 Stocks                                   16.9          15.2          19.2         21.3          20.7          18.4         18.5
 Pooled investment funds                  10.4          12.3          16.5         17.7          15.0          11.5         10.8
 Retirement accounts                      37.9          45.2          48.8         52.2          49.7          55.6         56.2
 Cash value life insurance                34.8          32.0          29.6         28.0          24.2          23.2         24.3
 Other managed assets                      4.0           3.9           5.9          6.6           7.3           5.6          5.7
 Primary residence                        63.9          64.7          66.2         67.7          69.1          68.9         70.3
 Other residential property                             11.8          12.8         11.3          12.5          13.9         13.0
Notes:   Cell entries show percent of households with some holdings of the specified asset in the given year. Households are
         much more likely to own their primary residence than they are to hold stock wealth.
Sources: Aizcorbe, et al. (2003), Bucks, et al. (2006), Bucks, et al. (2009), Kinnickell, et al. (1997), Kinnickell, et al. (2000).




                                                                                                                                      40
                                    Figure 1A: Changes in Old and Young Population Ratios in Selected States
                                              Arizona                                        California                                                Colorado
                0.40




                                                                        0.40




                                                                                                                               0.40
     Ages 55+ Percent




                                                                                                                               0.35
               0.35




                                                                        0.35
                                         2009




                                                                                                                               0.30
                                                                                                                                                    2009
       0.30




                                                                        0.30
                                                          1985                           2009




                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                 1985
                0.25




                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                         1985

                                                                                                                                      0.25      0.30    0.35     0.40       0.45
                             0.25      0.30      0.35     0.40   0.45          0.25   0.30      0.35      0.40          0.45                     Ages 20-34 Percent


                                                Florida                                      Georgia                                                Massachusetts
                      0.40




                                                                        0.40




                                                                                                                               0.40
                                2009            1985
     Ages 55+ Percent
               0.35




                                                                        0.35




                                                                                                                               0.35
                                                                                                                                             2009

                                                                                                                                                                  1985
       0.30




                                                                        0.30




                                                                                                                               0.30
                                                                                        2009


                                                                                                            1985
                0.25




                                                                        0.25




                                                                                                                               0.25
                             0.25      0.30    0.35    0.40      0.45          0.25   0.30    0.35     0.40             0.45          0.25      0.30    0.35     0.40       0.45
                                        Ages 20-34 Percent                             Ages 20-34 Percent                                        Ages 20-34 Percent



Notes: Figure shows the percent of the adult population ages 25-34 and ages 55+ in each year for selected states and the U.S. Observations for 1985 and
2009 are labeled and consecutive years are connected.




                                                                                                                                                                                   41
                                    Figure 1B: Changes in Old and Young Population Ratios in Selected States
                                             New York                                                    Ohio                                             South Dakota
                0.40




                                                                            0.40




                                                                                                                                     0.40
     Ages 55+ Percent




                                                                                                                                                   2009
               0.35




                                                                            0.35




                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                          2009
                                     2009                                                                                                                            1985

                                                    1985                                                        1985
      0.30




                                                                            0.30




                                                                                                                                     0.30
                0.25




                                                                            0.25




                                                                                                                                     0.25
                             0.25     0.30     0.35        0.40      0.45          0.25          0.30    0.35      0.40       0.45          0.25   0.30       0.35       0.40   0.45


                                              Texas                                                     Virginia                                           Entire U.S.
                      0.40




                                                                            0.40




                                                                                                                                     0.40
     Ages 55+ Percent
               0.35




                                                                            0.35




                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                                                 2009
       0.30




                                                                            0.30




                                                                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                                      1985
                                             2009

                                                                                                                       1985
                                                                  1985
                0.25




                                                                            0.25




                                                                                                                                     0.25
                             0.25     0.30    0.35    0.40           0.45          0.25          0.30     0.35     0.40       0.45          0.25   0.30     0.35     0.40       0.45
                                       Ages 20-34 Percent                                          Ages 20-34 Percent                                Ages 20-34 Percent



Notes: Figure shows the percent of the adult population ages 25-34 and ages 55+ in each year for selected states and the U.S. Observations for 1985 and
2009 are labeled and consecutive years are connected.




                                                                                                                                                                                       42
            0.30
            0.250.20                            Figure 2: Poverty Rates across Time by State
   Poverty Rate
      0.15  0.10
            0.05
            0.00




                       AK        AR CA CT DE GA IA    IL    KS LA MD MI MO MT ND NH NM NY OK PA SC TN UT VT WI WY
                            AL     AZ CO DC FL HI  ID    IN   KY MA ME MN MS NC NE NJ NV OH OR RI SD TX VA WA WV
                                                                               State

Notes: Figure shows the poverty rate in each year of the analysis for each state. Data are presented for the years 1985-2009; the years 1981-1984 are
excluded from the analysis because of lags used for instrumenting.




                                                                                                                                                        43
                                              Figure 3: Housing Wealth/Total Wealth across Time by State
              0.80
              0.70
   Housing Wealth Percent
   0.40     0.50
              0.30
              0.20   0.60




                            AK        AR CA CT DE GA IA    IL   KS LA MD MI MO MT ND NH NM NY OK PA SC TN UT VT WI WY
                                 AL     AZ CO DC FL HI  ID    IN KY MA ME MN MS NC NE NJ NV OH OR RI  SD TX VA WA WV
                                                                                State

Notes: Figure shows fraction of total wealth comprised by housing wealth in each year of the analysis for each state. Data are presented for the years 1985-
2009; the years 1981-1984 are excluded from the analysis because of lags used for instrumenting.



                                                                                                                                                               44
                                                  Figure 4A: Housing Wealth/Total Wealth in Selected States
                                                Arizona                                       California                                       Colorado
                            .7




                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                          .7
     Housing Wealth Percent
                     .6




                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                          .6
              .5




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                          .5
        .4




                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                          .4
                  .3




                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                          .3
                                 1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990    1995   2000    2005   2010


                                                Florida                                        Georgia                                       Massachusetts
                            .7




                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                          .7
     Housing Wealth Percent
                     .6




                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                          .6
              .5




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                          .5
        .4




                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                          .4
                  .3




                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                          .3
                                 1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990    1995   2000    2005   2010



Notes: Figure shows fraction of total wealth comprised by housing wealth over time for selected states and the U.S. as a whole.




                                                                                                                                                                           45
                                                   Figure 4B: Housing Wealth/Total Wealth in Selected States
                                                New York                                         Ohio                                         South Dakota
                             .7




                                                                            .7




                                                                                                                           .7
      Housing Wealth Percent
                       .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                .5




                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                           .5
           .4




                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                           .4
     .3




                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                           .3
                                  1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000    2005   2010


                                                  Texas                                         Virginia                                       Entire U.S.
                             .7




                                                                            .7




                                                                                                                           .7
      Housing Wealth Percent
                       .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                .5




                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                           .5
           .4




                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                           .4
     .3




                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                           .3
                                  1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000    2005   2010



Notes: Figure shows fraction of total wealth comprised by housing wealth over time for selected states and the U.S. as a whole.




                                                                                                                                                                           46
Notes: The time path of the average housing and stock wealth effects are shown for each of the five
models presented in Table 3 (each year’s value is the average across states). Model 1 is a traditional
constant elasticity framework. Model 2 allows housing and stock wealth elasticities to vary based on
the composition of total wealth. Model 3 includes demographic effects (age and poverty rates) but not
wealth compositions. Model 4 includes both age demographics and wealth compositions but not
poverty rates. Model 5 includes all demographic wealth composition effects; 95 percent error bands
are calculated assuming zero cross-state correlation among wealth effects within a given year.



                                                                                                         47
                            Figure 6A: Range of Housing Wealth Effects over Time by State
    0.3
    0.2
    0.1
    0.0
    -0.1
    -0.2




                                   Range of Values                     Mean              Median              25th & 75th Percentiles
    -0.3




           AK AR CA CT DE GA IA IL KS LA MD MI MO MT ND NH NM NY OK PA SC TN UT VT WI WY
             AL AZ CO DC FL HI ID IN KY MA ME MN MS NC NE NJ NV OH OR RI SD TX VA WA WV
                                                                               state

Notes: For each state, figure shows the range of calculated housing wealth effects over the years of the analysis (1985-2009), as well as the mean, median,
25th percentile and 75th percentile of these values.




                                                                                                                                                              48
      0.3
      0.2
      0.1
      0.0
      -0.1
      -0.2                      Figure 6B: Range of Stock Wealth Effects over Time by State




                                    Range of Values                     Mean               Median              25th & 75th Percentiles
      -0.3




             AK AR CA CT DE GA IA IL KS LA MD MI MO MT ND NH NM NY OK PA SC TN UT VT WI WY
               AL AZ CO DC FL HI ID IN KY MA ME MN MS NC NE NJ NV OH OR RI SD TX VA WA WV
                                                                                 state

Notes: For each state, figure shows the range of calculated stock wealth effects over the years of the analysis (1985-2009), as well as the mean, median, 25th
percentile and 75th percentile of these values.




                                                                                                                                                                 49
                                            Figure 7: Relationship between
                                            Wealth Effects and Total Wealth
                                                    Panel A: Model 4 (without poverty rates)
                                                      SD
                          0.10



                                                     ND
                                    AR WV              IA              FL
    Average Wealth Effect




                                        OK
                                         KYAL  SC
                                              TN     NE       ME NV
                                   MS            IN NMID
                                                     NC     MT PA      OR
                                                         OH AZMO
               0.05




                                        LA          GA KS MI WI                         WA DE
                                                                        VAVNH
                                                                           T                      MD         HI
                                                      UT            IL
                                                                 WY RI                                 CA     NJ     CT
                                                                          NY                                MA
                                          TX                                                MN                  DC
                                          TX                                                CO
                                                     NE KS MI WI                            MN
                                   MSAR OK
                                        LA     ND
                                                SD
                                                 IN            MOWY
                                                       IAOH MT AK
                                                                                            CO
      0.00




                                                                    RI     NH
                                                      UT     AZ  PA IL FL VT
                                                                          NY               DE               MA DC
                                       WVKYAL TN NM   ID
                                                     NC
                                                              ME       OR                                     NJ
                                                    GA                  VA              WA    MD                     CT
                                               SC                NV                                    CA
                                                                                                             HI
                  -0.05




                                 60,000              80,000                100,000           120,000         140,000

                                                       Panel B: Model 5 (full specification)
                          0.15




                                                      SD
                                   MS                ND
                                    AR WV
    Average Wealth Effect




                                                        IA
                                          LAKYAL
                  0.10




                                                 TN  NM
                                                      NE
                                          OK      SC                         FL
                                                           ID  KS MT MO
                                                      IN GA        AZ
                                                          NC OH ME PA        OR
                                            TX                    MI NV                      DE
           0.05




                                                                     WI   IL
                                                                       WY       NY      WA             CA
                                                           UT             RI VA VT           MNMD               DC
                                                                                                             HINJ
                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                 NH          CO                      CT
                                            TX
                                                                  MT      RI     NH
    0.00




                                          OK                  OH  MI WIWY FL NY             CO
                                                                                            MN
                                    AR                IN NC
                                                     SD        KS AZ MO
                                                                     AK
                                                                    ME PA IL ORVT                           MA DC    CT
                                          LAKY      ND    NE
                                                           UT
                                                           ID        AK                                      HINJ
                                          WV
                                              AL
                                                   TN    NM IA
                                                         GA            NV     VA        WA DE MD
                                   MS                                                                  CA
                                                     SC
                  -0.05




                                 60,000              80,000           100,000        120,000                 140,000
                                                                Average Total Wealth

                                                   Housing Wealth Effect        Stock Wealth Effect



Notes: Figure shows the relationship between each state’s average housing and stock wealth effects
and average total wealth within that state (averaged across over the years of the analysis, 1985-2009,
within each state). Panel A calculates the average housing and stock wealth effects using the
parameter estimates from Model 4, which does not include the poverty rate. Panel B calculates the
wealth effects using the parameter estimates from Model 5 (the full specification).




                                                                                                                          50
Table A1 – State Fixed Effect Coefficients for Table 3 - Model 5
State                                    State                                   State
 AK        Omitted                       KY            0.042 ***                 NY           0.042 ***
                                                     (0.010)                                (0.009)
 AL           0.048 ***                   LA           0.029 ***                  OH          0.054 ***
            (0.010)                                  (0.010)                                (0.008)
 AR           0.051 ***                   MA           0.047 ***                  OK          0.044 ***
            (0.012)                                  (0.007)                                (0.009)
 AZ           0.044 ***                   MD           0.034 ***                  OR          0.045 ***
            (0.009)                                  (0.005)                                (0.008)
 CA           0.028 ***                   ME           0.061 ***                  PA          0.062 ***
            (0.007)                                  (0.008)                                (0.009)
 CO           0.029 ***                   MI           0.047 ***                  RI          0.057 ***
            (0.005)                                  (0.007)                                (0.008)
 CT           0.053 ***                   MN           0.051 ***                  SC          0.041 ***
            (0.007)                                  (0.007)                                (0.009)
 DC           0.006                       MO           0.057 ***                  SD          0.056 ***
            (0.015)                                  (0.008)                                (0.010)
 DE           0.047 ***                   MS           0.039 ***                  TN          0.044 ***
            (0.007)                                  (0.011)                                (0.009)
 FL           0.071 ***                   MT           0.048 ***                  TX          0.015 **
            (0.011)                                  (0.010)                                (0.008)
 GA           0.024 ***                   NC           0.039 ***                  UT          0.027 ***
            (0.006)                                  (0.008)                                (0.006)
  HI          0.043 ***                   ND           0.056 ***                  VA          0.037 ***
            (0.007)                                  (0.009)                                (0.006)
  IA          0.066 ***                   NE           0.064 ***                  VT          0.046 ***
            (0.009)                                  (0.008)                                (0.006)
  ID          0.041 ***                   NH           0.056 ***                 WA           0.034 ***
            (0.008)                                  (0.005)                                (0.006)
  IL          0.043 ***                   NJ           0.053 ***                  WI          0.054 ***
            (0.008)                                  (0.006)                                (0.007)
  IN          0.048 ***                   NM           0.030 ***                 WV           0.059 ***
            (0.007)                                  (0.011)                                (0.012)
 KS           0.051 ***                   NV           0.049 ***                 WY           0.035 ***
            (0.008)                                  (0.006)                                (0.007)

Notes: Standard errors (clustered by state) are shown in parentheses below the estimates.
       *** Coefficient significant at the 1% level.
       ** Coefficient significant at the 5% level.
       * Coefficient significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                          51
                                               Data Appendix
Consumption: Real, per-capita retail sales

         State-level retail sales data from 1977Q1 through 2010Q1 were provided by Moody’s

Economy.com. The underlying data are nominal, seasonally-adjusted annual rates at a quarterly

frequency. Nominal annual retail sales are the average of the quarterly figures within each year.

Housing Wealth: Real, per-capita value of owner-occupied housing

         Housing wealth is measured as the average value of owner-occupied housing times the

number of owner-occupants within each state. The average value of owner-occupied housing

each quarter is taken from the Land Prices by State Dataset developed by Davis and Heathcote

(2007) and provided by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy; we use 4th quarter figures as the

value for the year in our annual data.9 We use the 2011Q1 release of these data.

         The number of owner-occupied households in each state-year is derived from the Annual

Social and Economic (ASEC) Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS) using the

March micro data provided by the National Bureau for Economic Research.10 Using the

household data in each year, the H_TENURE variable is tabulated by state using MARSUPWT

(the March Supplement, or household sampling weight) to get an estimate of the number of

owner-occupied, renter-occupied and total households by state. These estimates are smoothed by




9
  These data are updated quarterly and can be found a “Land and Property Values in the U.S.”, Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy, http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/. According to the Lincoln Institute website, this figure is
estimated in two steps. “First, the average value for each state is estimated in 1980, 1990, and 2000 using micro
data from the Decennial Census of Housing (DCH). Then the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) quarterly
repeat-sales (constant quality) house price indexes for each state are used to scale the home value series by quarter
between 1980 and 2000 and to extend the home value series back from 1980 to 1975 and forward from 2000 to the
most recent quarter. The growth rates of the reported FHFA indexes are adjusted so that their growth between 1980-
1990 and 1990-2000 match the decennial growth of average house values from the DCH data. The 1980-1990
growth-rate adjustments are applied to the pre-1980 FHFA data and the 1990-2000 growth-rate adjustments are
applied to the post-2000 FHFA data.”
10
   http://www.nber.org/data/current-population-survey-data.html


                                                                                                                  52
taking the three-year (forward and lagging) moving average, in order to minimize noise induced

by changes in the sampling weights over time.11

         Total nominal housing wealth for each state-year observation is simply the number of

owner households times the average value of owner-occupied housing.

Stock Wealth: Real, per-capita financial assets

         Total U.S. stock wealth is calculated as the sum of corporate equities, mutual fund shares

and pension fund reserves for households and non-profit corporations from the Federal Reserve

Flow of Funds (FoF) Z1 statistical release, Table L100, 2011Q1 release; annual data are year-end

(4th quarter) values.

         Aggregate U.S. stock wealth is allocated across states based on the distribution of mutual

fund holdings across states. CQS (2005) use data on mutual fund holdings by state obtained

from the Investment Company Institute (ICI) as a proxy for the fraction of aggregate financial

wealth held in each state in the years 1986, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1993. Since the publicly-

available CQS (2005) data do not contain the underlying ICI mutual fund allocations, each

state’s implied percent of aggregate U.S. financial wealth was calculated using the CQS (2005)

Nominal Stock Market Wealth variable in each quarter.12 The percent of financial wealth held

by each state in 1986, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1993 was then assumed to be the 1st quarter values

in these years.13

         Additional years’ estimates of the distribution of mutual fund assets by state were

provided directly by ICI. For 1995, the figure is based on the same mutual fund company

information used in CQS (2005); 2000, 2008 and 2009 figures are based on household survey

11
   The estimated coefficients in Table 3 are qualitatively similar using the raw estimates of the number of owner-
occupied households instead of the three-year moving averages.
12
   The publicly-available data used this study can be found at http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~quigley/papers.html.
13
   CQS (2005) interpolated quarterly values between these years, and analysis of the data revealed that 1st quarter
values were the break points in the interpolation.


                                                                                                                      53
results. For years prior to 1986, we used the 1986 value; values for the remaining missing years

were interpolated linearly.

         Nominal stock wealth is then aggregate U.S. financial wealth times the mutual fund

percent for each state-year.

Total Wealth: Real, per-capita financial assets + real, per-capital housing wealth

         Total real, per-capita wealth is the sum of real, per-capita housing wealth and real, per-

capita stock wealth.

Income: Real, per-capita personal income by state

         Annual and quarterly data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2011Q1 release).

Population

         Mid-year population estimates of the Census Bureau, provided in the annual personal

income summary by state from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Intercensal population estimates

for the 2000’s were not yet available at the time of this draft, so population estimates for 2001-

2009 are based on postcensal estimates obtained directly from the Bureau of the Census;14 while

the 2010 figure is from the 2010 census.

Demographic (Age Range and Poverty) Data

         Estimated population counts by age group for 1970-2009 were obtained from the Centers

for Disease Control CDC WONDER on-line database.15 The Young adult population ratio is the


14
  http://www.census.gov/popest/states/NST-ann-est.html
15
  Actual data were obtained from two different pages on the CDC WONDER website:
     Data for 1970-1989 came from: United States Department of Commerce, U.S. Census Bureau, Population
Division; Census Population 1970-2000 for Public Health Research, CDC WONDER On-line Database, March
2003. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Bridged-
Race Population Estimates, United States, 1990 - 2003, July 1st resident population by state, county, age, sex, race,
and Hispanic origin, on CDC WONDER On-line Database, June 2005. Accessed at
http://wonder.cdc.gov/census.html on Jul 11, 2011 7:47:34 PM.
     Data for 1990-2009 came from: United States Department of Health and Human Services (US DHHS), Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Bridged-Race Population
Estimates, United States July 1st resident population by state, county, age, sex, bridged-race, and Hispanic origin,


                                                                                                                   54
percent of the adult population ages 20-34; the Middle adult population ratio is the percent of the

adult population ages 35-54; and the Old adult population ratio is the percent of adult population

ages 55 and up.

        Poverty rates for each state-year were found in Historical Poverty Table 21, Number of

Poor and Poverty Rate, by State, on the Bureau of the Census website.16 According to notes in

this table, the figures are estimated by the Bureau of the Census using the Annual Social and

Economic (ASEC) Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS).

GDP Deflator

        All real values are calculated using the Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator

(Index 2005=100). Data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Federal

Reserve Economic Data (FRED) service (Series ID: GDPDEF; 2011Q1 release).17 Fourth

quarter values are used as the annual figure of the index.




compiled from 1990-1999 bridged-race intercensal population estimates and 2000-2009 (Vintage 2009) bridged-race
postcensal population estimates, on CDC WONDER On-line Database. Accessed at http://wonder.cdc.gov/bridged-
race-v2009.html on Jul 11, 2011 7:49:52 PM.
16
   http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/historical/people.html.
17
   http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/


                                                                                                            55
