                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHAT EXPLAINS TRENDS IN LABOR SUPPLY AMONG U.S. UNDERGRADUATES,
                              1970-2009?

                                         Judith Scott-Clayton

                                         Working Paper 17744
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17744


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




I gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
program, as well as support from the Malcolm Wiener Center’s Multidisciplinary Program on Inequality
and Social Policy to develop an earlier version of this paper. All errors are mine. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Judith Scott-Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
What Explains Trends in Labor Supply Among U.S. Undergraduates, 1970-2009?
Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 17744
January 2012
JEL No. I22,I23,J22,J24

                                               ABSTRACT

Recent cohorts of college enrollees are more likely to work, and work substantially more, than those
of the past. October CPS data reveal that average labor supply among 18 to 22-year-old full-time undergraduates
nearly doubled between 1970 and 2000, rising from 6 hours to 11 hours per week. In 2000 over half
of these “traditional” college students were working for pay in the reference week, and the average
working student worked 22 hours per week. After 2000, labor supply leveled off and then fell abruptly
in the wake of the Great Recession to an average of 8 hours per week in 2009. This paper considers
several explanations for the long-term trend of rising employment—including compositional change
and rising tuition costs—and considers whether the upward trend is likely to resume when economic
conditions improve.


Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        Today’s college enrollees are more likely to work, and work more, than their counterparts

in the past. The trend is most pronounced among “traditional” undergraduates: 18 to 22 year olds

enrolled full-time at either two-year or four-year colleges. Overall labor supply among these

students rose steadily between 1970 and 2000, nearly doubling from 6 hours to 11 hours per

week. In 2000, more than half were working for pay during the October Current Population

Survey (CPS) reference week, and the average working student worked about 22 hours per

week—significantly more time than the typical student spends on schoolwork outside of class.2

After 2000, labor supply leveled off and then fell sharply in 2009 to 8 hours per week—giving

up nearly half of the long-term increase in a single year. The same pattern is repeated across age,

race, gender, family income, and institutional subgroups.

        Given the unrelenting rise in tuition prices over the past 40 years, an immediate concern

is that the increase in student employment may reflect a market failure rather than an

economically efficient time allocation decision. Unless student employment has other benefits,

students would be better off borrowing money to finance rising costs, so that they could finish

college faster or with higher levels of achievement. But credit-constrained students may have

little choice but to work. This in turn may delay or diminish their acquisition of human capital,

thus decreasing the return on their educational investment.

        This concern is reinforced by empirical evidence that student employment interferes with

academics. First, rising levels of term-time employment roughly correspond with an increase in

the time students take to complete their degrees (Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner, 2010). In 2003,


2
 The National Survey of Student Engagement (2004) reports an average of 14 hours per week studying for full-time
seniors in college, and an average of 13 hours per week studying full-time first-year undergraduates (the same
survey reports average weekly work hours of 14 and 8 for seniors and first-years, respectively). Stinebrickner and
Stinebrickner (2003) also report an average of 2 hours per day of studying.


                                                                                                                 3
less than 40 percent of college graduates age 30 and younger had earned their degree by age 22,

compared to about 60 percent in the 1970s and 1980s (Turner, 2005). Moreover, several studies

using plausibly exogenous variation to estimate the consequences of student employment have

found significant negative effects on academic performance. Tyler (2003) uses cross-state

variation in the stringency of child labor laws to instrument for hours worked by twelfth graders,

and concludes that working an additional 10 hours per week is associated with a 0.20 standard

deviation decrease in math test scores. Similar effects may apply to college student employment.

Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2003) examine students at Berea College, all of whom are

required to work at least 10 hours per week, and who are randomly assigned to an on-campus

job. Because some jobs allow students to work more than 10 hours per week, while others do

not, the authors use initial job assignments to instrument for hours worked. They find that an

additional hour worked per week decreases the first semester grade point average by 0.162 points

out of a four-point scale. Finally, Scott-Clayton (2011) uses institutional variation in access to

Federal Work-Study (FWS) funds to instrument for FWS participation, and finds that program

participation is associated with significant declines in GPA and graduation rates for women,

though it may have some positive effects for men.3

        Credit constraints are not the only possible explanation for rising student employment,

however. Student work is hardly a new phenomenon: even in 1970 over a third of young, full-

time students were working, including more than one in five students at four-year institutions

from the top quartile of family income.4 Unless all of these students were credit constrained,

many students apparently believe there are benefits to working that outweigh any potential harm

3
  DeSimone (2008) and Kalenkoski and Pabilonia (2010) instrument for student employment (using parental
schooling and religion, and parental transfers and net schooling costs, respectively) and find negative effects on
students’ grades, but substantially smaller in magnitude (reductions of 0.011 to 0.017 in GPA per hour of work) than
those found by Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2003).
4
  Author’s calculations using October CPS data on 18 to 22 year olds.


                                                                                                                  4
to their studies. For example, two particularly careful non-experimental analyses by Ruhm

(1997) and Light (1999) conclude that high school employment improves future labor market

outcomes in the decade after high school graduation, despite possibly negative effects on

academic achievement. Moreover, the relevance of credit constraints remains a matter of debate

among economists, with several studies arguing that such constraints are nonexistent or

quantitatively unimportant (see, e.g., Cameron and Taber, 2004, and Carneiro and Heckman,

2002, respectively), while other work has found evidence of tightening constraints in recent

years (Belley and Lochner, 2007).

       Indeed, even in the absence of borrowing constraints, students may rationally combine

school and work if the additional hours spent studying within a given time period produce

diminishing marginal amounts of human capital (Ben-Porath, 1967). Students will then balance

the benefits of working against the costs to their academic performance and progress, and thus

many factors other than credit constraints may help explain the changes over time, including

changes in demographic composition, wages, or returns to work experience. These and other

alternative explanations must be considered; the rise in student employment cannot be taken as

prima facie evidence of tightening credit constraints.

       In Section II, I outline the trends in student employment using data from the October

Current Population Survey (CPS). I show the increase over time cannot be explained away by

any simple shifts in student demographics. In Section III, I describe a stylized model of human

capital investment and analyze its key predictions regarding student employment. In Section IV,

I draw upon a broad array of empirical evidence to weigh the relative importance of alternative

explanations for the changes over time.




                                                                                                  5
         I find that no single factor can explain the overall trend, and different factors appear to

dominate in different time periods. For example, approximately one-quarter of the increase

between 1970 and 2000 occurred before 1982, a time when neither compositional changes,

economic fluctuations, nor tuition increases appear to be plausible contributing factors. Instead,

this early increase may be explained by the significant expansion of the Federal Work-Study

program, as well as declining returns to college during that decade. Compositional changes and

economic improvements can explain most of the increase between 1982 and 1994, and the recent

recession can explain most (but not all) of the decline in student employment since 2005.

Tightening credit constraints, however, are plausibly the driving explanation for higher-than-

predicted levels of student employment between 1994 and 2005, and the subsequent relaxation of

these constraints appears to have contributed to the faster-than-predicted decline in recent years.

II. TRENDS IN UNDERGRADUATE LABOR SUPPLY, 1970-2009

         It is well-established that college enrollment has risen dramatically over the past several

decades: the percentage of 18- to 22-year-old high school graduates who are enrolled in either a

two-year or four-year college rose from around 38 percent in the early 1970s, to an all-time high

of 58 percent in 2009. Enrollment has risen in both two-year and four-year institutions, and both

part-time and full-time enrollments are increasing. Contrary to popular impression, two-year

students have comprised a fairly stable share of these young college enrollees over the past 40

years (30 percent), as have part-time students (10 percent).

         Over the same time period (until 2009), October employment for these young high school

graduates remained surprisingly stable at about 63 percent.5 Average weekly hours of work

(including zeros for those not working) hovered around 19-20 hours per week, with a barely

5
  Unless otherwise noted, the “employment rate” here refers to the employment-to-population ratio. Labor force
status is not a particularly useful concept for college students, since those enrolled in school will generally be in the
labor force if they work and not in the labor force if they do not work.


                                                                                                                        6
perceptible decline over time. (In 2009, employment rates fell to 51 percent and average hours

fell to 14 hours per week.)

         Since employment has remained stable while college enrollment has increased, it follows

that more young people today are combining school and work. Figure 1 illustrates this trend by

categorizing individuals by their activities: college only, college and work, work only, or neither.

The expanding or contracting band widths over time show the shifts in distribution across

categories. The figure shows that the fraction of 18 to 22 year old high school graduates

combining school and work nearly doubled, rising from 15 percent in 1970 to a peak of 29

percent in 2005, before falling to 25 percent in 2009.

         Turner (2005) has shown that college students are taking longer to finish their degrees;

however, it is not the case that 18- to 22-year-olds are working more but 23- to 27–year-olds are

working less. I demonstrate this by comparing three simulated cohorts: high school graduates

who were aged 18 in 1970-1974, 1980-1984 or 1995-1999. Using repeated cross-sectional data

from the CPS, I link the data from those who were 18 in 1970 with data from those who were 19

in 1971, 20 in 1972, and so on. The results (available on request) indicate that while those in the

recent cohorts are more likely to be enrolled in school at every age, at no age has labor force

participation notably decreased. Although the phenomenon is most pronounced for 18- to 22-

year-olds, young high school graduates are combining work and school in substantial numbers

throughout early adulthood.

         When the sample is limited to 18- to 22-year-old college students enrolled full-time, the

trend emerges clearly.6 The top panel of Figure 2 shows employment rates, while the bottom

panel shows average weekly hours. Employment rates during the survey week rose steadily from


6
 For the remainder of the paper, all references to “college students” will refer to 18- to 22-year-old full-time college
enrollees at either two-year or four-year institutions, unless otherwise noted.


                                                                                                                       7
33 percent in 1970 to 52 percent in 2000.7 The trend reverses after 2005, with employment

falling from 48 to 40 percent in just five years. Similarly, average hours rose steadily from 6

hours per week in 1970 to a peak of 11 hours per week in 2000, before leveling off to about 10

hours per week for the past decade and then dropping to 8 hours per week in the last year of the

series.

          Not only are more students working, but employed students work more hours than in the

past. Average hours among workers increased from about 18 to 22 hours per week between 1970

and 2008 before dipping to 21 weekly hours in 2009. The percentage of students working more

than 20 hours per week nearly doubled from 10 percent to 19 percent over this same time period

before falling to 13 percent in 2009. Finally, the percentage of students working full time rose

from 4 percent in 1970 to 7 percent in 2008, before falling back to 4.5 percent in 2009.

          Interestingly, the long-term trend among college enrollees does not mirror that of high

school students. From 1970 to 2000, October employment rates among 16- to 18-year-old high

school students averaged 34 percent (and total labor supply averaged about 5 hours per week,

including zeros), with no clear upward or downward trend. After 2000 labor supply fell sharply

to a low of 16 percent employed and an average of just over 2 hours per week (including zeros)

in 2009.

          How much of the trend in students’ labor supply can be explained by purely

compositional changes (that is, changes in who attends college)? How much is explained by

economic conditions? And how much can be attributed to rising tuition costs in combination

with credit constraints? The following section presents a simple theoretical model to help frame

the empirical evidence.

7
 Employment and hours data are taken from the October CPS question, “How many hours did you work last
week?” Surveys that ask more generally about typical weekly hours or jobs held “during the school year” tend to
elicit substantially higher estimates.


                                                                                                                  8
III. STUDENT EMPLOYMENT IN HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT THEORY

       Under the simplest model of human capital investment, versions of which were

formulated by Becker (1962) and Rosen (1976) and later utilized and adapted by many authors, it

is not optimal to interlace periods of schooling with periods of work. Doing so necessarily

postpones the moment at which the individual will complete her education, and thus reduces the

number of years she can spend in the labor force reaping the returns on her investment. Only in

the presence of credit constraints may it be optimal to combine work and school.

       I will return to the topic of credit constraints. However, a minor modification of the

standard model can justify a life-cycle phase combining school and work even in the absence of

credit constraints. While the simplest model assumes that human capital can be obtained at

constant marginal cost, the time students devote to schoolwork likely produces diminishing

marginal amounts of human capital within any given period. As Yoram Ben-Porath (1967) writes

in introducing his model of human capital investment,

       It is hard to think of forms of human capital that the individual can acquire as final
       goods—he has to participate in the creation of his human capital. His own abilities, innate
       or acquired, the quality of co-operating inputs, the constraints and opportunities offered
       by the institutional setup—all determine the “technology” or the production function (p.
       352).

As long as the human capital production function is concave, students will balance the marginal

benefits of working against the marginal costs to their academic performance and progress.

Focusing on school alone thus will not be optimal for all students in all situations.

       The basic intuition underlying the concavity of human capital production is that students’

time becomes less productive as more and more of it is devoted to schoolwork. This seems a

plausible assumption. This concavity could be interpreted as an additional dimension of student

ability, including mental focus and stamina, developmental maturity, organizational ability, or




                                                                                                  9
study skills. It need not be fixed by nature, though; it also may result from institutional factors

regarding course offerings and logistics. For example, as students add more courses they may

find they are more restricted in their choices of instructors and course times. At some point,

course availability may be restricted such that marginal costs effectively become infinite—the

student may not be able to enroll in any additional courses that would count towards the degree.

        In equilibrium, the marginal benefits the student gains from an additional hour of

working while in school should just equal the marginal costs, in terms of foregone (or delayed)

human capital. If working students take longer to graduate, or graduate with fewer credits or

lower grades, this does not necessarily indicate a market failure or irrationality on the part of

working students. But the higher the estimated marginal costs, the higher the marginal benefits

ought to be.

        A simple time allocation model captures the essence of this tradeoff. Consider a two-

period model in which individuals divide non-leisure time T between schooling (s) and work (h)

in the first period. Everyone works full-time in the second period. Individuals can freely borrow,

so the goal is to choose s and h in the first period to maximize lifetime income. Base wages w

vary by individual ability, a. In the first period, wages are simply h( w(a )   1 ) where ε1 captures

periodic random variation in economic conditions. In the second period, wages are

w(a )  r s f ( s (h); q s , a )  r h g (h; q h , a )   2 where rs and rh are the per-unit wage gains from

observable school-based and work-based human capital, respectively, and ε2 again captures

temporary economic fluctuations (with expectation zero). I assume that both f( ) and g( ) are

increasing and concave in s or h, respectively, and both functions also depend on the quality of

human capital obtained, qs and qh (with low quality units requiring less time to produce) and




                                                                                                                10
individual ability a (with low ability students requiring more time to produce the same number of

units). The objective function is thus:

(1)     Max Y  h( w(a )   1 )   E[ w(a )  r h g (h; q h , a )  r s f ( s (h); q s , a )   2 ]
          h


where s(h)=T-h and β is a measure of total hours worked in the second period (it could also be

interpreted as accounting for discount rates). The first-order condition for this problem is:

                          g (h; q h , a )      s f ( s ( h ); q , a )
                                                                 s
(2)     w(a )   1   r  h
                                            r
                               h                          s

Intuitively, the left side of this equation represents the lifetime earnings benefit to an additional

hour of work in the first period, while the right side represents the lifetime earnings benefit to an

additional hour of schooling. Both school and work generate human capital that can be converted

to additional earnings in the second period, while work also provides wages in the first period. At

the margin, the lifetime earnings benefit of an additional hour of school or work should be equal.

Note, if neither g( ) nor f( ) were concave, the result would be a corner solution in which

individuals would devote all of their non-leisure time to either school or work.

       For simplicity, I assume that leisure time is fixed and that the individual is only making

tradeoffs between school and work. If leisure were incorporated, individuals would ensure that

an additional hour of school or work “purchases” the same amount of utility as an additional

hour of leisure. Key predictions are summarized below; details are provided in Appendix A.

A. Student wages

       As in any model of labor supply, wages matter. When base wages rise or there is a

positive economic shock, students will shift towards working more. In either case, the shift is

smaller when β is large and/or when returns to human capital are high (in other words, when

first-period wages are a relatively small piece of lifetime earnings).




                                                                                                         11
B. Returns to work experience

       In addition to wages (or in some cases, in place of wages), students may acquire valuable

work experience through student employment. Even in relatively low-skilled jobs, students may

develop soft skills, build career networks, secure references, and/or acquire information that

enables better job matches later in life. Students shift towards work in the first period when

returns to work experience rise, all else equal.

       The value of work experience may vary by subject. For example, those majoring in

business may get more out of student employment than those majoring in English, particularly

given the types of jobs available to young, part-time workers. Sales experience in a retail outlet

may be directly relevant to a future businesswoman, but only marginally relevant to a future

English teacher. Though not formally incorporated into the above model, work experience could

be particularly valuable in the context of uncertainty about individual returns: acquiring some

amount both of formal and informal human capital may be a form of “portfolio diversification”

that increases lifetime utility by decreasing risk even if it does not increase expected lifetime

earnings.

C. Returns to schooling

       On the other side of the equation, students have less incentive to work when the returns to

schooling are high. The time spent working must come from somewhere, and a student who

either takes a bit longer to finish her degree or graduates with a lower-quality education will pay

a higher price in terms of future earnings when the returns to schooling are high.

D. Student ability

       Intuitively, the relationship between ability and student work decisions is ambiguous.

High ability students may have a comparative advantage in producing school-based human




                                                                                                    12
capital, and thus they have more to lose by increasing work hours at the cost of valuable school-

time. On the other hand, if high-ability students also command higher wages, this will increase

their incentives to work.

E. Credit constraints

       The factors above will influence student employment decisions even in the absence of

credit constraints, as long as the educational production function is concave. But incorporating

these other factors does not negate the potential for credit constraints (see Belley and Lochner

[2011a] for a detailed treatment of human capital investment under borrowing constraints). An

individual is credit constrained if she is unable to finance the full costs of attendance, including

both direct costs and opportunity costs (foregone earnings), as well as any additional spending

that may result from a desire to smooth consumption over the lifetime. While extremely

constrained individuals may ultimately opt out of schooling, an alternative response for

moderately constrained students is to work while enrolled, using current earnings to pay for both

direct costs and current consumption (indeed, simulations by Keane and Wolpin [2001] suggest

that student employment is the primary margin of response to borrowing constraints).

       While credit constraints may be most consequential for students from low-income or low-

wealth families, it is important to recognize that credit constraints may be an issue for middle-

class or even wealthier students as well. As Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011a) note, a student

who can borrow enough to pay for tuition and fees is not necessarily unconstrained. If students

cannot borrow enough to optimally smooth their consumption, this represents a credit constraint

that may affect behavior, even if students can borrow enough to finance tuition and whatever




                                                                                                    13
their parents or society might consider to be the other nondiscretionary costs of attendance.8

Further, even if students had unlimited access to credit, they may choose to limit their own

borrowing because of either risk aversion (if there is uncertainty around future economic

outcomes) and/or debt aversion (if students incur negative psychic costs to holding debt). These

internal borrowing constraints may similarly affect behavior but may be less correlated with

family income/wealth than external constraints.

         To clarify the types of credit constraints that may affect student employment, it is useful

to categorize them along two dimensions: whether such constraints are “strict” (preventing

students from financing direct costs and nondiscretionary living expenses) or “fuzzy”

(preventing students from financing additional consumption), and whether they are internally or

externally imposed. The resulting possible types of constraints are summarized in Table 1.9

         Students facing strict constraints have two options: work more, or forego schooling

altogether. Individuals who face fuzzy constraints have the additional option of reducing in-

school consumption—it is not necessary either to work more or to forego schooling. Both types

of constraints are real: both will distort behavior. Either may cause students to work more and

spend less time on schoolwork, thus delaying or diluting their educational progress; either may

cause some to skip college altogether. But in the case of fuzzy constraints, students have more

than one means of adjustment: they could decrease their discretionary consumption rather than

(or at least in addition to) reallocating some of their school-time to paid employment (this is

consistent with the standard implication that when individuals face constraints, educational



8
  Assuming that the educational investment is a good one, lifetime income will be higher if an individual chooses to
enroll. Thus, in the absence of credit constraints there is no reason for an individual to choose a lower level of
consumption as a student than as a non-student.
9
  Of course, these are not the only dimensions along which constraints can vary. Lochner and Monge-Naranjo
(2011b) focus on exogenous constraints versus endogenous constraints, where access to credit is tied to the direct
costs of educational investment.


                                                                                                                  14
investments will be more sensitive to changes in direct costs than opportunity costs; see Lochner

and Monge-Naranjo [2011a]). The economically optimal solution will depend on each student’s

intertemporal consumption preferences, i.e. the extent to which the student is willing to trade

consumption now for consumption later.

       Internally-imposed constraints, whether a result of risk aversion or pure debt aversion,

can have similar consequences. Even when students are able to borrow to finance their

educational investment, they may not want to. Even if trading school for work is expected to be a

good investment on average, it may not pay off for everyone, at least within the time frame of

loan repayment requirements. Alternatively, internal constraints may result from a purely

psychological disutility associated with being in debt or from a semi-rational rule-of-thumb that

leads students to avoid financial transactions they don’t fully understand. In comparison with

externally imposed constraints, internal constraints may be less correlated with family

income/wealth, and may have very different policy implications.

F. Other possible explanations

       To the extent a college degree is purely a signal and true effort/quality are difficult for

employers to observe, students may have incentives to “free-ride” off the hard work of their

predecessors, completing their degrees with the least effort required (see, e.g. Babcock and

Marks 2011). One might hypothesize that when school quality is low (in this framework,

meaning that coursework is not very demanding) students will have more time to spend working.

But the opposite conclusion is relatively easy to reach: when qs is low, the time-cost of obtaining

human capital is low, so there is an incentive to purchase more human capital. Rather than

freeing up more time for work, low-quality schooling may create incentives for students to

pursue higher grades, “stock up” on additional courses or degrees (for example, adding double or




                                                                                                     15
even triple-majors), or simply to finish degrees faster, if their school allows. The effect of school

quality or course difficulty on student employment is thus ambiguous, and will depend both on

students’ ability to adjust their course loads as well as on employers’ ability to observe school

quality.

       Institutional context may affect student employment via at least two pathways. First, the

educational production function is not necessarily fixed by nature, but may vary depending on

institutional context. Institutional crowding may cause the production function to become flat

after a point, if students are not able to get into all of the courses they want in a given term.

Second, the structure of tuition and fee charges may affect student employment. The model

above assumes that tuition is fixed (per term), so that it does not affect the marginal tradeoff

between school and work. But if tuition is charged per-course, this will strengthen the incentives

to work even in the absence of credit constraints. In the case of per-term charges, when tuition

rises students may have an incentive to work less, if doing so makes it possible to complete

schooling in fewer terms.

IV. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

       Credit constraints, in combination with rising real tuition costs, provide one popular

hypothesis for the change over time. But with so many students working, and with so many

factors potentially affecting students’ employment decisions, it is important to consider the role

of alternative explanations for the trend. In this section I evaluate the evidence for these

alternative explanations, based on the factors described above in Section III.

A. Compositional changes

       Many of the factors listed in Section III will vary depending on the individual. As college

enrollments have expanded, it is possible that the composition of the student population has




                                                                                                    16
shifted. Perhaps some individuals who in a previous era would have only worked, either because

of low returns to schooling, high returns to work experience, or socioeconomic barriers to access,

are now shifting into college. These marginal individuals may retain their higher propensity to

work even as they enroll in school, and thus compositional change may drive an increase in

student employment even without any deeper structural changes.

         If this were the case, controlling for the changing composition of the college student

population would eliminate the apparent increase over time. Relevant covariates are limited in

the CPS, but one can examine subgroups defined by race, gender, age, dependency status,

parental income quartile, parental education, and attendance at public versus private

institutions.10, 11 As indicated in the panels of Figure 3, while the trend is slightly stronger for

some groups (such as students at public institutions, and 19 to 21 year olds) and slightly weaker

for others (such as those in the top income quartile), the basic pattern is replicated for every

subgroup I examine. It is thus clear that basic compositional changes are not going to explain

away the trend.

         Nonetheless, there are important differences in levels of work along some dimensions

that are shifting, most notably age and dependency status, which may explain some of the change

over time. For example, older, independent students are more likely to work and make up an

increasing fraction even of this “traditional” college population. In 1970, 21 and 22 year olds

made up only 11 percent of this group, but comprised 31 percent of the sample when average

hours peaked in 2000. Also, the percentage of the sample defined as independent increased from



10
   I have classified anyone who is not a household head or spouse as dependent to ensure a consistent definition over
time. This will include some individuals living with roommates rather than parents; however, the coding of the
CPS’s “household relationship” variable changed in 1989, 1994, and 1995, making it impossible to more
specifically identify dependent children in a consistent way over time.
11
   Parental income and education are available only for students who are still dependent on their parents (dependent
students, even if living away at college, are to be surveyed as part of their parents’ household).


                                                                                                                  17
about 8 percent to 14 percent over this time period. To summarize the role of compositional

change, I regress hours worked on age and dependency status, as well as gender, race/ethnicity,

marital status, region, parental income quartile, parental education dummies, and public/private

enrollment status (regression results are provided in Appendix B).12 Using the parameter

estimates from this regression I predict hours worked in each year; the predicted trend indicates

how much we would have expected labor supply to change as a result of compositional changes

alone.13

         The predicted and actual values are plotted in Figure 4. This shows that compositional

changes (primarily by age and dependency status) alone would have predicted an increase of

about 1.3 hours between 1970 and 2009, or about 65 percent of the actual increase. Looking at

the full 1970-2009 trend is misleading, however, because it combines severe under-predictions of

both the 1970-2000 increase as well as the subsequent decrease in hours. When I separate these

two time periods, I find that predicted hours can explain only about 20 percent of the 1970-2000

increase, and actually predict a slight increase between 2000 and 2009 when hours fell

substantially. I conclude that while compositional changes can explain a fraction of the increase

up through 2000, they are not the driving factor during that period nor do they explain any of the

reversal in trend since then.

         Of course, there is still room for substantial compositional shifts even within these broad

demographic groups. Even among white, male, middle-income nineteen year olds attending

private universities, the marginal student may have a higher propensity to work. But the evidence



12
   Parental income and education dummies are set to zero for independent students, and the dependency dummy
serves as the missing data indicator in these regressions. Income quartile cutoffs are established using families
including at least one member between age 16 and 30, regardless of college enrollment status.
13
   I utilize ordinary least squares (OLS) regression; however, a Tobit specification to account for the left-censoring
of hours at zero returns virtually identical results.


                                                                                                                     18
above suggests that the trends in student labor supply are remarkably broad-based and thus

cannot be explained away by any simple shifts in student demographics.

B. Economic conditions

       The recent recession makes obvious the need to incorporate economic conditions into any

model of trends in students’ labor supply. As the wages students can command rise and fall, this

will change the tradeoff between time spent on schoolwork versus paid employment. Although

the October CPS does collect wage data, they do so only for a relatively small subsample and

only since 1981. For these reasons I choose instead to use unemployment rates (by state and

year) as a proxy for broader economic conditions. Unemployment rates follow a similar (inverse)

pattern as wages, are less noisy and enable me to utilize the entire 40-year data series.

       Economic conditions clearly will do little to explain the increases in both employment

and hours between 1970 and 1982, a period of generally rising unemployment. But the long-term

decline in unemployment rates between 1982 and 2000, and the subsequent fluctuations, are

broadly consistent with trends in student labor supply. To quantify the role of economic

conditions, I add state-year unemployment rates to the model above that predicts average weekly

hours as a function of demographic characteristics, and generate a new series of predicted hours.

The resulting predictions are plotted in Figure 5, with actual hours plotted for comparison.

       With two periods of notable exception, the predicted hours now generally track actual

hours. Overall, this model—including both demographic characteristics and economic

conditions—can explain about 29 percent of the increase in hours between 1970 and 2000, and

70 percent of the decrease since then. But between 1970 and 1982, labor supply rose by 1.1

hours per week although a decline of 1.4 hours was predicted; between 1993 and 2005, actual




                                                                                                19
labor supply rose faster and then remained persistently about three-quarters of an hour higher

than predicted.

C. Rising real tuition costs in combination with credit constraints

        College costs have risen dramatically over the past 40 years, even after accounting for

inflation. As shown in Figure 6, average published tuition and fee charges have risen

substantially at all institution types since 1980. At public four-year institutions, which enroll the

majority of 18- to 22-year-old students, inflation-adjusted costs more than tripled, from $2,097 in

1980 to $7,396 in 2009 (measured in constant 2011 dollars). Tuition and fees have also more

than doubled at both two-year and private four-year institutions.

        Rising tuition costs, however, do not appear to be a good explanation for the rapid

increase in student employment between 1970 and 1982, because tuition prices were stable in

real terms during that time. Moreover, both Pell Grants and federal Stafford Loan limits were at

historical highs relative to tuition prices during that period (see Figure 7). For example, in 1977-

78 the average Pell Grant (among recipients, in 1977 dollars) was $748, which would more than

cover the average tuition of $655 at a public four-year institution; the Stafford Loan limit for a

first-year student was $2,500, which would nearly cover the $2,700 tuition and fees at a private

four-year institution (College Board, 2011b).14

        Credit constraints are a much more plausible explanation for the faster-than-predicted

increase and then persistently higher-than-predicted average hours of work during the 1993-2005

period. While prices continued to rise, sources of financial aid failed to keep up. As shown in

Figure 6, 1994 was the first year in which the Stafford Loan limit (then $2,625) would fail to

14
  For historical information on Pell Grant average awards, see “FinAid: FinAid for Educators and FAAs: Pell Grant
Historical Figures.” FinAid: The Smart Student Guide to Financial Aid,
http://www.finaid.org/educators/pellgrant.phtml. For historical information on Stafford Loan Limits, see “FinAid:
Loans: Historical Loan Limits.” FinAid: The Smart Student Guide to Financial Aid,
http://www.finaid.org/loans/historicallimits.phtml.


                                                                                                              20
cover average tuition and fees at a public four-year institution (then $2,705); the loan-limit-to-

tuition ratio continued to fall steadily through 2005. Similarly, the average Pell Grant had fallen

to cover just 56 percent of the average public four-year tuition by 1994, and fell even further to

cover just 45 percent by 2005.

       A relaxation of credit constraints can also potentially explain why labor supply has fallen

faster than predicted since 2005 (recall that economic fluctuations only explained about 70

percent of the decline since 2000—most of which took place since 2005). While published prices

have continued their steady upward climb, Figure 6 shows that net prices in all sectors were

actually lower in 2009-10 than they were in 2005-06. These net prices are calculated by

subtracting out estimated grant aid (from all sources) and the estimated value of education-

related income tax credits and deductions, by sector (College Board, 2011a). The net price of a

private four-year in 2009 was 2 percent lower than the net price in 2005, and the net price for a

public four-year was 13 percent lower. The net price of a public two-year institution went from

negative $60 to negative $810 over this time period, meaning the average student received more

in grant aid than he or she was charged in tuition and fees.

       Evidence of tightening constraints between the late 1970s and the late 1990s comes from

other sources as well. Using data from the NLSY-79, Carneiro and Heckman (2002) compare

college enrollment and completion across income groups, controlling for ability and

demographic characteristics. Under the assumption that families in the top quartile are

unconstrained, they calculate that the adjusted differences in outcomes by income imply that no

more than 8 percent of the U.S. population was credit constrained in the late 1970s and early

1980s. Belley and Lochner (2007) update and extend this analysis using data from the NLSY-97.

While they do not provide a specific estimated percentage constrained, they find that college




                                                                                                     21
attendance gaps by income (controlling for ability) increased substantially for the NLSY-97

cohorts. They conclude that this pattern cannot be explained except by credit constraints. Belley

and Lochner also examine patterns of student employment, and find that while hours worked

were unrelated to family income in the NLSY-79 cohorts, they were strongly related in the

NLSY-97 cohorts for high-ability students: among the top quartile of ability, low-income

students worked about twice as much as high-income students.

       One remaining puzzle for the borrowing constraints explanation, however, is that while

trends in average hours are slightly less pronounced for the top quartile of family income, they

have followed similar patterns for all income groups (see panel D of Figure 3). For example,

among students in the top quartile of family income labor supply as measured in the CPS still

rose by more than 80 percent between 1970 and 2000, from 5 to over 9 hours per week, before

falling to 6.6 hours in 2009. Belley and Lochner (2007) also concede that they find large income

effects on college enrollment even for the top half of the income distribution, evidence which

they find “difficult to reconcile” with borrowing constraints (p. 80).

       One way to measure credit constraints directly is simply to ask students, “Could you

afford college without working?” A student who responds “No” to this question is almost by

definition credit constrained. In this case perception equals reality: it matters little for behavior

(though immensely for policy) whether the student actually has no access to credit, or simply

perceives she does not. Table 2 presents employment statistics, along with responses to this

question for 18 to 22-year-old full-time four-year working students in the 2003-04 NPSAS. The

statistics are broken out by income quartiles, where quartiles are defined over this sample of

dependent, full-time four-year enrollees.




                                                                                                        22
       The pattern of responses raises several points. First, about half of working students say

they could not afford school without working. This suggests that credit constraints are a

significant factor in students’ employment choices, even if they are not the only factor. Second,

responses clearly correlate with family income, but the biggest gap on this “affordability”

question is between the top two income quartiles: working students in the upper-middle quartile

are 16 percentage points more likely to say they could not afford school without working than

those in the top quartile. (Unfortunately, the “affordability” question was not asked in early

iterations of the NPSAS.) The difference between the middle two quartiles is 9 percentage

points, and between the bottom two quartiles, less than 3 percentage points. Third, even among

working students in the top quartile (with a median family income of $143,000), nearly one in

three responded that college would be unaffordable without a job.

       This suggests that credit constraints may be a significant factor in student employment

decisions even among the relatively well-off—a possibility that is rarely discussed, but becomes

plausible when one considers a broad definition of credit constraints as described in Section III,

rather than focusing purely on strict, externally-imposed constraints. Wealthy students, for

example, tend to attend significantly pricier schools (College Board, 2006) and are more likely to

have siblings enrolled at the same time (author’s calculations using NPSAS:04). Moreover, they

may have a greater desire to consumption-smooth if they have a greater expectation of high

earnings after graduation.

       Table 2 sheds light on the types of constraints facing different families. Working students

from the bottom quartile are almost twice as likely as those in the top quartile to say that their

primary reason for working is to pay tuition and fees (62 percent versus 35 percent), and half as

likely to say they work primarily to pay “living expenses” (27 percent versus 50 percent). This




                                                                                                     23
supports the hypothesis that low-income families are more likely to face strict constraints while

the rich are more likely to face fuzzy constraints. Finally, the third panel of Table 2 indicates that

both external and internal constraints may be important for those who report they couldn’t afford

school without working. About half of these students took out the maximum student loan, an

indicator that they may face binding external credit constraints. On the other hand, half did not,

suggesting an internally-imposed constraint. Interestingly, among those eligible for a subsidized

student loan, poor students were slightly more likely than eligible rich students to decline these

loans.

D. Other possible explanations

1. The Federal Work-Study Program

         About one-quarter of the increase in hours between 1970 and 2000 occurred in the 1970s,

when neither compositional changes, economic conditions, nor borrowing constraints appear to

play much role. One possible explanation for the increase in this early period is the expansion of

the Federal Work-Study (FWS) program. The program was inaugurated in 1964, and the number

of students receiving assistance from it rose from 425,000 in 1970 to over 900,000 in 1979

before falling and then leveling off around 700,000. The ratio of FWS recipients to the 18- to 22-

year-old full-time enrolled student population rose from 12 percent in 1970 to 18 percent in

1979, and has fallen steadily since to less than 9 percent in 2007.15 At the prevailing average of

18 hours of work per week among workers during this period, this would account for up to a 1.1

hour increase in overall labor supply (18*0.06=1.1).

         Referring back to Figure 2, note that the student employment rate rose from 34 to 38

percentage points during the 1970s and average hours rose by 1.1. Thus, the expansion in FWS

15
  Students over age 22 are also eligible for FWS assistance; accounting for changes in the age distribution of
college enrollees would only accentuate the pattern here (i.e. including older students in the denominator would
lower the ratio disproportionately in more recent years).


                                                                                                                   24
participation is large enough to account for all of the actual increase in employment.16 Moreover,

while employment was increasing during this period, hours among those who worked remained

steady and there was no increase in the proportion of students working more than 20 hours per

week. This is also consistent with the FWS explanation, since students in the program are

generally limited to 10 to 15 hours of work per week.

2. Returns to work experience

        Previous literature (Ruhm 1997, Light 1998) suggests that students’ in-school work

experience may have labor market payoffs after graduation. Is it possible that increases in the

return to work experience can explain the particularly rapid growth in student employment

during either the 1970s or the period from 1994-2005?

        At least in recent years, work experience does not appear to be a primary motivation for

student employment: only 8 percent of working students surveyed in the 2003-2004 NPSAS

reported work experience as their “main reason” for working. That it plays such a small role in a

recent cross section makes it a less plausible candidate for the large increases over time.

Unfortunately, similar survey data are unavailable for the 1970s. But if work experience were an

increasingly important factor, we might expect to see students shifting towards higher-skilled

jobs. Figure 8 thus presents trends in broad occupational categories among working students in

the CPS. Though data are available for the entire series, major revisions to the occupational

classification scheme occurred in 1983 and 2003, so the large shifts in those years likely result

from definitional rather than real changes.

        The patterns revealed in Figure 8 confirm that changes in the returns to working are an

unlikely explanation for the increase in student employment between 1982 and 2000; however, it


16
  Recall, however, that because the 1970s were also a period of rising unemployment, we might actually have
expected a decline in hours during this time.


                                                                                                              25
may have played some role both in the increase during the 1970s and the decline post-2003. For

example, during the 1970s there was a significant shift among working students away from

labor/farm occupations towards service positions. Interestingly, these occupational shifts

diverged from the trends among non-enrolled young workers at the time, for whom the

likelihood of working in labor/farm occupations continued to increase through 1978. This

occupational shift would, however, be consistent with the expansion of Federal Work-Study.

Since 2003, student employment has shifted towards lower-skill jobs: working students are

increasingly in service occupations rather than professional, technical, managerial, or clerical

positions. The decreased availability of high-return jobs may help explain the decline in hours in

recent years (which has been more rapid than simply the broad unemployment rate would

predict).

3. Returns to schooling and the possibility of declining educational quality

        The lower the labor market returns to schooling, the higher the incentive to work while

enrolled. This provides an additional possible explanation for the increase in labor supply during

the 1970s, since the college wage premium was declining during this decade. It is clearly not a

good candidate explanation for more recent trends, since the college wage premium has risen

steadily and substantially since 1980 (see Goldin and Katz, 2008).

        There is less evidence about trends in educational quality, mainly because educational

quality is so difficult to measure. And as described in Section III, it is not theoretically clear that

declining educational quality should lead students to shift time from school to work, but it is

certainly possible (particularly if students are approaching a flat part of the educational

production function). Recent research by Babcock and Marks (2011) does provide suggestive

evidence that the “time-cost” of college is falling: using multiple sources of survey data, the




                                                                                                     26
authors find that full-time college attendance required 40 per week in 1961 but only 23 to 26

hours per week in 2004. Babcock and Marks have only fairly granular measures of student labor

supply. They find that the decline in study time corresponds with an increase in work, but also

that study time has decreased even among non-workers. One explanation they offer for the

decline in study time is that today’s students may be “free-riding” off of the hard work of

previous generations of students who established the high returns to a college degree.

       There are two problems with this as an explanation for the trend in student employment.

First, relying only on time use data leaves the direction of causality unclear. Students might work

more because they are spending less time on school, or they might be working more for some

other reason, and spending less time on school as a consequence. Second, if a college degree

requires less effort than in the past, this does not square with the trend that students are taking

longer to finish their degrees (Turner, 2005).

4. Institutional crowding

       If institutional capacity has not kept up with rising enrollments, students may not be able

to take all of the courses they need in a given semester, and this would increase the incentive to

work. Bound and Turner (2006), comparing outcomes between birth cohorts of varying sizes,

find suggestive evidence that those in large birth cohorts within states take longer to finish their

degrees, which they hypothesize may be due to institutional crowding. It follows that students

whose degree progression is slowed would have more time to work while in school. Bound,

Lovenheim, and Turner (2010) also find that while resources per student have increased for

private and the most selective public institutions, they have stagnated or declined over time for

the remaining institutions.




                                                                                                      27
         The increase in labor supply is certainly stronger for students at public four year

institutions. Between 1970 and 2005, labor supply rose from 5.1 to 10.1 hours per week among

full-time students at four-year public institutions, a 98 percent increase. It rose from 3.6 to 8.1

hours per week for equivalent private-college enrollees, an 80 percent increase. If institutional

crowding plays no role at these private institutions, but explains all of the difference in labor

supply trends between public and private enrollees, then institutional crowding could explain up

to 25 percent of the overall increase in labor supply during this time.17 This is a generous upper

bound; the true effect will be smaller if other factors such as credit constraints also apply

disproportionately to public enrollees (recall that prices have risen fastest in percentage terms at

public four-year schools).

V. DISCUSSION

         This paper has documented and attempted to explain the large increase in student

employment between 1970 and 2000, followed by a stagnation through 2005 and recent sharp

decline. My analysis suggests that no single factor is responsible for the observed pattern, and

the importance of different factors itself has shifted over time.

         Table 3 summarizes the plausibility of alternative explanations during different time

periods. Between 1970 and 1982, compositional change plays a modest role – explaining about

half of the observed increase (or about 20 percent of the “residual” increase after accounting for

economic conditions).18 Neither economic conditions nor trends in college costs can explain any

of the increase during this early period. Instead, the expansion of the Federal Work-Study

program appears to be a significant factor. Increases in the return to work experience, declines in

17
   This calculation assumes that institutional crowding explains the full difference-in-difference of hours worked
between public and private enrollees (1.4 hours), weights this by the fraction of enrollees that are at public
institutions in 2005 (78 percent) and divides by the total increase of 4.4 hours (1.4*0.78/4.4=25 percent).
18
   The “residual increase” is larger than the observed increase because economic conditions suggest that hours
should have been declining during this period, all else equal.


                                                                                                                     28
the return to schooling, and institutional crowding may also have contributed to the increase over

the 1970s.

       Between 1982 and 1993, compositional change and economic fluctuations can more than

explain the observed increase (explaining 19 percent and 94 percent, respectively). Rising tuition

and potential institutional crowding are also consistent with, but not necessary to explain the

trend during this period.

       Since 1993, however, credit constraints appear to play more of a role. Compositional

change and economic fluctuations (primarily the latter) together can explain only about 40

percent of the increase between 1993 and 2005, and only about 60 percent of the decline since

2005. Between 1993 and 2005 tuition continued to rise sharply in real terms while the value of

student aid declined. Since 2005, however, net tuition has actually fallen in real terms after

accounting for significant increases in student aid.

       In 2009, for the first time ever, 18 to 22 year old high school graduates were more likely

to be going to college and not working than they were to be working and not going to college.

Employment rates and hours of work among college students in 2009 were near a 30-year low..

Clearly, broader economic conditions are the predominant explanation for the recent reversal in

student employment trends, and students are likely to return to work again in larger numbers

when unemployment rates decline. However, this analysis suggests that borrowing constraints

(whether strict or fuzzy, internally-imposed or externally-imposed) are also a significant factor

for explaining recent trends. Thus, what happens to student employment in coming years will

also depend on whether recent increases in student aid can continue to outpace increases in

published prices.




                                                                                                    29
REFERENCES

Babcock, Philip and Mindy Marks, 2011. “The Falling Time-Cost of College: Evidence from
Half a Century of Time-Use Data.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2), 468-478.

Becker, Gary, 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” The Journal of
Political Economy 70 (5) [Part 2], 9-49.

Belley, Philippe and Lance Lochner, 2007. ”The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in
Determining Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital 1 (1), 37-89.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life cycle of Earnings.”
The Journal of Political Economy 75 (4) [Part 1], 352-365.

Bound, John and Sarah Turner, 2006. “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate
Attainment.” NBER Working Paper No. 12424. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.

Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner, 2010. “Increasing time to Baccalaureate
Degree in the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 15892. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.

Cameron, Stephen and Christopher Taber, 2004. “Estimation of Educational Borrowing
Constraints Using Returns to Schooling.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (1) [Part 1], 132-
182.

Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman, 2002. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-
Secondary Schooling.” The Economic Journal 112 (October), 705-734.

College Board, 2004. Trends in College Pricing 2004. The College Board, New York, NY.

College Board, 2005. Trends in College Pricing 2005. The College Board, New York, NY.

College Board, 2006. Trends in College Pricing 2006. The College Board, New York, NY.

College Board, 2011a. Trends in College Pricing 2011. The College Board, New York, NY.

College Board, 2011b. “2011 Trends in College Pricing, All Figures and Tables.” The College
Board, New York, NY,
http://trends.collegeboard.org/college_pricing/downloads/2011_Trends_College_Pricing_All_Fi
gures_Tables.xls.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, 2008. The Race between Education and Technology. The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Kalenkoski, Charlene Marie and Sabrina Wulff Pabilonia, 2010. “Parental Transfers, Student
Achievement, and the Labor Supply of College Students.” Journal of Population Economics 23
(2), 469-496.


                                                                                               30
Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, 2001. “The Effect of Parental Transfers and
Borrowing Constraints on Educational Attainment.” International Economic Review 42 (4),
1051-1103.

Light, Audrey, 2001. “In-School Work Experience and the Returns to Schooling.” Journal of
Labor Economics 19 (1), 65-93.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1976. “A Theory of Life Earnings.” The Journal of Political Economy 84 (4)
[Part 2], S45-S67.

Ruhm, Christopher J., 1997. “Is High School Employment Consumption or Investment?”
Journal of Labor Economics 15 (4), 735-776.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd R. Stinebrickner, 2003. “Working during School and Academic
Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (2), 473-491.

“Student Engagement: Pathways to Student Success: 2004 Annual Survey Results.” National
Survey of Student Engagement: Annual Report 2004. Trustees of Indiana University:
Bloomington, IN (2004). http://www.indiana.edu/~nsse/.

Turner, Sarah E., 2004. “Going to College and Finishing College: Explaining Different
Educational Outcomes,” in Hoxby, Caroline M., ed. College Choices: The Economics of Where
to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It, 63-100. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
IL.

Tyler, John H., 2003. “Using State Child Labor Laws to Identify the Effect of School-Year Work
on High School Achievement.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (2), 381-408.




                                                                                             31
                                         Table 1
                                Types of Credit Constraints

                                            Source of constraint
Margin of
constraint                    External                                     Internal
Strict          Student cannot borrow the minimum            Students can borrow the minimum
             required to pay tuition and                  required to pay tuition and basic
             nondiscretionary living expenses. Likely     living expenses, but choose not to
             to apply mainly to students from low-        because of either risk aversion or
             income families (or those estranged          disutility of debt. May apply to
             from their parents)                          anyone, but mainly becomes an
                                                          issue for low-income students (or
                                                          those estranged from their parents)

Fuzzy          Students can borrow the minimum               Students can borrow enough to
             required to pay tuition and                  fully finance schooling and smooth
             nondiscretionary living expenses, but        consumption, but choose not to
             cannot borrow enough to optimally            because of either risk aversion or
             smooth consumption. Worse for lower-         disutility of debt. May apply to
             income students, but may apply across        students at any point in the income
             the income scale (particularly if parents’   distribution.
             generosity is bounded).




                                                                                                32
                                                 Table 2

                         Employment and Reasons for Work, By Family Income

                                                            Bottom                                  Top
 Variable                                            All    Quartile         Q2          Q3      Quartile
 Average weekly hours of work                       14.0        15.2        15.1        13.9        11.8
 Employed during school year (%)                    70.0        71.7        74.0        71.2        63.3
 Conditional weekly hours of work                   20.0        21.2        20.5        19.5        18.7
 Received any federal work-study aid (%)            18.8        26.5        22.3        16.4         9.9
 Median income ($)                               74,530      21,200      51,669      81,119     144,168
 Sample size (rounded to nearest 10)             17,050       4,430        4,210       4,120       4,290
 Among working students
 Main reason for employment
   Pay tuition and fees (%)                         49.8        61.5        55.6        47.3        34.8
   Pay living expenses (%)                          37.9        27.1        33.8        40.4        50.0
   Work experience (%)                               8.4         7.0         6.7         8.3        11.6
 Cannot afford school without working (%)           47.3        58.3        54.5        45.6        30.1
 Median income ($)                               74,003      21,634      51,703      80,982     142,631
 Sample size (rounded to nearest 10)              9,170       2,310        2,380       2,340       2,140
 Among students who "cannot afford school without working"
 Took out maximum federal student loan              49.6        44.2        52.5        52.4        49.4
 Took out loan, but less than maximum               10.4        14.3        10.0         9.3         5.5
 Took out no loan                                   39.9        41.3        37.4        38.2        44.9
 Eligible for any subsidized loan                   77.0        98.2        93.7        61.8        27.3
    Of these, took out less than maximum            55.0        56.6        55.1        52.3        54.4
    Of these, fully declined the loan               39.4        41.4        39.7        36.4        34.3
 Sample size (rounded to nearest 10)                4,210        1,310       1,260      1,030         610
Source: Author's calculations using NPSAS:2003-04 data.
Notes: Income quartiles are defined over this sample of full-time dependent four-year enrollees. Students
who exclusively worked at a work-study job were not asked the questions about the main reason for
working or whether school could be afforded without working. Thus these students are excluded in the
bottom two panels of the table. Students are eligible for federally-guaranteed loans regardless of need.
Subsized loans are based on need, a combination of financial status and cost of attendance.




                                                                                                       33
                                            Table 3
                    Explanations for Student Employment Trends, 1970-2009

                                                      Time Period
Explanation                      1970-1982       1982-1993      1993-2005        2005-2009

Actual change in hours                   1.1            1.6             1.7             -2.4

Expected change due to
  compositional change                   0.6            0.3             0.2             0.2

Expected change due to
  economic fluctuations                 -2.0            1.5             0.5             -1.7

Residual unexplained
trend                                    2.5            -0.2            1.0             -0.9


Explanations consistent with residual trend?
   Tuition/fees net of aid                no            yes             yes              yes
                                     (stable)   (increasing)    (increasing)     (declining)
   Federal Work Study                    yes              no             no              no
                                (increasing)     (declining)        (stable)        (stable)
   Returns to work exp.                 yes              no              no             yes
                                 (decline in        (stable)        (stable)     (decline in
                                 labor/farm                                        prof/mgr
                               occupations)                                    occupations)

   Returns to schooling                  yes              no              no             no
                                  (declining)   (increasing)    (increasing)   (increasing)
   Institutional crowding                yes             yes             yes             no
                                (increasing)    (increasing)    (increasing)   (increasing)




                                                                                               34
                                      Figure 1
                     Enrollment and Employment Combinations
                    Of 18- to 22-Year-Old High School Graduates


      100%
       90%
       80%
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40%
       30%
       20%
       10%
        0%
             1970

                    1973

                           1976

                                  1979

                                         1982

                                                1985

                                                       1988

                                                              1991

                                                                     1994

                                                                            1997

                                                                                   2000

                                                                                           2003

                                                                                                  2006

                                                                                                         2009
                    College Only          College & Work             Work Only            Neither


Source: Author's calculations using October Current Population Survey, 1970-2009, compiled by
Unicon Corp.
Notes: College refers to part- or full-time enrollment in a two- or four-year institution.
Employment refers to part- or full-time paid employment in the past week.




                                                                                                                35
                                                         Figure 2

                                                 A. Employment
      60%

      50%

      40%

      30%

      20%

      10%

       0%
            1970

                   1973

                            1976

                                   1979

                                          1982

                                                  1985

                                                            1988

                                                                   1991

                                                                            1994

                                                                                   1997

                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                 2003

                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                 2009
                          Employed               Over 20 hrs. per week                     Full-time

                                          B. Average Weekly Hours
       24
       22
       20
       18
       16
       14
       12
       10
        8
        6
        4
        2
        0
            1970

                   1973

                           1976

                                   1979

                                          1982

                                                  1985

                                                           1988

                                                                   1991

                                                                           1994

                                                                                   1997

                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                 2003

                                                                                                        2006

                                                                                                                2009




                             Hours among workers                          Hours incl. zeros

Source: Author's calculations using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009
(compiled by Unicon Corp.) on 18- to 22-year-old full-time college enrollees.




                                                                                                                        36
                                                                                 Figure 3
                                                               Average Weekly Hours By Selected Characteristics
                                                A. Gender                                                                                                           B. Race/Ethnicity

  16                                                                                                                16
  14                                                                                                                14
  12                                                                                                                12
  10                                                                                                                10
   8                                                                                                                    8
   6                                                                                                                    6
   4                                                                                                                    4
   2                                                                                                                    2
   0                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                      2000
         1970
                 1973
                         1976
                                 1979
                                         1982
                                                 1985
                                                         1988
                                                                 1991
                                                                        1994
                                                                               1997


                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                            2009




                                                                                                                            1970
                                                                                                                                      1973
                                                                                                                                                1976
                                                                                                                                                          1979
                                                                                                                                                                    1982
                                                                                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                                                                               1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                  Female                       Male                                                                 Hispanic                                                 White, non-hisp
                                                                                                                                                    Black, non-hisp

                                                  C. Age                                                                             D. Family Income Quartile (Dependents Only)
  16                                                                                                               16
  14                                                                                                               14
  12                                                                                                               12
  10                                                                                                               10
   8                                                                                                               8
   6                                                                                                               6
   4                                                                                                               4
   2                                                                                                               2
   0                                                                                                               0
                         1976
                                1979




                                                                        1994
                                                                               1997




                                                                                                            2009
        1970
                 1973




                                        1982
                                                1985
                                                         1988
                                                                 1991




                                                                                      2000
                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                     2006




                                                                                                                        1970
                                                                                                                               1973
                                                                                                                                             1976
                                                                                                                                                       1979
                                                                                                                                                                 1982
                                                                                                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                                              Q1 (Lowest)                                    Q2
                        22                21                    20             19               18                                                            Q3                                             Q4 (Highest)

                                        E. Institution Type                                                                                                    F. Dependency Status
 16                                                                                                                16
 14                                                                                                                14
 12                                                                                                                12
 10                                                                                                                10
  8                                                                                                                 8
  6                                                                                                                 6
  4                                                                                                                 4
  2                                                                                                                 2
  0                                                                                                                 0
                                                        1988


                                                                        1994
                                                                               1997
                                                                                      2000
                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                    2006
       1970
                1973
                        1976
                                1979
                                        1982
                                                1985


                                                                 1991




                                                                                                            2009



                                                                                                                        1970
                                                                                                                                   1973
                                                                                                                                             1976
                                                                                                                                                       1979
                                                                                                                                                                 1982
                                                                                                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009




                       2-Yr                     Public 4-Yr                           Private 4-Yr                                                                                Indep                      Dep.

Source: Author's calculations using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009
(compiled by Unicon Corp.) on 18- to 22-year-old full-time college enrollees.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      37
                                          Figure 4
                         Actual and Predicted Average Weekly Hours
                          (Using Demographic Characteristics Only)

      16
      14
      12
      10
       8
       6
       4
       2
       0
           1970

                  1973

                          1976

                                 1979

                                        1982

                                                1985

                                                        1988

                                                               1991

                                                                      1994

                                                                             1997

                                                                                    2000

                                                                                           2003

                                                                                                  2006

                                                                                                         2009
                                               Actual           Predicted


Source: Author's estimates using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009 (compiled
by Unicon Corp.) on 18- to 22-year-old full-time undergraduates.
Notes: Average hours include zeroes for non-workers. See text for details.




                                                                                                                38
                                           Figure 5
                          Actual and Predicted Average Weekly Hours
                        (Using Demographics and Economic Conditions)
     16
     14
     12
     10
      8
      6
      4
      2
      0
          1970

                 1973

                          1976

                                 1979

                                        1982

                                               1985

                                                      1988

                                                             1991

                                                                    1994

                                                                           1997

                                                                                  2000

                                                                                         2003

                                                                                                2006

                                                                                                       2009
                                               Actual           Predicted


Source: Author's estimates using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009 (compiled
by Unicon Corp.) on 18- to 22-year-old full-time undergraduates.
Notes: Average hours include zeroes for non-workers. See text for details.




                                                                                                              39
                                                                              Figure 6
                                                                 Published and Net Tuition and Fees
                                                                       (Constant 2011 Dollars)

  $30,000

  $25,000

  $20,000

  $15,000

  $10,000

   $5,000

       $0

   -$5,000
             1975-76

                       1977-78

                                   1979-80

                                             1981-82

                                                       1983-84

                                                                   1985-86

                                                                             1987-88

                                                                                       1989-90

                                                                                                 1991-92

                                                                                                           1993-94

                                                                                                                     1995-96

                                                                                                                               1997-98

                                                                                                                                         1999-00

                                                                                                                                                     2001-02

                                                                                                                                                               2003-04

                                                                                                                                                                         2005-06

                                                                                                                                                                                   2007-08

                                                                                                                                                                                             2009-10
                                 Private Four-Year                                     Public Four-Year                                            Public Two-Year
                                 Private Four-Year (Net)                               Public Four-Year (Net)                                      Public Two-Year (Net)

Source: College Board (2004, 2005, 2011b). Net tuition and fees are calculated by subtracting
estimated average grant aid plus tax benefits per full-time student in the sector from the
published price. Original source for data 1987-88 through 2010-11: Annual Survey of Colleges,
The College Board. Original source for earlier data: Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS), U.S. Department of Education.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                 Figure 7
                                               Average Pell Grants and Stafford Loan Limits
                                            as a Proportion of Average Public Four-Year Tuition


  450%
  400%
  350%
  300%
  250%
  200%
  150%
  100%
   50%
    0%
         1976-77

                   1978-79

                             1980-81

                                        1982-83

                                                  1984-85

                                                            1986-87

                                                                      1988-89

                                                                                1990-91

                                                                                          1992-93

                                                                                                    1994-95

                                                                                                                1996-97

                                                                                                                          1998-99

                                                                                                                                    2000-01

                                                                                                                                              2002-03

                                                                                                                                                        2004-05

                                                                                                                                                                  2006-07

                                                                                                                                                                            2008-09

                                                                                                                                                                                      2010-11
                                       Average Pell Grant (Recipients)                                        Stafford Loan Limits (First-Years)

Source: Author's calculations based on tuition and fee data from the College Board (2004, 2005,
2011b). For historical information on average Pell Grant awards and Stafford Loan maxima, see
"FinAid: The Smart Student Guide to Financial Aid," www.finaid.org.




                                                                                                                                                                                                41
                                                                            Figure 8
                                                    Occupational Groupings Among Employed Students Over Time


                                    50%

                                    45%
   Percentage of Working Students




                                    40%

                                    35%
                                    30%

                                    25%
                                    20%

                                    15%
                                    10%

                                    5%
                                    0%
                                          1970

                                                 1973


                                                        1976


                                                               1979


                                                                      1982


                                                                             1985

                                                                                    1988


                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                  1994


                                                                                                         1997


                                                                                                                2000


                                                                                                                       2003


                                                                                                                              2006

                                                                                                                                     2009
                                          Professional, technical, managerial, clerical       Service      Sales       Labor/farm

Source: Author's estimates using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009 (compiled
by Unicon Corp.) on employed 18- to 22-year-old full-time undergraduates.
Notes: Occupational classifications underwent major changes in 1983 and 2003; thus, changes in
the observed occupational distribution during those periods is likely due to definitional rather
than real changes.




                                                                                                                                            42
APPENDIX A

          Noting the dependence of h* on the exogenous parameters, the first-order condition can

be rewritten as an identity:

                  g (h( w(a ),  , r h , r s , q h , q s , a ); q h , a )        f ( s (h( w(a ),  , r h , r s , q h , q s , a )); q s , a )
           w(a )  r h                                                     r s
                                         h                                                                 s
Analyzing this equation will formalize largely intuitive implications regarding how h* depends

on wages, returns to school and work, ability, school quality, and other factors—even in the

absence of credit constraints.

          Student wages. As in any model of labor supply, wages matter. Higher base wages will

increase the value of work relative to schooling:

           h *                    1
                
           w  h  g (h( ); q , a)
                         2      h
                                          s  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                             2            h
                    r              r                        
                          h 2                   s 2            

                                                   h *
Since both g( ) and f( ) are concave,                   >0. Students shift time from school to work in the first
                                                   dw

period when wages rise, all else equal. The shift is smaller when β is large and/or when returns to

human capital are high (in other words, when base wages are a relatively small piece of lifetime

earnings).

          Returns to work experience. Formally:

                                  g (h( ); q h , a)
                                     
           h *
                                        h
                
           r h
                   h  g (h( ); q , a)
                       2          h
                                             s  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                                  2          h
                   r                    r                        
                          h 2                      s 2            

                                                             h *
Again due to the concavity of g( ) and f( ),                      >0. Students shift towards work in the first
                                                             r h

period when returns to work experience rise, all else equal.


                                                                                                                                     43
       Returns to schooling. Formally:

                              f ( s ( ); q h , a)
        h *                          s
             
        r s
                h  g (h( ); q , a)
                    2          h
                                            s  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                                 2          h
                r                    r                          
                       h 2                        s 2            

                                                       h *
Again due to the concavity of g( ) and f( ),                <0. Students work less in the first period if
                                                       r s

returns to schooling increase.

       Student ability. Intuitively, the relationship between ability and student work decisions is

ambiguous. This ambiguity is reflected in the formal analysis:

                s  2 f ( s ( ); q s , a )       h  g ( h( ); q , a )
                                                       2           h
                                                                             dw 
                 r                         r                               
        h *
                          sa                            ha              da 
             
        a           h  2 g (h( ); q h , a )         s  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                                          2            h
                      r                         r                        
                                h 2                          s 2            

The denominator is negative, but the sign of the numerator is ambiguous. To the extent that

ability affects the marginal productivity of school-based human capital more than it affects the

marginal productivity of work-based human capital (and to the extent that returns to schooling

are higher than returns to work experience), this will push higher-ability students to work less. If

high-ability students also command significantly higher base wages, however, this creates an

incentive to work more.

       School quality. Intuitively, one might guess that when school quality is low students will

have more time to spend working. However, this conclusion does not clearly follow from the

formal analysis:




                                                                                                            44
                                  2 f ( s ( ); q s , a)
                                 s
                               r
        h *                           sq s
             
        q s  h  2 g (h( ); q h , a)    s  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                             2            h
                r                    r                        
                        h 2
                                                    s 2
                                                                  

                 2 f ( s ( ); q s , a)
I assume that                           <0, in other words, that marginal productivity of observable
                      sq s

school-based human capital is higher when school quality is lower. Intuitively, students need less

time to produce the same number of courses completed when coursework is less demanding.

                           h *
This would imply that           >0 and that students work less when coursework is less demanding.
                           q s

       This result, however, relies crucially on the assumption that school quality affects only

the cost of educational investment, not the returns on that investment. In reality, returns may be

an increasing function of school quality—employers may not be completely blind. If this is the

case, we would have:

                s s  2 f ( s ( ); q s , a ) dr s f ( s ( ); q s , a ) 
                r (q )                       s                         
        h *              sq s              dq            s          
             
        q s
                   h  g (h( ); q , a )
                        2          h
                                                  f ( s ( ); s , a ) 
                                                  2            h
                   r                      rs                       
                          h  2
                                                       s 2            

The denominator remains negative but the numerator is now ambiguous. The first term in the

numerator remains negative, but the second term is positive. The less that returns depend on

                                                                                        h *
school quality and the higher the levels of returns overall, the more likely that            will be
                                                                                        q s

positive; that is, the more likely that low-quality schooling will induce students to work less

rather than more.




                                                                                                       45
APPENDIX B

                                             Table B1
                               Predictors of Average Weekly Hours

                                                   Model 1                       Model 2
 Independent variable                     Coeff.    (Std. Err)          Coeff.    (Std. Err)

 Female                                     0.39     (0.07)              0.36      (0.07)
 Black, non-hispanic                       -2.84     (0.12)             -2.77      (0.12)
 Hispanic                                   0.22     (0.15)              0.23      (0.15)
 Missing race/ethnicity                    -0.44     (0.40)             -0.35      (0.40)
 Midwest region                             2.10     (0.10)              2.05      (0.10)
 South region                               1.78     (0.10)              1.82      (0.10)
 West region                                1.81     (0.11)              2.07      (0.11)
 Ever married                               0.04     (0.21)              0.09      (0.21)
 Not household head or spouse              -5.73     (0.14)             -5.67      (0.14)
 Age 19                                     1.85     (0.10)              1.83      (0.10)
 Age 20                                     3.06     (0.11)              3.04      (0.11)
 Age 21                                     3.56     (0.11)              3.57      (0.11)
 Age 22                                     4.54     (0.13)              4.55      (0.13)
 Public four-year institution              -4.24     (0.09)             -4.30      (0.09)
 Private four-year institution             -5.32     (0.11)             -5.38      (0.11)
 Lowest family income quartile             -1.33     (0.14)             -1.33      (0.14)
 Lower middle family income quartile        0.09     (0.12)              0.08      (0.12)
 Upper middle family income quartile        0.69     (0.10)              0.72      (0.10)
 Mother: Less than HS education             0.41     (0.18)              0.57      (0.18)
 Mother: HS diploma only                    1.12     (0.11)              1.24      (0.11)
 Mother: Some college, no degree            1.58     (0.11)              1.58      (0.11)
 Mother: Missing education                  2.95     (0.17)              2.95      (0.16)
 Father: Less than HS education             0.99     (0.18)              1.04      (0.18)
 Father: HS diploma only                    1.96     (0.12)              1.95      (0.12)
 Father: Some college, no degree            2.09     (0.11)              2.04      (0.11)
 Father: Missing education                  2.36     (0.13)              2.35      (0.13)
 State-year level unemployment rate                                    -39.26      (1.74)
 Constant                                  11.57     (0.18)             13.76      (0.20)

 R-squared                                          0.074                           0.078
 Sample size                                      113,899                         113,899
Source: Author's estimates using October Current Population Survey data, 1970-2009 (compiled by
Unicon Corp.) on 18- to 22-year-old full-time undergraduates.
Notes: Average hours include zeroes for non-workers. All coefficients are from ordinary least squares
regression. Using a Tobit specification produces virtuallly identical predictions of annual average hours.




                                                                                                             46
