NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES LINKING WORKER PAY TO FIRM PERFORMANCE HELP THE BEST
FIRMS DO EVEN BETTER?
Douglas L. Kruse
Joseph R. Blasi
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 17745
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17745
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

This research was made possible with the gracious cooperation of Amy Lyman and the Great Place
to Work® Institute. It was supported by an Officer Grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation toWKH
School of Management and Labor Relations at Rutgers, and by the Foundation for Enterprise Development
which funded the Beyster Faculty Fellowships for Kruse and Blasi at Rutgers. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Douglas L. Kruse, Joseph R. Blasi, and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Linking Worker Pay to Firm Performance Help the Best Firms Do Even Better?
Douglas L. Kruse, Joseph R. Blasi, and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 17745
January 2012
JEL No. J33,J53,J54,J63,M50,M52,M54,P12,P13,P17
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the linkages among group incentive methods of compensation, labor practices,
worker assessments of workplace culture, turnover, and firm performance in a non-representative sample
of companies: firms that applied to the “100 Best Companies to Work For in America” competition
from 2005 to 2007. Although employers with good labor practices self- select into the 100 Best Companies
firms sample, which should bias the analysis against finding strong associations among modes of compensation,
labor policies, and outcomes, we find that in the firms that make more extensive use of group incentive
pay employees participate more in decisions, have greater information sharing, trust supervisors more,
and report a more positive workplace culture than in other companies. The combination of group incentive
pay with policies that empower employees and create a positive workplace culture reduces voluntary
turnover and increases employee intent to stay and raises return on equity. Finding these effects in
the non-representative “100 Best Companies” sample strengthens the likelihood that the policies have
a causal impact on employee well-being and firm performance.
Douglas L. Kruse
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
kruse@smlr.rutgers.edu
Joseph R. Blasi
Rutgers University
School of Management and Labor Relations
200 B Levin Building
Rockefeller Road
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER
blasi@smlr.rutgers.edu

Richard B. Freeman
Harvard and NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org

This paper examines how employee compensation and managerial personnel practices
affect employee well-being and firm performance among a special group of firms – those that
applied to the Great Place to Work® Institute competition to become one the “100 Best
Companies to Work For in America” that Fortune magazine publishes each year. Our 100 best
data set include firms that made the list and those that applied but did not make the list, and the
firm and employee surveys that are part of the application process, none of which was available
to earlier studies of 100 best companies (Edmans, 2011; Faleye and Trahan, 2011). Because
applicants to the 100 best list view their workplace policies and practices as exemplary, estimates
of the link between those practices and worker and firm outcomes in this data set are likely to be
biased downward compared to estimates that one would obtain from a random sample of firms.
Thus, the data provide a high hurdle for claims that particular compensation policies and
practices improve outcomes.
The Great Place to Work (GPTW) data set contains information on the 780 firms that
applied for the 100 best list in 2005-2007. The firms tend to be large. About half are public
firms that in 2007 employed about 6 million workers or around 5% of the private sector
workforce. Information on the firm's compensation policies and turnover rates comes from the
firm's application to be considered for the list. Information at the individual level about work
practices and workplace culture comes from a survey that the Great Place to Work® Institute
conducts among 200-300 randomly chosen workers within the workforce of every applicant
company. We obtain additional data for the economic performance of public companies from
Standard and Poor's Compustat file.
The GPTW dataset allows us to examine the link between three forms of compensation
that tie employee earnings to the performance of the firm – employee stock ownership, profit and
gain sharing, and broad-based stock options, which we have labeled elsewhere as shared
capitalist compensation (Kruse, Freeman, Blasi, 2010) – and worker reports on managerial
practices and workplace culture. We estimate the link from shared capitalist compensation, work
practices, and workplace culture to worker and firm outcomes.
We find that:
1) There is great variation among the applicants to the “100 best companies to work for”
list in their use of group incentive systems of pay, in workplaces practices, and in worker
assessment of workplace culture.
2) The firms that use shared capitalist modes of compensation have policies that allow
greater employee participation in decisions and greater information sharing than other firms, and
have a more positive workplace culture than other firms.
3) The combination of group incentive pay and policies that empower employees and
create a positive workplace culture increases employee intent to stay with a firm, lowers
voluntary turnover, and raises return on equity.
The next section places our study in the context of the large extant body of literature on
group incentive pay and worker and firm performance. We then describe the GPTW sample and
document the substantial differences in the use of shared capitalist modes of pay and work
practices even among these self-selected good employers. The following sections present our
estimates of the linkages between modes of compensation and work practices and workplace
culture and our estimates of the impact of these factors on economic outcomes. We conclude
with a summary of results and discussion of outstanding issues.
3

The study of “shared capitalist” compensation and practices
There are over 100 studies of the relation between group incentive pay and related
personnel practices and firm and worker performance. Most of the studies compare firm
performance of firms with and without these forms of pay in cross-section data.1 Some studies
examine firms before and after their adoption of a group incentive compensation scheme, or
control in other ways for selection bias.2 Meta-analyses analyzing the combined results of
studies show statistically significant positive associations of employee ownership and profitsharing with firm performance.3
There is also a wide dispersion in the magnitude of estimated effects within and across
studies. Many analysts and practitioners interpret this dispersion as indicating that the context in
which management establishes a group compensation system affects its success. Firms cannot
simply institute a program that links worker pay to the firm performance and expect the firm to
do better as if the method of pay was a technological fix to some engineering problem.4 “To get
the productivity-enhancing effects, something more may be needed—something akin to
developing a corporate culture that emphasizes company spirit, promotes group cooperation,
encourages social enforcement mechanisms, and so forth” (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990: 100).
Bundling equity and profit sharing with financial information and participation in decision
1
For reviews of the employee ownership literature see Blasi 1988; Doucouliagos, 1995, Kruse and Blasi, 1997,
Kaarsemaker, 2006, Freeman, 2007, and Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi 2010. For a review of the broad-based stock
option literature see Blasi et al., 2003. For reviews of the profit sharing and gain-sharing literatures see
Weitzman and Kruse, 1990, Bullock and Tubbs, 1990, Kruse, 1993, OECD, 1995, Doucialiagos, 1995,
Welbourne and Mejia, 1995.

2
One field study implemented random assignment of profit sharing at 3 of 21 establishments within a firm,
finding that the performance of those establishments improved relative to the control group (Peterson and
Luthans, 2006); A laboratory experiment among subjects organized into employee-owned “firms” found higher
productivity (Frohlich et al., 1998). Our study using an employee survey before and after the introduction of a
profit sharing plan found an increase of anti-shirking behaviors. (Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi 2010: 31). Two
studies find that average worker quality based on observables did not change as compensation changed from
individual to group incentives, while average worker performance improved (Weiss, 1987; Hansen, 1997).

3
Doucialiagos, 1995; Kruse and Blasi, 1997; Weitzman and Kruse, 1990.

4
Our 2010 analysis (Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi) of two nationally representative surveys and over 41,000
employee surveys in companies with shared capitalist modes of compensation found that the effects of these
plans on performance-related attitudes and behaviors was greatest in firms that also trusted employees to work
well without close supervision, paid base wages at or above market, and offered good job security, training, and
employee involvement in decisions. This suggests that the dispersion in results around the positive average in the
literature may be due in part to policies that accompany the incentive systems. Pendleton and Robinson (2010)
find that employee ownership appears to interact with formal employee involvement programs in affecting
performance when a minority of employees participate in employee ownership but that ownership affects
performance directly when a majority of employees participate.

4

making can enhance worker contributions to the firm by creating employment relationships
based on congruent psychological contracts. Such a bundle can form the basis of trust and
aligned interests between workers and the employer (Rousseau and Shperling 2003: 564-565).
One likely reason why a group incentive system needs support from other practices to
improve outcomes is that it must overcome the free rider or 1/N problem that plagues all forms
of collective action. In an incentive plan with N workers, the payoff to the individual from his or
her effort is diluted because each individual receives only 1/Nth of the reward from their work.
It is rational to free ride on the effort of others, but if most workers do that, the group incentive
system fails. In theory, workers can solve the free rider problem by establishing and enforcing
work norms for high effort (Axelrod, 1984; Fudenberg and Maskin, 1986) but neither theory nor
empirical studies specify what it takes to overcome the 1/N problem in different settings.5 On
the employers' side, one interpretation of successful programs is that they work like a “gift
exchange” (Akerlof, 1983) from the employer to employees in which the plans draw on feelings
of reciprocity that help establish norms for greater effort and cooperation. On the workers' side,
some workers may step up and monitor fellow employee efforts to enforce the work norm. New
empirical work indicates that proportionately more workers in establishments with group
incentive systems than workers in establishments without such incentives intervene with fellow
employees to improve performance (Freeman, Kruse, Blasi, 2011: 77-104). This demonstrates
that worker self-monitoring is a real channel for policing a group incentive system. But it pushes
the free rider question back a stage rather than eliminating it, for it raises the free rider question
of why some workers undertake the monitoring activity rather than “letting Joe do it”.
The GPTW data set provides a new way to illuminate the effects of group incentive
compensation systems and accompanying policies and practices on economic outcomes, and to
assess the complementarity among shared capitalist forms of compensation and particular ways
of operating a firm. To our knowledge it is the largest sample of firms and workers in the United
States that contains data on shared compensation practices, workplace practices, worker attitudes
and responses to policies, and measures of firm performance. But it is a highly nonrepresentative sample. Only firms that view themselves as having sufficiently good labor
practices to make the 100 best list are likely to take the time and resources to apply to the Great
Place to Work® Institute for consideration in the competition.
It is usual to regard a non-representative sample as inferior to a representative sample, but
in this case the fact that the sample come from the upper tail of those with good labor practices is
a strength. One weakness of most studies that link shared capitalist pay and practices to outputs,
including our own earlier work, is that there is always the potential that some unobservable
characteristic of the employer, workplace, or situation of the firm overcomes the 1/N problem so
that the group incentive pay system succeeds. If firms debating whether or not to introduce these
modes of compensation cannot replicate that unique attribute or find their own way to overcome

5
Laboratory experiments show that cooperation occurs more often than predicted by models of self-interest, and is
more likely when participants form a group identity by talking with each other before making their choices
(Dawes and Thaler, 1988; Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1991). Empathy with co-workers through
communication can help develop and enforce norms that support higher performance (Kandel and Lazear, 1992;
Lazear, 1992).

5

the 1/N problem, they are unlikely to have the same success with group incentive pay as firms
that have succeeded by adopting those forms of pay and practices. Having a sample of firms that
view their labor practices as exemplary allows us to sign the likely selection bias as a downward
bias.
To see this, consider a comparison of two applicants to the 100 best competition under
the assumption that firms apply only if their workplaces exceed some level of good practice, P*.
Firm A has a group incentive compensation policy (and/or other shared capitalist modes of
operating) so that it produces a workplace with good practice Pa, with Pa > P*. Firm B does not
have such a policy but has other attributes that leads it to view its workplace practices Pb as
making it exemplary, Pb >P*. Firm B's positive unobservable characteristic/policy makes it
comparable to firm A with its shared capitalist mode of pay. If both the good workplace
practices of firm A and the unobservable characteristics of firm B produce better economic
outcomes, comparisons of A and B would yield smaller differences in outcomes than would
comparisons of A with some randomly drawn firm from the population of firms.
The empirical task for the rest of this study is twofold: 1) to see whether there are
substantial differences in the use of group incentive modes of pay and related personnel policies
and practices within the select group of GPTW firms that will allow us to study the relation
between these ways of operating the firm's business and worker and firm outcomes; and 2) to
estimate whether within this group those modes of pay work separately or in combination with
other practices to affect worker and firm outcomes.
The “100 Best Companies to Work For ” Applicant Data Set
The data come from two surveys collected by the Great Place to Work® Institute: 1) the
“Culture Audit” survey of workplace practices that representatives of companies fill out when
they apply for selection to the 100 best list, and 2) the employee survey that the Institute gives to
200-300 representative employees in each company, in order to measure employee attitudes and
perceptions of the company. The Institute gave us access to the surveys for the firms that made
the 100 best list and those that applied and did not make the list under a confidentiality
agreement which allowed us to link the data to other data sources and to analyze it on an Institute
server.
The Institute developed the Culture Audit from intensive fieldwork with corporations
over the last fifteen years. It contains information on the availability of shared capitalism plans,
and other work practices and performance outcomes. About 400 companies supply Culture
Audit and employee survey data each year as part of their application to be considered one of the
“100 Best Companies to Work For in America.” Our sample contains 780 companies over the 3year span 2005-2007. It has 1312 company-year observations (reflecting applications in multiple
years by some of the companies). Three hundred seventy five of the companies are public,
which allowed us to add measures of their economic performance from Standard & Poors'
Compustat to the data set. The remaining firms are privately-held, for which we do not have
information on performance. The publicly owned companies are large companies traded on the
NYSE and the NASDAQ. Based on Compustat data, our public company sample captures a
substantial proportion of US public company activity: 10% of total sales, 10% of total
employment, and 20% of the market value of all publicly traded corporations in 2007.
The employee surveys provide information on 305,339 employees or an average of 232
6

surveys per company-year. While firms can be tracked over time, individual employees cannot
be tracked over time.
Our data are multilevel. Some are at the firm level. Some are at the individual level
within firms, which can be aggregated to firm level. Data on compensation policies and turnover
come from management responses on the Culture Audit. Data on firms’ financial performance,
which is limited to public companies, come from the linked Compustat data file. These two
sources of data allow us to examine the effect of firm practices on firm outcomes in a different
way than the two studies that have used the publicly available list of “100 best places to work”
firms to assess the effects of good labor practices on firm performance. Edmans (2011) and
Faleye and Trahan (2011) compare the stock market returns of firms that make the “100 best list”
to the returns of industry and size-matched firms that are not on the list. They both find that
companies on the 100 best list have higher shareholder returns, at least over some time periods.6
We complement their studies by comparing performance among applicant firms with different
human resource management policies that allows us to assess the impacts of particular policies.
Information on employee empowerment and workplace culture comes from the employee
responses to the randomly distributed surveys administered by the Institute. In some calculations
we average individual reports to the company level, which allows us to test the potential
mediating effects of employee reported patterns on the relation between modes of compensation
and policy on firm outcomes. The individual responses also allow us to examine the relationship
of worker reported measures of employee empowerment and workplace culture on individuallevel outcomes, such as the intent to stay with the firm, and to link those outcomes to firm-level
compensation policies.
Having data from both employees and managers and objective measures about firm
performance avoids the problem of common method bias that often plagues studies with data
from a single source or respondent, be it workers or managers With only a single source, there
is a danger of spurious covariance in variables due to the respondent's report on different
attributes having a common base. For example, workers who report high trust in management
may also report that they are more likely to stay with the firm, producing a strong relation among
individuals, but if high trust workers are randomly distributed among establishments there may
be no relation between trust and likelihood of staying at the establishment level. The manager
may report positively on practices that he or she believes are being implemented and view the
firm's performance positively, while workers may have a different view on how the firm actually

6
Using only those corporations designated as the Best Companies, the Edmans study constructs both a valueweighted and an equal-weighted portfolio from 1984-2009, both of which have better long-run stock returns
above the risk-free rate with the findings robust to controls for industries and outliers. The study hypothesizes
that “employee satisfaction” as determined by a firm’s appearance on the Best Company list, plays a key role in
this linkage, noting that two-thirds of the ranking for the list is based on the random employee surveys of
employees. The Faleye and Trahan study also examines only the companies designated Best Companies from
1998-2005 and finds a statistically significant average abnormal stock price reaction to the announcement of the
Fortune list. In addition, the Best Companies outperform comparable firms on measures of employee
productivity, firm-level total productivity, profitability and firm value with highly robust results. The study
hypothesizes that “labor-friendly” policies play a key role in this linkage and tests these ideas using a separate
independent measure of “labor-friendly” policies using a different corporate social responsibility data set.

7

operates on the ground, and company financial data may give yet a different picture of how the
firm is performing. Having information from three sources provides a test of whether patterns
found with one type of data hold in others. In the case of turnover, we have manager-reported
data on company voluntary turnover as well as employee reports of their intent to stay at the firm
that allows us to check whether relations found at the worker level are also found at the firm
level.
Table 1 provides detail on the group incentive compensation systems used by firms in the
data set over all company-years. The table demonstrates one key fact – that there is substantial
variation in the compensation systems among firms in the GPTW data. Approximately one-sixth
of firms (17.6%) report that they have an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOPs), 18.1%
report cash profit/gain-sharing plans, and 22.3% report deferred profit sharing plans. Given the
widespread use of stock options to reward executives, the most common form of group incentive
pay is granting stock options, which 44.5% of firms report. While most publicly-traded firms
give stock options to some subset of their top managers or employees, this lower incidence in the
sample reflects the large segment of the sample made up of closely-held firms which do not
utilize employee stock options to the same extent.
There is also substantial variation in the attributes of the group incentive plans among
firms that use these modes of pay. Of the companies with an ESOP, the mean proportion of
shares held by the ESOP is 17.4%,. The median proportion is a much lower 5.9% – a divergence
due to the fact that 9.1% of the firms are majority employee owned with over 50% of the shares
held by the ESOP. Of the companies with profit or gain sharing plans, the average cash plan
provided to an employee is 7.2% of annual pay while the average deferred profit sharing plan
provided a contribution equaling 6.5% of employee pay, on top of the base pay. In both cases the
distribution is concentrated below the mean so that the median payout or contribution is notably
smaller than the mean. Finally, of the companies with stock options, the average percent of
employees granted stock options was 20.6% while the median was 6.5%. Three quarters of the
firms gave options to less than 25% of employees while 16.4% of the companies were broadbased in that they granted stock options to more than half of their employees.
In sum, the table shows a wide variation among firms in both the presence of different
modes of group incentive pay and in the extent of such pay. This variation is necessary for us to
make any inferences about the effects of shared capitalist modes of pay and accompanying
practices on outcomes from the GPTW sample.
Because the Culture Audit provides information on the details of compensation systems
that reflect the extent to which the systems offer incentives to representative groups of workers,
which creates a host of variables, for ease of analysis we combine the compensation measures
into a single statistic. This is a thermometer-style index focusing on the extent of shared
capitalist forms of pay, where we give high scores to firms whose compensation system rewards
more workers through group incentive pay and/or where incentive pay is a potentially larger
share of worker earnings. The index is a summated rating of eight items that accord one point
each for 1) Having an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP), 2) Having an ESOP owning
50% or more of the company, 3) Having a stock option plan that covers 25% or more of
employees, 4) Having a stock option plan that covers 50% or more employees, 5) Having a
cash profit/gain‐sharing plan, 6) Having a cash profit/gain sharing paying more than the
median percent of pay, 7) Having a deferred profit sharing plan, and 8) Having a deferred
8

profit sharing with a contribution above the median percent of pay. With eight items the
range of the scale is 0 to 8.
Table 2 gives the distribution of firms by this measure and some summary statistics for
this “shared capitalist compensation index”. Over half of the firm-year observations meet none
of the eight criteria and thus have a score of zero. In these cases, the firms have no shared
capitalism in the specified years. They are effectively the firm B “control group” for inferring the
effects of shared capitalist modes of incentive pay on outcomes within the GPTW sample. Six
percent of the observations have scores of 3 or more, with a maximum score of 5. They are
effectively the firm A “treatment group” for inferring the effects of shared capitalist pay. In the
ensuing analysis we relate the index to work practices and measures of workplace culture and
economic outcomes and report in the appendices on the link between the components of the
index and relevant outcomes.
Other policies and practices
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics on the measures of workplaces practices and
workplace culture on which we focus.
With respect to workplace practices, we examine three variables that theory and prior
research suggest are complementary to shared capitalism7: high-trust supervision, high
participation in decisions, and high information sharing. These are highly correlated variables
that we averaged to form a single index which we label ”employee empowerment” (alpha=.890).
For workplace culture we use six measures: workers assessments of team or family feeling,
employee cooperation, employee willingness to give extra to their work, the feeling that one
receives a fair share of company profits, the Great Place to Work Trust Index©, and the
perception that this is a great place to work. The Institute developed the Trust Index© as a
summary measure of employee perceptions of the company. It includes all items from the
employee survey, grouped into five dimensions and averaged across the dimensions.8 It provides
a broad measure of company culture.
Table 3 also presents descriptive statistics for our individual-level measure of intent to
stay and company-level performance measures of voluntary turnover and return on equity
(ROE).
Turnover is one of the most important measures of worker satisfaction with how a firm
operates. The ubiquitous finding from studies of job satisfaction is that low satisfaction is
associated with high quits, which makes up most voluntary separation (retirement being the other
part of voluntary separation). The question to workers on intent to stay with the firm is forwardlooking and subjective while the company-level measure of voluntary turnover is backwardlooking and objective. Aggregating the worker reports on intent to stay gives us a firm-level
7
See, for example, Dube and Freeman (2010); Conyon and Freeman (2004).

8
The five dimensions are labeled camaraderie (10 items, alpha=.94), credibility (13 items, alpha=.96), fairness (12
items, alpha=.93), pride (8 items, alpha=.93), and respect (13 items, alpha=.94). The Trust Index© that averages
these five dimensions has an alpha of .970. We exclude the “intent to stay” item since we examine the
relationship between the Trust Index© and intent to stay in Table 7.

9

measure that we have correlated with the firm-level measure of turnover. To the extent that the
practices or conditions that produce high or low turnover are stable over the period, the two
measures should be negatively related. Their correlation is -.245.
Turning to firm outcomes, the most widely used financial measure of the performance of
firms is return on equity (ROE), which reflects the value of the firm to shareholders. But ROE
varies across industries depending on riskiness and other factors. We have “adjusted” ROE from
a robust regression of ROE on forty industry dummies and firm size, separately by year, for the
entire Standard and Poor’s Compustat data set. With this method we have effectively controlled
for industry-specific risk factors that may vary over time. The resulting value represents the
company’s performance relative to public companies of the same size in the same industry in the
same year. There were some extreme values in ROE among the GPTW companies after this
adjustment, so we ran all regressions both with and without trimming the upper and lower 1% of
ROE within the GPTW sample. The basic results were similar; here we present the results using
the trimmed measure. The mean value of .039 for adjusted ROE indicates that the applicants had
an average ROE that was 3.9 percentage points higher than the industry-year average for firms of
the same size, consistent with the idea that these are better-performing firms in general.9
Shared Capitalist Compensation and Complementary Workplace Practices
As noted, a key issue in the analysis of group incentive systems is the extent to which
they are accompanied by other work practices and workplace culture, presumably due to the
complementarity of the pay and workplace operations.10 Table 4 summarizes the results of
analyzing the relation between group incentive modes of pay and workplace practices and
culture in the GPTW data set. It records the coefficients from regression of workers' reports on
each of the measures of workplace empowerment and culture on the shared capitalist index
variable.
The regressions show that employees in companies with higher values on the shared
capitalist index are more likely to report high-trust supervision, participation in decisions,
information sharing, and more favorable outcomes on all of the culture measures. The
calculations in appendix table A, which replace the index with its underlying components –
namely, dummy variables for presence or absence particular forms of pay and continuous
variable measures of its extent – show that ESOP variables are most consistently significantly

9
This is higher than Edmans’ (2011) estimate of an excess return of 2.1% annually over the 1984-2009 period for a
portfolio made up of Best Company winners relative to a portfolio of same-industry firms.

10
In our 2010 book we analyzed two nationally representative surveys and over 41,000 employee surveys in shared
capitalism companies, finding that these plans have the most positive effects on performance-related attitudes and
behaviors when they are combined with high-trust supervision (trusting employees to work well without close
supervision), base wages at or above market, and high-performance policies (job security, training, and employee
involvement in decisions). Without these policies these plans can have no or negative effects, indicating that the
dispersion in results across the 100+ studies we have reviewed may be explained in part by the types of policies that
do or do not accompany shared capitalism. Other recent studies finding evidence of complementarities between
shared capitalism and workplace policies include Jones et al. (2010) and Pendleton and Robinson (2010).

10

positively related to the practices and attitudes, with deferred profit-sharing as the second most
significantly related. It appears that managers tend to have supportive cultures where shared
capitalism practices are prevalent.
Model Specifications and Results
Standard regression analysis is an appropriate tool to estimate the links from the
compensation and workplace practice variables on outcomes in each of the three years of our
data set taken independently. But because many firms apply to the Great Place To Work
competition in more than one year, we can do better than simple OLS in an analysis that pools
the data over the three years: the existence of the same firm in two or three of the years allows us
to take account of firm-specific factors. In the 2005-2007 GPTW data set, 480 companies applied
to the competition once in this period, 168 applied twice, and 182 applied three times, which
creates a distinct structure to the error terms associated with an individual establishment. To
exploit this pattern, we use a random effects specification of the model that uses both within-firm
and between-firm variation to estimate the parameters linking variables.
First we examine the overall relationship of shared capitalism to the other outcomes using
the following equations:
(1)
Y1 = a + b1*SC + b2*X1 + b3*X2 + b4*R + e
ijt

jt

ijt

jt

j

(2)

Y2 = a + b1*SC + b2*X1 + b3*X2 + b4*R + e

(3)

Y3 = a + b1*SC + b2*X2 + b3*R + e

ijt
jt

jt

jt

ijt

jt

jt

j

j

ijt

ijt

jt

where
Y1 = perception of empowerment and culture for individual i, firm j, year t
ijt

Y2 = intent to stay for individual i, firm j, year t
ijt

Y3 = firm performance measure for firm j, year t
jt

SC = shared capitalism measure(s) for firm j, year t
jt

X1 = employee-level controls for individual i, firm j, year t
ijt

X2 = company-level controls for firm j, year t
jt

R = firm-level random effect for firm j
j

e = error term for individual i, firm j, year t
ijt

e = error term for firm j, year t
jt

The X1 controls include individual-level employee demographic information (gender
dummy, full-time dummy, 6 dummies for race/ethnicity, 5 dummies for age category, 7 dummies
for occupation, 6 dummies for tenure category) and the X2 controls include company-level
characteristics (defined benefit pension plan dummy, natural logarithm of total employment,
unionized percent of workforce, whether publicly-held, age of company, dummies for services
and manufacturing, and natural logarithms of average hourly pay for largest hourly-paid group
and average salary for largest salaried group).
In the next stage of analysis we examine the potential moderating effects of
empowerment and culture by using interactions with shared capitalism.
11

(4)

Y2 = a + b1*Y1 + b2*SC + b3*(Y1 *SC ) + b4*X + b5*R + e

(5)

Y3 = a + b1* Y 1 + b2*SC + b3*( Y 1 *SC ) + b4*X + b5*R + e

ijt
jt

ijt

jt

jt

ijt

jt

jt

jt

jt

jt

j

jt

j

ijt
jt

where

Y1 =
jt
mean of Y1 variable across individuals in firm j, year t
The b3 coefficients will indicate whether empowerment and culture moderate the effects of
shared capitalism.
Our model for the avenues through which shared capitalism may affect worker and firm
outcomes is presented in Figure 1.11
Effects on Turnover
We next examine the links among intent to stay, voluntary turnover, the shared capitalist
index of rewards, and the complementary work practices and workplace culture.
Panel A of Table 5 summarizes calculations of the effect of shared capitalist
compensation and the empowerment measure of workplace practices and the Trust Index©,
introduced separately and interactively with the shared capitalist index on the worker level
turnover measure of intent to stay. The figures in line 1 show that the index of shared capitalist
pay by itself is moderately related to turnover behavior: it raises intent to stay. But its impact is
dwarfed by the employee empowerment measure of work place practices in line 2 and by the
Trust Index© measure in line 4. At the individual level these factors have an overwhelming
impact on turnover, which makes the shared capitalist index insignificant. This is due in part to
the “common source” bias that individuals who are personally well-treated or have trust in the
firm are more likely to stay with it whereas workers who feel the opposite at the same workplace
are less likely to stay. What is critical to the complementarity story is that the interaction terms
are also positive and significant.
The more relevant level of analysis for assessing firm personnel practices is the level of
the firm. Panel B of Table 5 summarizes calculations of the effect of shared capitalist
compensation and the firm-level averages of the empowerment measure of workplace practices
and the Trust Index© on the firm-level measure of voluntary turnover. At this level, the shared
capitalist variable obtains a negative coefficient by itself that remains substantial with the
addition of the empowerment measure in line 7 and the Trust Index© in line 9. Those variables
have significant effects on turnover but they do not “dominate” the calculations as they did in
panel A. In the firm-level analysis the interaction terms show the powerful moderating impact of
the empowerment measure and the Trust Index© on behavior. The interactions are sufficiently
strong as to flip the sign on the shared capitalism measure so that it is associated with high
voluntary turnover at low levels of worker empowerment or trust, and low turnover at high levels
of empowerment or trust.
11
The model in Figure 1 allows for the effects of shared capitalism on worker and firm outcomes to be both
mediated and moderated by employee empowerment and culture. We have also tested mediation (results
available on request), and the results point toward a richer story of moderation in analyzing the effects of shared
capitalism

12

These results are illustrated in Figure 2, which is based on regression 8 in Table 5.12
th
“Low” empowerment is defined as the empowerment score for the firm at the 10 percentile,
th
while “high” empowerment is the score at the 90 percentile. In a firm without any shared
capitalism, voluntary turnover is predicted to drop slightly from 15.3% to 14.4% as a firm moves
from low to high empowerment. In a firm with high shared capitalism (the maximum observed
score of 5 on the index), voluntary turnover is predicted to drop from 17.6% to 6.3% as a firm
moves from low to high empowerment. Our interpretation is that employees may react badly to
shared capitalism when they are closely supervised and not given the tools to improve
performance (“we want you to be inspired by the shared rewards, but we’re still going to keep a
close eye on you and follow a control-oriented management system”); in this case the shared
capitalism may be seen primarily as shifting financial risk onto employees. Kruse, Freeman, and
Blasi (2011: 87-88, 94, 96, 152-157) found similar results for the interaction of supervision and
high-performance practices.
Finally, panel C presents a comparable analysis that uses the employee-reported intent to
stay aggregated to the firm level. The results match the pattern in panels A and B, indicating that
shared capitalist pay interacts with the empowerment and trust measures to decrease turnover
whether turnover is measured at the employee or firm level, or with a forward-looking or
backward-looking measure.
Effects on company financial performance
Table 6 examines the effect of shared capitalist compensation and the empowerment
measure of workplace practices and the Trust Index©, introduced separately and interactively
with the shared capitalist index, on the adjusted return on equity measure that reflects the value
to shareholders of these modes of operation. Edmans (2011) found that the firms on the 100 best
list had returns on the order of 2 percentage points or so higher than comparable firms, while
Faleye & Trajan (2011) found that “companies selected for the list subsequently outperform
comparable firms in terms of long-run stock returns.”13 The calculation in line 1 shows that in a
sample that includes not only the firms that made the list but those that did not make the list,
shared capitalist forms of pay produced significantly higher ROE as well. Addition of the
employee empowerment index in line 2 and of the Trust Index© in line 4 show that those
measures of workplace practices and culture are also associated with higher returns while barely
impacting the estimated coefficient on shared capitalist compensation index. But again, the key
finding is that it is the interactive effects of the variables that matter. At low levels of employee
empowerment, shared capitalist modes of pay reduce ROE whereas at high levels of
empowerment, shared capitalist modes of pay raise ROE. Similarly, at low levels of trust shared
capitalist modes of pay reduce ROE whereas at high levels of trust, they raise it. We find similar
results when empowerment and trust are broken into four dummy variables, allowing non12
A very similar figure is created when empowerment is replaced with the Trust Index© (not shown but available).

13
See Edmans (2011: 628) and Faleye and Trahan (2010: 33).

13

linearities (results available on request). Shared capitalism affects ROE most strongly among
firms with values in the top quarter of the Trust Index©.
Conclusion
Our analysis of the GPTW data set finds that shared capitalist forms of pay are associated
with high-trust supervision, participation in decisions, and information sharing, and with a
variety of positive perceptions of company culture. At the firm level, shared reward forms of pay
are associated with lower voluntary turnover and higher ROE. But it is the interaction between
the mode of compensation and work practices and workplace culture that dominates the impact
of shared capitalist pay on turnover and ROE. These results confirm the overall findings from
prior studies and point to the value of further research on how shared capitalist practices interact
with other workplace policies, particularly policies that give workers the means to make a
difference in the workplace and help engender a climate of cooperation, as offering the best
explanation for the dispersion of results around positive average effects in the literature.

14

Bibliography
Akerlof, George. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 97, pp. 543-569.
Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne Kalleberg. 2000. Manufacturing
Advantage. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Axelrod, Robert M. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Azfar, Omar, and Stephan Danninger. 2001. “Profit Sharing, Employment Stability, and Wage
Growth,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(3), pp. 619-630.
Baron, Reuben M., and David A. Kenny. 1986. “The Moderator-Mediator Variable Distinction in
Social Psychological Research.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 51, No.
6, pp. 1173-82.
Benartzi, S. and R. Thaler. 2001. Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
Plans,” American Economic Review Vol. 91, No. 1, pp. 79-98.
Berger, Johannes, Claus Herbertz, and Dirk Sliwka, 2011. “Incentives and Cooperation in
Firms: Field Evidence,” IZA DP No. 5618, Institute for the Study of Labor, April 2011.
Blasi, Joseph R. 1988. Employee Ownership: Revolution or Ripoff? New York: HarperCollins,
Ballinger Books.
Blasi, Joseph, and Douglas Kruse. 1991. The New Owners The Mass Emergence of Employee
Ownership in Public Companies and What it Means to American Business. New York:
HarperCollins.
Blasi Joseph, Michael Conte, and Douglas Kruse. 1996. “Employee Stock Ownership and
Performance Among Public Companies,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume
50, Number 1, 60-79.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners: The Truth
About Stock Options (And Why Every Employee Should Have Them). New York: Basic
Books.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Harry Markowitz. 2010. “Risk and Lack of Diversification
under Employee Ownership,” in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi, eds.
Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, Gainsharing, and Broadbased Stock Options. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Buchele, Robert, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf. 2010. “Show Me the
Money: Does Shared Capitalism Share the Wealth?” in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman,
and Joseph Blasi, eds. Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing,
Gainsharing, and Broad-based Stock Options. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bullock, R.J. and Mark E. Tubbs. 1990. "A Case Meta-Analysis of Gainsharing Plans as
Organization Development Interventions," Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 26, 3, pp.
383-404.
Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark. 2001. “Do 'High-Performance' Work Practices Improve
Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 2001, v. 54,
iss. 4, pp. 737-75.
Carstensen, Vivian, Knut Gerlach, and Olaf Hübler. 1995. “Profit sharing in German firms,” in
Friedrich Buttler, Wolfgang Franz, Ronald Schettkat, and David Soskice (eds.), Institutional
frameworks and labor market performance: Comparative views on the U.S. and German
economies. London and New York: Routledge, 168-207.
15

Conyon, Martin J., and Richard B. Freeman. 2004. “Shared Modes of Compensation and Firm
Performance: UK Evidence,” in David Card, Richard Blundell, and Richard B. Freeman,
eds. Seeking a Premier Economy: The Economic Effects of British Economic Reforms,
1980-2000. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 109-146.
Dawes, Robyn M., and Richard H. Thaler. 1988. “Anomalies: Cooperation,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Summer 1988, v. 2, iss. 3, pp. 187-97
Doucouliagos, C. 1995. “Worker participation and productivity in labor-managed and
participatory capitalist firms: a meta-analysis,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
49(1), 58-77.
Dube, Arin, and Richard Freeman. 2010. “Complementarity of Shared Compensation and
Decision-Making Systems,” in Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi, eds., Shared Capitalism at Work:
Employee Stock Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-based Stock Options.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Edmans, Alex 2011 “Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and
equity prices” Journal of Financial Economics 101,621-640
Estrin, Saul, and Nicholas Wilson. 1989. "Profit Sharing, the Marginal Cost of Labour and
Employment Variability," Draft, Dept. of Economics, London School of Economics (May).
Faleye, Olubunmi and Emery A. Trahan, 2011.” Labor-Friendly Corporate Practices: Is What is
Good for Employees Good for Shareholders? “ Journal of Business Ethics Vol. 1, No 1, 127,
Freeman, Richard B., Joseph R. Blasi, and Douglas L. Kruse. 2011. “Inclusive Capitalism for the
American Workforce: Reaping the Rewards of Economic Growth through Broad-based
Employee Ownership and Profit Sharing,” Center for American Progress, Washington, D.C.,
March.
Freeman, Richard B., Douglas L. Kruse, and Joseph Blasi, 2011. “Worker Responses to Shirking
under Shared Capitalism,” ,” in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi, eds.
Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, Gainsharing, and Broadbased Stock Options. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Freeman, Steven F. 2007. “Effects of ESOP Adoption and Employee Ownership: Thirty years of
Research and Experience,” Working Paper #07-01, Organizational Dynamics Programs,
University of Pennsylvania.
Frohlich, N., J. Godard, J. A. Oppenheimer, and F. A. Starke. 1998. Employee versus
conventionally- owned and controlled firms: An experimental analysis. Managerial and
Decision Economics 19 (4/ 5): 311– 26.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Eric Maskin. 1986. "The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with
Discounting or with Incomplete Information." Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 3 (May), pp. 53354.
Handel, Michael, and Maury Gittleman. 2004. "Is There A Wage Payoff to Innovative
Practices?" Industrial Relations, Vol. 43 (1), pp. 67-97.
Hansen, D. G. 1997. “Worker performance and group incentives: A case study,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 51 (1): 37– 49.
Hart, R.A., and Olaf Hubler. 1991. “Are Profit Shares and Wages Substitute or Complementary
Forms of Compensation?” Kyklos 44, pp. 221-231.

16

Hubler, Olaf. 1993. “Productivity, Earnings, and Profit Sharing: An Econometric Analysis of
Alternative Models,” Empirical Economics, 18, pp. 357-380.
Ichniowski ,Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. “The Effects of Human
Resource Management Practices on Productivity: a Study of Steel Finishing Lines,”
American Economic Review, Volume 87. Number 23, 291-313.
Jones, Derek C.; Kalmi, Panu; Kauhanen, Antti. 2010. “Teams, Incentive Pay, and Productive
Efficiency: Evidence from a Food-Processing Plant,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, July 2010, v. 63, iss. 4, pp. 606-626.
Jones, D., T. Kato, and J. Pliskin. 1997. Profit sharing and gainsharing: A review of theory,
incidence, and effects. In Handbook of human resources, ed. D. Lewin, D. Mitchell, and M.
Zaidi. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Kaarsemaker, Eric C.A. 2006. “Employee ownership and its consequences: Synthesis-generated
evidence for the effects of employee ownership and gaps in the research literature.” York,
UK: University of York.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1991. “Anomalies: The Endowment
Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 5,
Issue 1, Winter 1991, 193-206
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear. 1992. "Peer Pressure and Partnerships," Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 4 (August), pp. 801-17.
Kardas, Peter; Adria L. Scharf; and Jim Keogh. 1998. “Wealth and Income Consequences of
ESOPs and Employee Ownership: A Comparative Study from Washington State," Journal of
Employee Ownership Law and Finance. Vol. 10, No. 4, Fall.
Kaufman, Roger T. 1998. “The Effects of Gain Sharing on the Basic Wage: The Case of
IMPROSHARE ,” Labour, Autumn 1998, v. 12, iss. 3, pp. 595-610.
Kim, E. Han and Paige Ouimet. 2011 “Employee Stock Ownership Plans: Employee
Compensation and Firm Value,” Working paper, Ross School of Business, University of
Michigan.
Kroumova, M. 2000. “Investment in employer stock through 401(k) plans: Is there reason for
concern?” PhD dissertation. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University.
Kruse, Douglas. 1993. Profit Sharing: Does It Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Kruse, Douglas, and Joseph Blasi. 1997. "Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm
Performance: A Review of the Evidence." In David Lewin, Daniel J.B. Mitchell, and
Mahmood A. Zaidi, eds., Human Resources Management Handbook, Part 1. Greenwich,
CT.: JAI Press.
Kruse, Douglas, and Joseph Blasi. 1999. “Public Opinion Polls on Employee Ownership and
Profit Sharing,” Journal of Employee Ownership Law and Finance, Vol. 11, No. 3, Summer
1999, pp. 3-25.
Kruse, Douglas, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi (Eds). 2010. Shared Capitalism at Work:
Employee Stock Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-based Stock Options.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

17

Lazear, Edward P. 1992. “Compensation, Productivity and the New Economics of Personnel,”
in Lewin, David, Olivia Mitchell, and Peter Sherer, eds., Research frontiers in industrial
relations and human resources. Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research Association,
pp. 341-80
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1995. “Profit sharing in
OECD countries,” OECD Employment Outlook, pp. 139– 69.
Pendleton, Andrew; Robinson, Andrew. 2010. “Employee Stock Ownership, Involvement, and
Productivity: An Interaction-Based Approach,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
October 2010, v. 64, iss. 1, pp. 3-29.
Peterson, Suzanne J., and Fred Luthans. 2006. “The Impact of Financial and Nonfinancial
Incentives on Business-Unit Outcomes Over Time,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 91,
No. 1, 156–165
Poutsma, Erik, Panu Kalmi, and Andrew Pendleton. 2006. “The Relationship between Financial
Participation and Other Forms of Employee Participation: New Survey Evidence from
Europe,” Economic and Industrial Democracy, November, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 637-67.
Renaud, S., S. St- Onge, and M. Magnan. 2004. “The impact of stock purchase plan participation
on workers’ individual cash compensation,” Industrial Relations 43(1): 120– 47.
Rousseau, Denise M. and Zipi Shperling 2003. “Pieces of the Action: Ownership and the
changing Employment Relationship,” Academy of Management Review, Vol. 28, No. 4,
533-570.
Scharf, Adria, and Christopher Mackin. 2000. "Census of Massachusetts Companies with
Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs)." Boston: Commonwealth Corporation.
Sesil, James, Maya Kroumova, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2007. “Broad-based Employee
Stock Options in the United States: Company Performance and Characteristics,”
Management Revue, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2007, pp. 5-22.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2007. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
Private Industry in the United States, 2005, Bulletin 2589. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, May.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2010. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
the United States, March 2010, Bulletin 2752. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, September.
United States General Accounting Office. 1987. Employee Stock Ownership Plans.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office, Report GAO/PEMD-88-1. END
Weiss, Andrew. 1987. "Incentives and Worker Behavior," in Haig Nalbantian, ed., Incentives,
Cooperation, and Risk Sharing (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1987), pp. 137-150.
Weitzman Martin. 1984. The Share Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weitzman, Martin L, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. “Profit Sharing and Productivity,” in Alan
Blinder, ed., Paying For Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Welbourne, T. M., and L. R. G. Mejia. 1995. Gainsharing: A critical review and a future research
agenda. Journal of Management 21 (3): 559– 610.

18

Individual level

Company level

Figure 1: Overall model

Shared capitalism
Employee ownership
Cash profit/gain sharing
Deferred profit sharing
Stock options

Company outcomes
1. Voluntary turnover
2. ROE

Employee
Empowerment and
Culture

Intent to stay

1. Supervision
2. Participation in
decisions
3. Information
4. Perceptions of
culture

19

20

Table 1: Group Incentive Compensation Plans in GPW Database, 2005-2007
Combining all company-years (n=1312)
Plan and characteristics

Employee Stock Ownership Plan

Percentage Percentage of firms with attribute if
of firms
they have compensation form (s.d.
with plan
in parenthesis)
17.6%

Of those with, mean % of company owned by plan

17.4% (26.9)

Median % of company owned by plan

5.9%

Percentage with >50% of company owned

9.1%

Cash profit/gain sharing plan

18.1%

Of those with, mean payout as % of pay

7.2% (10.5)

Median payout as % of pay
Deferred profit-sharing plan

4.7%
22.3%

Of those with, mean contribution as % of pay

6.5% (8.7)

Median contribution as % of pay
Stock options granted in past year

3.9%
44.5%

Of those with, mean % of employees granted

20.6% (29.1)

Median % of employees granted

6.50%

Percentage < 25% of employees granted

74.50%

Percentage > 50% of employees granted

16.40%
21

Table 2: Summary index of the extent of “shared capitalist” modes of compensation
Distribution of Company-Year
observations (n=1089)

Percentage of firms

0

52.3%

1

20.9%

2

20.4%

3

4.0%

4

2.0%

5

0.4%

Mean and Standard deviation

0.835 (1.05)

Note: Index defined as in text, with one point for 1) an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP), 2) an ESOP owning 50% or
more of the company, 3) a stock option plan covering 25% or more of employees, 4) a stock option plan covering 50% or
more employees, 5) a cash profit/gainsharing plan, 6) a cash profit/gainsharing plan paying more than the median
percent of pay, 7) a deferred profit sharing plan, and 8) a deferred profit sharing with a contribution above the median
percent of pay.

22

Table 3: Measures of Employee Empowerment, Workplace Culture, and Firm Performance

Var. name
Employee empowerment
High‐trust
supervision
Participation in
decisions
Info sharing
Culture
Team
Cooperation
Give extra
Fair share
Trust Index©
Great place
Intent to stay

Variable definition/survey statement^
Management trusts people to do a good job without watching over their
shoulders.
Management involves people in decisions that affect their jobs or work
environment.
Management keeps me informed about important issues and changes.

There is a "family" or "team" feeling here.
You can count on people to cooperate.
People here are willing to give extra to get the job done.
I feel I receive a fair share of the profits made by this organization.
Great Places to Work Trust Index©
Taking everything into account, I would say this is a great place to work.
I want to work here for a long time.

Company performance
Voluntary turnover

Voluntary separations (excluding retirements) of full‐time employees as
proportion of full‐time employment (company‐reported)
ROE
Return on equity (from S&P Compustat)
ROE adjusted
Return on equity controlling for year, industry, and firm size (upper and
lower 1% trimmed)
^ All employee survey items scored on 1‐5 scale (1="almost always untrue", 5="almost always true")
Survey statements are protected by copyright by Great Place to Work® Institute

23

Mean

(S.d.)

Sample
size

4.246

(0.96)

303928

3.821

(1.09)

302608

4.026

(1.02)

303855

4.215
4.116
4.200
3.671

(0.99)
(0.88)
(0.88)
(1.21)

303517
303232
303503
299067

4.180
4.351

(0.72)
(0.95)

305339
304160

4.266

(1.04)

302863

0.139

(0.12)

1258

0.053
0.039

(0.40)
(0.15)

415
406

Table 4: Summary of Regressing Workplace Practices and Culture on Shared Capitalist Modes
of Pay
Coefficients and T-Statistics from random-effects maximum likelihood multilevel model estimates.
Each row represents results from one regression. See Appendix Table A for fuller results and control
variables.
Coefficient, t
statistic in
parenthesis

Wald chisquare
(38)

n

Compensation with most
significant impact, followed
by compensation with 2nd
most significant

High trust supervision

.019(3.07)***

3663.5

241564 ESOP, Deferred profit
sharing

Participation in work decisions

.012 (2.12)**

7299.8

240507 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Management shares information

.015(2.09)**

6390.4

241499 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Team feeling

.015 (2.07)**

6675.6

241227 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

People cooperate

.012 (2.12) **

5136.1

240999 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Do extra to get job done

.020 (3.33)*** 7054.4

241241 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Fair share of profits

.073 (6.29)*** 8825.5

237488 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Workplace Practice

Workplace Culture/Attitudes

Great Place to Work Trust Index© .069 (2.34)**

9910.2

242587

All in all, great place to work

4860

241751 ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

.022(3.03)***

** p<.05 *** p<.01

24

ESOP, Deferred profitsharing

Table 5: Summary of Regressing Turnover Behavior on Workplace Practices, Culture, and
Shared Capitalist Modes of Pay
Panel A: Worker level “intent to stay at company”
Shared Capitalism Employee empowerment
Index
index in lines 2 and 3; Trust
Index in lines 4 and 5
1

.012(.007)*

2

.006(.004)

.7365(.002)***

3

-.03(.008)

0.73(.002)***

4

-0.003 (0.003)

1.115(.002)***

5

-0.047(.008)***

1.106(.003)***

Interaction

N

240715
240550
.0076(.002)***

240550
240714

0.011(.002)***

240714

Panel B: Employer level, voluntary turnover rate for firm
Shared Capitalism Employee empowerment
Interaction
Index
index in lines 7 and 8; Trust
Index in lines 9 and 10

N

6

-0.008(.004)**

1011

7

-0.007(0.004)*

-0.044(0.016)**

8

0.1374(.056)**

-0.016(.020)

9

-0.007 (.004)*

-0.054(0.019)**

10

0.154(.065)**

-0.023(0.023)

1011
-0.036(0.014)***

1011
1011

-0.039(0.016)**

1011

Panel C: Employer level, aggregated worker “intent to stay at firm”
Shared Capitalism Employee empowerment
Interaction
Index
index in lines 12 and 13; Trust
Index in lines 14 and 15

N

11

0.014(.007)**

1024

12

-0.003(0.004)

1.012(0.019)***

13

-0.142(.066)**

0.985(.023)***

14

-0.001 (.004)

0.810(0.020)***

1024
0.033(0.016)**

1024
1024

15
-.125(.067)*
0.786(0.024)***
0.031(0.014)*
1024
In Panel A, all regressions are run using a random-effects maximum likelihood multilevel model,
with random effects both at the company-year level and the company level. Company-level
control variables include defined benefit pension, ln(total employment), ln(avg. hourly pay),
ln(avg. salaried pay), company age, whether publicly-held, manufacturing, services, and percent
25

of employees who are unionized. Individual-level control variables include gender,
race/ethnicity (7 dummies), age (5 dummies), tenure (7 dummies), and occupation (7 dummies).
In Panels B and C, all regressions use random effects with correction for autogression. Control
variables include defined benefit pension, ln(total employment), ln(avg. hourly pay), ln(avg.
salaried pay), company age, whether publicly-held, manufacturing, services, and percent of
employees who are female, black, Hispanic, Asian, other race, age 26-34, age 35-44, age 45-54,
age 55+, and unionized.

26

Table 6: Summary of Regressing Adjusted Return on Equity on Workplace Practices and
Culture, and Shared Capitalist Modes of Pay
Coefficients and T-Statistics from random-effects maximum likelihood multilevel model
estimates. Each row represents results from one regression.
Shared Capitalism Employee empowerment
Interaction
Wald chi-sq
Index
index in lines 4 and 5; Trust
Index in lines 8 and 9
1

0.019(.008)**

26.1

2

0.018(.008)**

0.112(0.041)***

3

-0.146(0.126)

0.067(0.053)

4

0.017(.008)**

0.161(0.047)***

5

-0.214(.144)

0.101(.060)*

34.5
0.041(0.032)

36.2
39.1

0.056(0.035)

41.7

All regressions use random effects with correction for autoregression. Control variables include
defined benefit pension, ln(total employment), ln(avg. hourly pay), ln(avg. salaried pay),
company age, whether publicly-held, manufacturing, services, and percent of employees who are
female, black, Hispanic, Asian, other race, age 26-34, age 35-44, age 45-54, age 55+, and
unionized.

27

Appendix Table A: Predicting Workplace Practices, Culture, and Intent to Stay under Shared Capitalism
Workplace practices
Dep. var.: High‐trust supervisi Part. in decisions
Info sharing
(1)
(2)
(3)
Shared capitalism index
0.019 (3.07) ***
0.012 (2.12) **
0.015 (2.09) **
n
Wald chi‐sq. (38)
Elements of index
Stock options 1‐25%
Stock options 25‐49%
Stock options 50%+
ESOP 1‐49% of co.
ESOP 50%+ of co.
Def. PS <4% of pay
Def. PS 4%+ of pay
Cash PS/GS <5% of pay
Cash PS/GS 5%+ of pay

241564
3863.5

n
Wald chi‐sq. (45)
Continuous variables
Any stock options
% of ees. given options
ESOP
% of co. owned by ESOP
Deferred PS plan
Def. PS as % of pay
Cash PS/GS plan
Cash PS/GS as % of pay

241564
3888.7

‐0.005
0.029
0.015
0.076
0.149
0.050
0.082
‐0.013
‐0.011

‐0.005
0.000
0.066
0.001
0.048
0.266
‐0.007
‐0.001

240507
7299.8
(0.27)
(1.03)
(0.55)
(3.36)
(2.74)
(2.08)
(3.49)
(0.71)
(0.53)

***
***
**
***

‐0.015
0.038
0.011
0.066
0.128
0.035
0.081
‐0.006
‐0.011

241499
6390.4
(0.67)
(1.04)
(0.30)
(2.31) **
(1.82) *
(1.15)
(2.72) ***
(0.27)
(0.41)

240507
7311.9
(0.28)
(0.87)
(2.71) ***
(1.70) *
(2.14) **
(1.41)
(0.41)
(0.95)

‐0.019
0.001
0.060
0.001
0.038
0.322
‐0.009
0.000

‐0.022
0.016
‐0.021
0.071
0.109
0.042
0.061
‐0.005
0.002

(1.04)
(0.47)
(0.61)
(2.69) ***
(1.69) *
(1.51)
(2.24) **
(0.23)
(0.08)

241499
6402.2
(0.80)
(1.39)
(1.93) *
(1.10)
(1.33)
(1.32)
(0.44)
(0.10)

‐0.024
0.000
0.066
0.001
0.033
0.294
‐0.006
0.000

Family
(4)
0.015

Culture
Cooperation
(5)
(2.07) **
0.012 (2.12) **

241227
6675.6

240999
5136.1

‐0.026
0.012
‐0.020
0.066
0.139
0.034
0.053
‐0.007
0.006

(1.28)
(0.38)
(0.61)
(2.56) **
(2.22) **
(1.23)
(1.97) **
(0.34)
(0.26)

241227
6686.5
(1.11)
(0.69)
(2.31) **
(0.83)
(1.27)
(1.32)
(0.31)
(0.38)

‐0.029
0.000
0.058
0.001
0.026
0.268
‐0.001
0.000

0.000
0.030
0.017
0.038
0.114
0.041
0.064
‐0.016
‐0.018

(0.01)
(1.14)
(0.63)
(1.83)
(2.23)
(1.82)
(2.95)
(0.92)
(0.91)

*
**
*
***

240999
5153.8
(1.40)
(1.06)
(2.09) **
(1.35)
(1.02)
(1.23)
(0.07)
(0.17)

‐0.003
0.000
0.032
0.001
0.029
0.371
‐0.017
0.000

(0.18)
(1.36)
(1.42)
(1.62)
(1.39)
(2.11) **
(1.11)
(0.07)

n
241564
240507
241499
241227
240999
Wald chi‐sq. (45)
3890.8
7312.2
6404.4
6690.1
5158.8
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01
Each column has three regressions: 1)with the shared capitalism index, 2) breaking out the elements of the shared capitalism
index, and 3) using the continuous variables underlying the shared capitalism index. All regressions are run using a random‐effects
maximum likelihood multilevel model, with random effects both at the company‐year level and the company level. Company‐
level control variables include defined benefit pension, ln(total employment), ln(avg. hourly pay), ln(avg. salaried pay), company
age, whether publicly‐held, manufacturing, services, and percent of employees who are unionized. Individual‐level control
variables include gender, race/ethnicity (7 dummies), age (5 dummies), tenure (7 dummies), and occupation (7 dummies).

28

Appendix Table A (cont.)
Culture
Dep. var.: Give extra
Fair share
Trust Index©
(6)
(7)
(8)
Shared capitalism index
0.020 (3.33) ***
0.073 (6.29) ***
0.069 (2.34) **
n
Wald chi‐sq. (38)
Elements of index
Stock options 1‐25%
Stock options 25‐49%
Stock options 50%+
ESOP 1‐49% of co.
ESOP 50%+ of co.
Def. PS <4% of pay
Def. PS 4%+ of pay
Cash PS/GS <5% of pay
Cash PS/GS 5%+ of pay

241241
7054.4

n
Wald chi‐sq. (45)
Continuous variables
Any stock options
% of ees. given options
ESOP
% of co. owned by ESOP
Deferred PS plan
Def. PS as % of pay
Cash PS/GS plan
Cash PS/GS as % of pay

241241
7077.7

n
Wald chi‐sq. (45)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01

241241
7087.3

‐0.003
0.048
0.069
0.041
0.097
0.045
0.075
‐0.024
‐0.013

‐0.008
0.001
0.036
0.001
0.031
0.447
‐0.024
0.000

237488
8825.5
(0.17)
(1.83)
(2.56)
(1.90)
(1.88)
(1.93)
(3.30)
(1.35)
(0.62)

*
**
*
*
*
***

0.022
0.074
0.083
0.160
0.305
0.078
0.237
0.007
0.100

242587
9910.2
(0.66)
(1.48)
(1.59)
(3.83)
(3.02)
(1.72)
(5.42)
(0.22)
(2.56)

***
***
*
***
**

237488
8843.6
(0.49)
(3.58) ***
(1.57)
(1.31)
(1.45)
(2.49) **
(1.54)
(0.53)

0.019
0.001
0.134
0.002
0.110
0.773
0.029
0.002

‐0.024
0.158
0.037
0.264
0.584
0.166
0.317
‐0.101
‐0.029

241751
4860
(0.29)
(1.23)
(0.28)
(2.50) **
(2.29) **
(1.46)
(2.87) ***
(1.17)
(0.29)

242587
9928
(0.57)
(1.70)
(2.99)
(2.04)
(2.59)
(2.18)
(0.96)
(1.26)

*
***
**
***
**

237488
8840.4

‐0.032
0.002
0.230
0.004
0.166
1.186
‐0.073
‐0.001
242587
9927.7

29

Intent to stay
Great place
(9)
0.022 (3.03) ***

‐0.007
0.050
0.001
0.067
0.159
0.025
0.085
‐0.022
0.025

‐0.007
0.000
0.056
0.001
0.023
0.495
‐0.004
0.000
241751
4874.2

(1.73) *

240715
7958.6
(0.32)
(1.58)
(0.04)
(2.56) **
(2.53) **
(0.88)
(3.10) ***
(1.04)
(1.01)

241751
4877.5
(0.39)
(1.16)
(2.03) **
(1.42)
(1.56)
(1.33)
(0.95)
(0.15)

(10)
0.012

0.006
0.043
‐0.017
0.056
0.175
0.009
0.063
‐0.026
0.005

(0.28)
(1.37)
(0.52)
(2.22) **
(2.86) ***
(0.33)
(2.35) **
(1.21)
(0.19)

240715
7978.4
(0.34)
(0.99)
(1.99) **
(1.67) *
(0.88)
(2.25) **
(0.22)
(0.07)

0.006
0.000
0.043
0.001
0.021
0.233
‐0.012
0.000
240715
7973.4

(0.30)
(0.17)
(1.56)
(2.11) **
(0.81)
(1.09)
(0.64)
(0.27)

Appendix Table B: Predicting Firm‐level Outcomes with Shared Capitalism
Dep. var.: Voluntary turnover, Return on equity
full‐time workers
(1)
(2)
Shared capitalism index
‐0.008 (0.004) **
0.0149 (0.008) *
R‐squared
n
Elements of index
Stock options 1‐25%
Stock options 25‐49%
Stock options 50%+
ESOP 1‐49% of co.
ESOP 50%+ of co.
Def. PS <4% of pay
Def. PS 4%+ of pay
Cash PS/GS <5% of pay
Cash PS/GS 5%+ of pay
R‐squared
n
Continuous variables
Any stock options
% of ees. given options
ESOP
% of co. owned by ESOP
Deferred PS plan
Def. PS as % of pay
Cash PS/GS plan
Cash PS/GS as % of pay

0.34
1011
0.004
‐0.025
‐0.012
‐0.015
0.036
0.029
‐0.018
‐0.013
‐0.023

0.107
406
(0.011)
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.012)
(0.034)
(0.013) **
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.013) *

0.353
1011
0.003
0.000
‐0.020
0.001
0.019
‐0.225
‐0.015
0.000

‐0.013
‐0.007
‐0.017
0.0253
na
‐0.001
0.0553
0.055
0.0379

(0.023)
(0.034)
(0.034)
(0.024)
(0.030)
(0.033)
(0.035)
(0.029)

0.109
406
(0.011)
(0.000)
(0.014)
(0.000)
(0.012)
(0.109) **
(0.010)
(0.001)

‐0.016
0.0003
0.0293
‐5E‐04
0.0035
0.4801
0.0496
‐7E‐04

(0.024)
(0.000)
(0.028)
(0.003)
(0.037)
(0.605)
(0.034)
(0.003)

R‐squared
0.343
0.11
n
1011
406
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
All regressions use random effects with correction for autogression.
Control variables include defined benefit pension, ln(total
employment), ln(avg. hourly pay), ln(avg. salaried pay), company age,
whether publicly‐held, manufacturing, services, and percent of
employees who are female, black, Hispanic, asian, other race, age 26‐
34, age 35‐44, age 45‐54, age 55+, and unionized.

30

