                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DIRECTED SEARCH OVER THE LIFE CYCLE

                                              Guido Menzio
                                           Irina A. Telyukova
                                             Ludo Visschers

                                         Working Paper 17746
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17746


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2012




We have benefited from the insights of Pierre Cahuc, Jean-Olivier Hairault, Greg Kaplan, John Kennan,
Richard Rogerson and Henry Siu. We have also received useful comments from participants at the
macro seminar at UC Santa Cruz, Mainz, Freiburg, Konstanz, Bogazici, METU, Carlos III, the Essex
conference in honor of Ken Burdett (Essex 2010), the NBER Summer Institute (Cambridge 2010),
the Canadian Macro Study Group (London 2010), the Society for Economic Dynamics Meeting (Montreal
2010), the Royal Economic Society Meeting (London 2010), the workshop on Labor Market Transitions
over the Lifecycle (Paris 2011). Visschers acknowledges financial support from the Simon Fraser
University's President's Research Grant, the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation grant ECO2010/20614,
the Bank of Spain's Programa de Excelencia Grant, and the Juan de la Cierva Grant. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Guido Menzio, Irina A. Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Directed Search over the Life Cycle
Guido Menzio, Irina A. Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers
NBER Working Paper No. 17746
January 2012
JEL No. E24,J63,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a life-cycle model of the labor market in which different worker-firm matches have different
quality and the assignment of the right workers to the right firms is time consuming because of search
and learning frictions. The rate at which workers move between unemployment, employment and across
different firms is endogenous because search is directed and, hence, workers can choose whether to
seek low-wage jobs that are easy to find or high-wage jobs that are hard to find. We calibrate our theory
using data on labor market transitions aggregated across workers of different ages. We validate our
theory by showing that it correctly predicts the pattern of labor market transitions for workers of different
ages. Finally, we use our theory to decompose the age profiles of transition rates, wages and productivity
into the effects of age variation in work-life expectancy, human capital and match quality.


Guido Menzio                                          Ludo Visschers
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                            Universidad Carlos III, Madrid
467 McNeil Building                                   Calle Madrid 126, Getafe 28903
3718 Locust Walk                                      Spain
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                lvissche@eco.uc3m.es
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu

Irina A. Telyukova
UCSD Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
itelyukova@ucsd.edu
1         Introduction
The US economy displays a great deal of labor reallocation, in the sense that workers move
frequently between employment, unemployment and across diﬀerent employers. For example,
the rate at which unemployed workers become employed (henceforth, the UE rate) is close
to 25 percent per month, the rate at which employed workers become unemployed (the EU
rate) is approximately 0.5 percent per month, and the rate at which workers move from one
employer to another (the EE rate) is approximately 1.8 percent per month.1 However, these
aggregate transition rates hide dramatic diﬀerences in the extent of labor reallocation for
workers of diﬀerent ages. For example, among workers of age 20 to 25, the monthly UE rate
is 28 percent, the EU rate is 1.5 percent and the EE rate is 3.5 percent. Among workers of
age 40 to 45, the monthly UE rate is 25 percent, the EU rate is 0.4 percent and the EE rate
is 1.8 percent. And among workers of age 55 to 60, the monthly UE, EU and EE rates are,
respectively, 18 percent, 0.2 percent and 1.5 percent.

        The purpose of this paper is to explain the diﬀerences in the extent and pattern of labor
reallocation of young, middle-aged and old workers. To this end, we develop a life-cycle
model of the labor market in which diﬀerent worker-firm matches have diﬀerent productivity
and the allocation of the right workers to the right firms is a time consuming process because
of search and learning frictions. On one side of the labor market, firms choose how many
and what type of vacancies to open, where the type of a vacancy is defined by the conditions
under which it hires a worker and by the value of the employment contract that it oﬀers to
a new hire. On the other side of the labor market, both employed and unemployed workers
choose which type of vacancy to seek. In this sense, the search process is directed. The
workers and the firms who seek and oﬀer the same type of vacancy come together through a
frictional process described, in reduced form, by a constant return to scale matching function.
When workers and firms match, they begin production and eventually learn the quality of
their union.

        In equilibrium, all workers face a choice between searching for vacancies that oﬀer rela-
tively higher wages and searching for vacancies that are relatively easier to find. The choices
    1
    The figures reported in this introduction are constructed from the 1996 panel of the U.S. Census’ Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) for men with a high school degree. We refer the reader to
Section 3 for further details about the data.

                                                     2
faced by a particular worker depend on his age and experience. Specifically, if the age and
experience of the worker make him a more valuable production partner, he will face a higher
probability of finding vacancies oﬀering any value. The preferences of a particular worker
over the probability of finding a vacancy and the value oﬀered by a vacancy depend on the
worker’s employment position (i.e., unemployment or employment in a match of a given
quality). Specifically, if the worker is in a more valuable employment position, he will have a
stronger preference for vacancies that oﬀer higher value and are harder to find. Overall, the
age, experience and employment position of a worker determine his optimal search strategy
and, consequently, the velocity at which he moves across employment states.

      We calibrate the model using aggregate data on labor reallocation, such as the uncondi-
tional mean of the UE, EU and EE rates and the mean of the EU and EE rates conditional
on tenure. The calibration reveals that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in the quality
of firm-worker formed matches. For example, a match in the 90th percentile of the quality
distribution is approximately 3 times more productive than a match in the 10th percentile.
The search frictions that slow down the process of assignment of the right workers to the
right firms are modest, in the sense that workers are almost always able to search the labor
market and that firms pay a relatively small cost to open new vacancies. For example, the
expected vacancy cost that a firm has to incur to hire a middle-aged unemployed worker is
approximately equal to 2 months of the worker’s output. Similarly, the learning frictions are
modest, in the sense that firms and workers learn rather quickly the quality of their match.
On average, it takes 4 months for a firm and a worker to learn the quality of their match.
Overall, the large heterogeneity in match quality and the modest search and learning fric-
tions add up to generate a rather time-consuming process of assignment of the right workers
to the right firms.

      In order to validate the calibrated model, we use data on labor reallocation disaggregated
according to the workers’ age. In particular, we show that the calibrated model correctly
predicts the mean of the UE, EU and EE transition rates conditional on the workers’ age.
We then use the model to decompose the overall eﬀect of age on the transition rates into
the eﬀect of three characteristics that diﬀer between older and younger workers: work-life
expectancy,2 experience and selection into matches of diﬀerent quality. We find that the
  2
      Throughout the paper, we define work-life expectancy as the expected time before a worker exits the

                                                    3
decline in the UE rate experienced by workers between the ages of 50 and 65 (see Figure 1)
is mainly due to the decline in the workers’ work-life expectancy, which reduces their value
to the firms as production partners. We find that the decline in the EU rate experience
by workers between the ages of 20 and 30 (see Figure 2) is mostly due to their transition
from low to high quality matches, which reduces their incentive to move into unemployment.
Moreover, we find that the steady decline in the EE rate that takes place throughout the life
cycle (see Figure 3) is caused initially by the increase in the quality of the workers’ matches
and later by the decline in the workers’ work-life expectancy.

   Finally, we use the model to identify the causes of productivity and wage growth over
the life cycle. We find that almost all of the life-cycle growth in labor productivity takes
place during the first ten years of the work-life, and that approximately 76 percent of this
growth is due to increases in the workers’ experience and 24 percent is due to improvements
in the quality of the workers’ matches. Similarly, we find that almost all of the life-cycle
growth in wages takes place early in a worker’s career. Approximately 75.9 percent of this
wage growth is due to increases in workers’ experience, 23.9 percent is due to increases in the
quality of the workers’ matches and only 0.2 percent is due to improvements in the terms of
the workers’ employment contracts.

   Our paper contributes to three strands of literature. First, the paper contributes to the
literature on directed search pioneered by Montgomery (1991), Moen (1997), Shimer (1996)
and Burdett, Shi and Wright (2001) and recently developed by Albrecht, Gautier and Vroman
(2006), Shi (2009), Galenianos and Kircher (2010), Eeckhout and Kircher (2010) and Menzio
and Shi (2011). Relative to the existing literature, we are the first to introduce workers’ age
and experience heterogeneity in a model of directed search on the job. In equilibrium,
we find that workers’ characteristics and employment status aﬀect the resolution of the
trade-oﬀ between the probability of finding a vacancy and the value oﬀered by a vacancy.
Moreover, we show that these eﬀects are suﬃcient to reproduce the empirical age profile of
the workers’ transitions between employment, unemployment and across diﬀerent employers.
We also generalize the theoretical results in Menzio and Shi (2011) by proving that the unique
equilibrium is block recursive and eﬃcient.
labor market.



                                              4
   Second, our paper contributes to the literature that studies the pattern of workers’ tran-
sitions across employment states over the life cycle. Cheron, Hairault and Langot (2007,
2011) develop a life-cycle version of the search model by Mortensen and Pissarides (1994).
The paper assumes that search is random and that the quality of a match is drawn indepen-
dently and identically in every period (i.e. match quality is i.i.d.) and is observed without
delay (i.e. matches are inspection goods). While these assumptions aﬀord the authors an
elegant closed-form analysis and powerful insights into the behavior of the model, they also
generate a number of counterfactual predictions. First, these assumptions imply that the
EU rate should be increasing with age, while, in the US data, the EU rate is clearly de-
creasing with age. Second, these assumptions imply that the exit rate from a job should be
increasing with tenure, while, in the US data, the exit rate is sharply decreasing with tenure,
suggesting that matches are not inspection goods but experience goods. Esteban-Pretel and
Fujimoto (2011) build on Chéron, Hairault and Langot (2007) by introducing a persistent
component to match quality that, with some probability, is observed before the creation of
the match (i.e. matches are partly inspection and partly experience goods and their quality
is persistent). While the model matches quite well the age profile of the UE and EU rates, it
only does so under the assumption that matches between firms and older workers are more
likely to be inspection goods. In contrast, our model correctly predicts the age profile of the
UE, EU and EE rates not because the matching technology varies with age, but because the
resolution of the directed search trade-oﬀ between the probability of finding a vacancy and
the value oﬀered by a vacancy varies with age.

   Finally, our paper contributes to the literature that combines search frictions and human
capital accumulation in an attempt to identify the causes of productivity and wage growth
over the life cycle. Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay and Robin (2006) develop and quantify a
human capital version of the random search model with dynamic auction model by Postel-
Vinay and Robin (2001, 2002). While their model is quite diﬀerent from ours, their main
findings are similar to ours. In particular, they find that most of the wage growth takes place
during the first 10 years of labor market experience, and that approximately 60 percent of
this growth is due to human capital accumulation and 40 percent is due to search frictions.
Fu (2011) and Burdett, Carrillo-Tudela and Coles (2011) and Burdett and Coles (2011)
develop human capital versions of the model of random search on the job by Burdett and

                                              5
Mortensen (1998). These papers are mainly theoretical, and do not oﬀer a decomposition
of wage growth. Moreover, because they assume that experience increases market and home
productivity proportionally, the models in these papers can be solved analytically, but have
counterfactual implications regarding workers’ transition rates. For example, they imply
that the UE and EU rates are independent of age.

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we develop our life-cycle
theory of labor reallocation. In particular, we lay out the environment, define equilibrium,
prove the existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of the equilibrium and characterize the eﬀect
of work-life expectancy, experience and match quality on the workers’ policy functions. In
Section 3, we describe the data that we use to calibrate and validate our theory. In Section 4,
we quantify and apply our life-cycle theory of labor reallocation. In particular, we calibrate
and validate the model, and we decompose the age profiles of the workers’ transition rates,
productivity and wages. Section 5 concludes.



2     Lifecycle theory of labor reallocation
In this section, we develop a life-cycle model of the labor market with search and learning
frictions in the spirit of Menzio and Shi (2011). On one side of the market, firms choose how
many and what type of vacancies to open, where the type of a vacancy is defined by the
conditions under which it hires a worker and by the value of the employment contract that it
oﬀers to a new hire. On the other side of the labor market, workers choose the type of vacancy
towards which they direct their search. Due to the presence of search frictions, it takes time
for a worker to find the type of vacancy he seeks. Due to the presence of learning frictions,
it takes time for a firm and a worker to learn the quality of their match. Because the search
process is directed, the velocity at which a worker moves across diﬀerent employment states
(i.e. employment, unemployment and across diﬀerent employers) depends on his age, human
capital and his current employment position. First, these characteristics aﬀect the trade-oﬀ
that the worker faces between the value oﬀered by a vacancy and the probability of finding
that vacancy. Second, these characteristics aﬀect the worker’s preferences over the value
oﬀered by a vacancy and the probability of finding it. Overall, the worker’s characteristics
determine whether the worker will seek vacancies that oﬀer him lower wages but are easier

                                               6
to find or vacancies that oﬀer more generous wages but are harder to find.


2.1       Environment

The economy is populated by T overlapping generations of workers. In every period, a
new generation of workers is born into the economy and lives for T periods, where T ≥ 2
is an integer. Each worker is endowed with one indivisible unit of labor. Each worker
maximizes the expected sum of periodical consumption discounted at the factor β ∈ (0, 1).
The economy is also populated by a continuum of firms with positive measure. Each firm
operates a constant return to scale technology that turns one unit of labor into zg(y) units
of output. The first component of productivity, z, is specific to the firm-worker pair, and its
value lies in the set Z = {z1 , z2 , ...zN (z) }, where 0 < z1 < z2 < ...zN(z) and N(z) ≥ 2 is an
integer. The second component of productivity, g(y), is specific to the worker. Specifically,
y ∈ N denotes the experience of the worker (i.e. the number of periods in which the worker
has been employed) and g : N → R+ is an increasing and concave function. Each firm
maximizes the expected sum of periodical profits discounted by the factor β.

       The labor market is organized in a continuum of submarkets indexed by the triple
(x, y, t) ∈ R × N2 . Diﬀerent submarkets diﬀer with respect to the terms of trade oﬀered
by the firms and with respect to the supply and demand conditions. Specifically, in sub-
market (x, y, t), firms hire workers of age t and experience y and oﬀer them employment
contracts worth x in lifetime utility.3 We refer to (y, t) as the type of the worker. Moreover,
in submarket (x, y, t), the ratio of firms searching for workers to workers searching for firms is
θt (x, y). Following Pissarides 1985, we refer to θt (x, y) as the tightness of submarket (x, y, t).

       Time is discrete and continues forever. At the beginning of each period, the aggregate
state of the economy can be summarized by the tuple ψ = (n, u, e, γ). The first component of
ψ is a function n : N → R+ , where n(t) denotes the measure of workers that have yet to enter
the labor market. We refer to these workers as non-participating. The second component is a
function u : N2 → R+ , where u(y, t) denotes the measure of workers of type (y, t) who are in
the labor market but are not employed. We refer to these workers as unemployed. The third
   3
    In many countries, it is illegal for firms to discriminate workers based on age. However, firms can
circumvent these legal restrictions by rejecting applicants based on age and claiming that they have been
rejected based on quality.

                                                   7
component is a function e : {z0 ∪ Z} × N2 → R+ , where e(z, y, t) denotes the measure of
workers of type (y, t) who are employed in a match of known quality z, and e(z0 , y, t) denotes
the measure of workers of type (y, t) who are employed in a match of unknown quality. We
refer to employed and unemployed worker as participating workers. Finally, γ ∈ R+ denotes
the current realization of the stochastic process for the measure of newly born workers.4

       Every period is divided into five stages: entry-and-exit, separation, search, matching and
production. At the first stage, a non-participating worker of age t enters the labor market
with probability μt ∈ [0, 1]. Similarly, a participating worker of age t permanently exits
the labor market with probability 1 − ν t , ν t ∈ [0, 1]. Without loss in generality, we assume
ν T +1 = 0.

       At the separation stage, an employed worker becomes unemployed with probability d ∈
[δ, 1], where d is a probability determined by the worker’s employment contract and δ ∈ [0, 1]
is the probability that the worker has to leave his job for exogenous reasons.

       At the search stage, a worker has the opportunity to search the labor market with a
probability that depends on his employment state. In particular, if a worker is unemployed
at the beginning of the separation stage, he has the opportunity to search with probability
λu ∈ (0, 1]. If a worker is employed at the separation stage and has not lost his job, he has
the opportunity to search with probability λe ∈ (0, 1]. And if the worker lost his job during
the separation stage, he cannot search in the current period. Whenever a worker has the
opportunity to search, he chooses which submarket to visit. Also, during the search stage,
a firm chooses how many vacancies to create in each submarket. The cost of maintaining a
vacancy for one period is k > 0.

       At the matching stage, the vacancies and the workers who are searching in the same
submarket come together through a frictional matching process. In particular, a worker
   4
    In existing lifecycle models of labor market search (see e.g. Cheron, Hairault and Langot 2007, Burdett,
Carrillo-Tudela and Coles 2011 and Esteban-Pretel and Fujimoto 2011), the distribution of workers across
ages is a state variable of the aggregate economy which non-trivially aﬀects the individual agents’ value and
policy functions. For this reason, these models have only been solved under the counterfactual assumption
that the population growth rate is constant over time and that the economy is in a steady-state. In our
model, the equilibrium is block recursive, in the sense that the distribution of workers across ages does
not aﬀect the individual agents’ value and policy functions. Hence, we can solve our model even when the
population growth rate is allowed to follow a stochastic random process. As discussed in Menzio and Shi
(2010), the equilibrium of our model is block recursive because we replaced the assumption of random search
with the assumption of directed search.

                                                     8
searching in submarket (x, y, t) meets a vacancy with probability p(θt (x, y)), where p : R+ →
[0, 1] is a twice-diﬀerentiable, strictly increasing and strictly concave function with boundary
conditions p(0) = 0 and p(∞) = 1. Similarly, a vacancy searching in submarket (x, y, t) meets
a worker with probability q(θt (x, y)), where q : R+ → [0, 1] is a twice-diﬀerentiable strictly
decreasing function such that q(θ) = p(θ)/θ, q(0) = 1 and q(∞) = 0. When a firm and a
worker of type (y, t) meet in submarket (x, y, t), the firm oﬀers to the worker an employment
contract that is worth x in lifetime utility. If the worker rejects the oﬀer, he returns to his
previous employment position (i.e. unemployment or employment at another firm). If the
worker accepts the oﬀer, he leaves his previous employment position and enters a productive
match with the firm. At the end of the matching stage, nature draws the productivity of a
newly formed match from the distribution f(z). Moreover, with probability η ∈ [0, 1], nature
draws a new realization for the productivity of an existing match from the distribution f (z).
We assume that matches are experience goods, in the sense that firms and workers do not
immediately observe the realized value of z.

   At the production stage, an unemployed worker of type (y, t) produces and consumes b
units of output. A worker of type (y, t) who is employed in a match of quality z produces
zg(y) units of output and consumes w of them, where w is the wage specified by the worker’s
employment contract. The worker and the firm observe their output with probability α ∈
(0, 1]. At the end of the production stage, nature draws the measure of next period’s entering
cohort from the distribution Π(γ̂|γ), Π : R+ → R+ . Throughout the paper, the caret
indicates variables or functions in the next period.

   To conclude the description of the model, we need to specify the details of the contractual
environment. In this paper, we assume that employment contracts are complete, in the sense
that they can specify the wage paid by the firm to the worker, w, the probability that the
worker and the firm break up at the separation stage, d, and the submarket where the
worker should search while employed by the firm, (xe , y, t), as a function of the history of
the firm-worker match and of the aggregate economy.

   Given the assumption of complete contracts and the fact that utility is perfectly trans-
ferrable, it is easy to prove that the firms always find it optimal to oﬀer employment con-
tracts that are bilaterally eﬃcient, in the sense that these contracts maximize the sum of

                                               9
the worker’s lifetime utility and the firm’s lifetime profits from forming a match. This re-
sult is formally established in Menzio and Shi (2011) and is easy to understand. A firm in
submarket (x, y, t) maximizes its profits by oﬀering an employment contract such that the
contingencies for d and xe deliver bilateral eﬃciency and the contingencies for w deliver the
value x to the worker. Clearly, there are many contingencies for w that deliver the same
value x to the worker. The value x can be delivered through a wage that remains constant
throughout the duration of the employment relationship, by a wage that varies with the
worker’s tenure, or by a wage that varies with the worker’s productivity.5 For the purposes
of the theoretical part of the paper, we do not need to resolve this indeterminacy. In the
empirical part of the paper, we will assume that wages are set as a constant fraction of the
worker’s productivity. We shall refer to this constant fraction as the worker’s piece-rate.6

       At this point, it is useful to briefly discuss the main assumptions in our model. First,
we assume that firms post the terms of the employment contract and workers can direct
their search towards firms oﬀering a specific contract. We make this assumption because we
are interested in finding out whether a model in which the search process is directed is able
to reproduce the life-cycle patterns of labor reallocation that we observe in the US data.
Second, we assume that firms post employment contract for only one type of worker rather
than a menu of contracts for all possible types of workers. This assumption is without loss
in generality. In fact, Menzio and Shi (2010b) show that, when firms are allowed to oﬀer
menus of contracts, they find it optimal to choose menus that attract exclusively one type
of worker. Third, we assume that firms can discriminate applicants based on their age and
experience, but not on their current employment state (e.g. whether the applicant is currently
   5
     In most search models with risk-neutral workers and firms, wages can only be pinned down with the help
of somewhat arbitrary assumptions about the process of wage determination. For example, in Pissarides
(1985) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), wages would not be uniquely pinned down if not for the arbitrary
assumption that wages need to be renegotiated in every period. In Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), wages
would not be uniquely pinned down if not for the assumption that firms are constrained to oﬀer wages that
remains constant until the employee receives an outside oﬀer.
   6
     We have carried out quantitative analysis of the model under two alternative specifications of the wage
determination process: a fixed-wage process and an incentive compatible process. In the case of the fixed-
wage process, we assume that the wage remains constant throughout the entire duration of the employment
relationship. In the case of the incentive compatible process, we assume that the wages are such that the
worker finds it optimal to choose the separation and search strategies prescribed by the bilaterally eﬃcient
contract. That is, the incentive compatible process implements the prescriptions of the bilaterally eﬃcient
contract without requiring any commitment from the worker. We found that the quantitative predictions
of the model under these two alternative specifications of the wage determination process are very close to
those obtained for the piece-rate process.


                                                    10
unemployed or employed in a match of a particular quality). This assumption is common
in the literature on search on the job. For example, Van den Berg and Ridder (1998) and
Burdett, Carrillo-Tudela and Coles (2011) allow contracts to depend on the applicant’s skill
and experience but not on his employment state. In general, this assumption is motivated
by the view that an applicant’s age, skill and experience are characteristics that can be
easily verified by a prospective employer, while an applicant’s current employment status is
not. Fourth, we assume that employment contracts are complete. We find this assumption
appealing not because we literally believe that firms and workers sign complete contracts,
but because we hold the view that matched firms and workers will find a way to behave so
as to maximize their joint gains from trade.7


2.2      Definition of Equilibrium

First, consider a worker of type (y, t) who is unemployed at the beginning of the production
stage. The worker’s lifetime utility Ut (y, ψ) is such that
                                             h                                i
                       Ut (y, ψ) = b + βEψ̂|ψ Ut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) + λu Rt+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) ,                   (1)

where ŷ = y and
                                                              h                 i
                       Rt+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) = max p(θt+1 (x, ŷ, ψ̂)) x − Ut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) .
                                        x


In the current period, the worker produces and consumes b units of output. In the next
period, the worker gets the opportunity to search the labor market with probability λu . In
this case, the worker’s continuation utility is Ut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) + Rt+1 (y, ψ̂), where Rt+1 (y, ψ̂) is the
maximum with respect to x of the probability that the worker finds a job, p(θt+1 (x, y, ψ̂)),
times the value to the worker from finding a job, x − Ut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂). With probability 1 − λu , the
worker does not have the opportunity to search in the next period. In this case, the worker
remains unemployed and his continuation utility is Ut+1 (y, ψ̂). We denote as xut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) the
policy function associated with (1).

      Second, consider a firm and a worker of type (y, t) who are in a match of known quality
  7
    In the model, we completely abstract from the funding and payment of unemployment and retirement
benefits. As discussed in Zhao and Faig (2012), this abstraction is approximately innocuous as long as
workers are not too far from risk neutral and unemployment and retirement benefits are funded according
to a scheme that is not too far from actuarially fair.

                                                   11
z at the beginning of the production stage. The sum of the worker’s lifetime utility and the
firm’s lifetime profits, Vt (z, y, ψ), is such that

        Vt (z, y, ψ) = zg(y)
                            n                     h                                             io
                                                                                                      (2)
              +βEψ̂|ψ max dUt+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) + (1 − d) Eẑ|z Vt+1 (ẑ, ŷ, ψ̂) + λe St+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂)
                      d∈[δ,1]


where ŷ = y + 1 and
                                                             h                           i
                   St+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂) = max p(θt+1 (x, ŷ, ψ̂)) x − Eẑ|z Vt+1 (ẑ, ŷ, ψ̂) .
                                       x


In the current period, the sum of the worker’s utility and the firm’s profit is zg(y), the
output of the match. At the separation stage of next period, the worker becomes unemployed
with probability d. In this case, the sum of the worker’s continuation utility and the firm’s
continuation profit is Ut+1 (ŷ, ψ̂). At the search stage of next period, the worker does not have
the opportunity to search the labor market with probability 1 − λe . In this case, the worker
and firm remain matched and the sum of their continuation values is Eẑ|z Vt+1 (ẑ, ŷ, ψ̂) =
ηVt+1 (z0 , ŷ, ψ̂) + (1 − η)Vt+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂), where γ is the probability that the match is hit by a
quality shock and Vt+1 (z0 , ŷ, ψ̂) is the value to the firm and the worker from a match of
unknown quality. At the search stage of next period, the worker gets the opportunity to
search the labor market with probability λe . In this case, the sum of the worker’s continuation
utility and the firm’s continuation profit is St+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂) + Eẑ|z Vt+1 (ẑ, ŷ, ψ̂). We denote as
dt+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂) and xet+1 (z, ŷ, ψ̂) the policy functions associated with (2).

   Third, consider a firm and a worker of type (y, t) who are in a match of unknown quality
at the beginning of the production stage. The sum of the worker’s lifetime utility and the
firm’s lifetime profits, Vt (z0 , y, t), is such that
                     P                                P
   Vt (z0 , y, ψ) = α z Vt (z, y, ψ)f (z) + (1 − α) z zh(y)f(z)
                                n                       h                                            io
         +(1 − α)βEψ̂|ψ max dUt+1 (ŷ, ψ̂) + (1 − d) Eẑ|z0 Vt+1 (ẑ, ŷ, ψ̂) + λe St+1 (z0 , ŷ, ψ̂) .
                         d∈[δ,1]
                                                                                                      (3)
With probability α, the firm and the worker observe the quality of their match in the current
period. In this case, the expected sum of the worker’s lifetime utility and the firm’s lifetime
         P
profit is z Vt (z, y, ψ)f (z). With probability 1 − α, the firm and the worker do not discover
the quality of their match in the current period. In this case, the sum of the worker’s lifetime
utility and the firm’s lifetime profit is given by the second line of (3), which is the analogue

                                                     12
of (2) for a match of unknown quality. We denote as dt+1 (z0 , ŷ, ψ̂) and xet+1 (z0 , ŷ, ψ̂) the
policy functions associated with (3).

   Finally, the tightness of the submarket is such that

                                 k ≥ q(θt (x, y, ψ)) [Vt (z0 , y, ψ) − x]                             (4)

and θt (x, y, ψ) ≥ 0 with complementary slackness. The above condition guarantees that the
tightness function θt is consistent with the firm’s incentive to create vacancies. The cost to a
firm from opening a vacancy in submarket (x, y, t) is given by k. The benefit to a firm from
opening a vacancy in submarket (x, y, t) is given by the product between the probability that
the firm fills the vacancy, q(θt (x, y, ψ)), and the value to the firm from filling the vacancy,
Vt (z0 , y, ψ) − x. Condition (4) states that, if the vacancy-to-applicant ratio in submarket
(x, y, t) is strictly positive, the cost from opening a vacancy must be equal to the benefit.
Moreover, condition (4) states that, if the vacancy-to-applicant ratio in submarket (x, y, t)
is equal to zero, the cost to a firm from opening a vacancy must be smaller or equal to the
benefit.

   We are now in the position to define a Block Recursive Equilibrium (see Shi 2009 and
Menzio and Shi 2010, 2011).
Definition: A Block Recursive Equilibrium (BRE) consists of a market tightness function,
θt , a value function for the unemployed worker, Ut , a policy function for the unemployed
worker, xut , a value function for the firm-worker match, Vt , and a policy function for the firm-
worker match, (dt , xet ), for each t = 1, 2, ...T. These functions satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Ut , Vt , θt , xut , xet and dt are independent of ψ; (ii) θt satisfies (4) for all (x, y, ψ) ∈ R×N×Ψ
and t = 1, 2, ...T ; (iii) Ut and xut satisfy (1) for all y ∈ N and t = 1, 2, ....T ; (iv) Vt , dt and xet
satisfy (2) and (3) for all (z, y, ψ) ∈ {z0 ∪ Z} × N × Ψ and t = 1, 2, ...T .

   In words, a Block Recursive Equilibrium is a recursive equilibrium in which the agents’
value and policy functions do not depend on the aggregate state of the economy ψ, which is
given by the distribution of workers across age, experience and employment states, (n, u, e),
and the demographic shock, γ. Notice that a Block Recursive Equilibrium is much easier
to solve than a recursive equilibrium. In fact, solving a recursive equilibrium amounts to
solving a system of functional equations in which the unknown functions (i.e., the agents’

                                                   13
value and policy functions) have at least 1+T +T 2 (N(z)+2) arguments (i.e., the dimensions
of the aggregate state ψ). In contrast, solving for a BRE amounts to solving for a system of
functional equations in which the unknown value function have at most two arguments (i.e.
the dimensions of the individual state (z, y)).


2.3    Existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of equilibrium

Theorem 1: (i) The unique recursive equilibrium is a BRE. (ii) The BRE is socially eﬃcient,
in the sense that it generates the same allocation that solves the problem of a utilitarian
social planner.
Proof: In the appendix.

   Theorem 1 extends the results in Menzio and Shi (2011) to an economy in which workers
are heterogeneous not only with respect to their employment status (e.g. unemployed or
employed in a particular type of match) but also with respect to their age and experience.
The economics behind Theorem 1 is the same as in Menzio and Shi (2011). The equilibrium
is block recursive because search is directed. Intuitively, when search is directed, diﬀerent
workers find it optimal to search in diﬀerent submarkets. As a result of this self-selection
process, a firm opening a vacancy in a particular submarket knows that it will only meet
applicants of a particular age, experience and employment status. Hence, the equilibrium
tightness in that submarket will depend on neither the distribution of workers over age,
experience and employment, nor on the demographic shock. Since the submarket tightness
is independent of the distribution of workers and of the demographic shock, the agents’
value and policy functions will have the same property. Moreover, the equilibrium is eﬃcient
because employment contracts are complete and the search is directed. Intuitively, the
assumption of directed search guarantees that the creation of new matches is eﬃcient and
the assumption of complete contracts guarantees that the destruction of existing matches is
eﬃcient.

   While the economics behind Theorem 1 is the same as in Menzio and Shi (2011), the
existence proof is diﬀerent. In Menzio and Shi (2011), workers are infinitely lived. For this
reason, proving the existence and uniqueness of a BRE requires showing that the equilibrium
conditions are a fixed point of an operator that: (a) maps the set of value functions that are

                                              14
independent of the workers’ distribution into itself; (b) admits a unique fixed point. In this
paper, workers are finitely lived. For this reason, we can prove the existence and uniqueness
of a BRE by backward induction. From equations (1)-(3), it follows that the value functions
for a worker of age T does not depend on ψ. From equation (4), it follows that the tightness
of a submarket (x, y, T ) does not depend on ψ. Since VT , UT and θT are all independent of ψ,
equations (1)-(3) imply that the value functions for a worker of age T − 1 are independent of
ψ, and equation (4) implies that the tightness of a submarket (x, y, T − 1) is independent of
ψ. The argument can then be repeated to prove that all the other value and policy functions
are also independent of ψ.


2.4    Characterization of equilibrium

The assumption of directed search implies that a worker searching for a job faces a trade-
oﬀ between the probability of receiving a job oﬀer and the value oﬀered by the job oﬀer.
The exact nature of the trade-oﬀ faced by a worker depends on his type (i.e. age and
experience), as firms are willing to create more vacancies for those types of workers that
make more productive (or, generally, more valuable) employees. The preferences of a worker
over the probability and the value of a job oﬀer depend on his current employment state (i.e.
whether the worker is unemployed or employed in a match of a particular quality), as workers
who are in more valuable states face a smaller downside risk in case they do not receive the
oﬀer. Overall, a worker’s choice of which job oﬀers to seek depends on his age, experience
and employment state. Hence, the velocity at which a worker moves from unemployment
to employment and from employer to employer also depends on his age, experience and
employment state. Similarly, the velocity at which a worker moves from employment to
unemployment depends on the value of his job relative to unemployment, which, in turn,
depends on the worker’s age and experience. From all these observations, it follows that, at
the aggregate level, the velocity at which workers of diﬀerent age reallocate depends on their
distribution over experience and employment states. In the next paragraphs, we formalize
the arguments above and characterize the transition probabilities of diﬀerent workers.

   From equation (4), it follows that a worker of type (y, t) can choose to search in sub-
markets where the value oﬀered by vacancies to applicants, x, and the ratio of vacancies to


                                             15
applicants, θ, are such that
                                                               k
                                      x = p(θ)Vt (z0 , y) −        .                         (5)
                                                              q(θ)
The above equation states that, in a submarket with tightness θ, a worker of type (y, t) is
oﬀered a value x which is equal to the diﬀerence between the value of a match between the
worker and a firm, Vt (z0 , y), and the expected vacancy cost that a firm has to incur to create
a match with the worker, k/q(θ). Equation (5) implies that the worker faces a trade-oﬀ
between the likelihood of receiving a job oﬀer and the value of a job oﬀer. In particular, the
higher is the likelihood of receiving a job oﬀer, p(θ), the lower is the value of a job oﬀer,
x. Moreover, equation (5) implies that diﬀerent types of workers face a diﬀerent trade-oﬀ
between the likelihood and the value of a job oﬀer. In particular, workers who generate more
valuable matches are more likely to receive a job oﬀer of any value x.

   From equations (1)-(3), it follows that the preferences over x and θ for a worker who is
searching for a job are given by
                                             p(θ)(x − v),                                    (6)

where v denotes the value of the worker’s current employment state (i.e. v equals Ut (y) if
the worker is unemployed and Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y) if the worker is employed in a match of quality
z). The above expression implies that workers in diﬀerent employment states have diﬀerent
preferences over the likelihood of receiving a job oﬀer, p(θ), and the value of a job oﬀer, x. In
particular, the higher is the value of the worker’s current employment state v, the stronger is
the worker’s preference for job oﬀers that are relatively more generous and relatively harder
to get. This property of the worker’s preferences is intuitive, as workers who currently are
in a better employment state face a smaller downside risk if they do not get the job oﬀer
they seek.

   After substituting (5) into (6), we can write the search problem of a worker of type (y, t)
who is currently unemployed as

                               max p(θ) [Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y)] − kθ.                         (7)
                                θ≥0


Similarly, we can write the search problem of a worker of type (y, t) who is currently employed




                                                  16
in a match of quality z as
                                     £                              ¤
                             max p(θ) Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y) − kθ.                         (8)
                              θ≥0


Equation (7) states that an unemployed worker chooses the tightness of the submarket where
he looks for a job so as to maximize the probability that he finds a job, p(θ), times the surplus
that he generates by finding a job, Vt (z0 , y)−Ut (y), net of the cost of creating θ vacancies, kθ.
Similarly, equation (8) states that an employed worker chooses the tightness of the submarket
where he looks for a new job so as to maximize the probability that he finds a new job, p(θ),
times the surplus that he generates by finding a new job, Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y), net of the
cost of creating θ vacancies, kθ.

   From (7), it follows that an unemployed worker of type (y, t) finds it optimal to search
in a submarket with tightness θut (y), where θut (y) is such that

                                    k ≥ p0 (θut (y)) [Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y)]                        (9)

and θut (y) ≥ 0 with complementary slackness. Equation (9) implies that θut (y) depends on
the surplus Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y) that the worker would generate if he were to find a job, which
in turn depends on the worker’s age t and experience y. For the calibrated values of the
parameters (see Table 1), we find that Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y) is increasing in y and decreasing in
t. These findings are intuitive. A higher y increases Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y) because it increases
the diﬀerence between the output of the worker in a job and at home. In contrast, a
higher t reduces Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y) because it lowers the expected duration of the job. Given
the properties of Vt (z0 , y) − Ut (y), it follows from (9) that p(θut (y))–the probability that
an unemployed worker becomes employed–is increasing in the worker’s experience y and
decreasing in the worker’s age t (see Figure 4).

   From (8), it follows that an employed worker of type (y, t) finds it optimal to search in a
submarket with tightness θet (z, y), where θet (z, y) is such that
                                                £                              ¤
                             k ≥ p0 (θet (z, y)) Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y)                   (10)

and θet (z, y) ≥ 0 with complementary slackness. Equation (10) implies that θet (z, y) depends
on the surplus that the worker would generate if he were to find a job, Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y),

                                                      17
which in turn depends on the worker’s age, t, experience, y, and on the quality of his current
job, z. It is easy to prove that Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y) is decreasing in z. However, it is
diﬃcult to characterize analytically the eﬀect of y and t on Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y). For
the calibrated version of the model, we find that the eﬀect of the worker’s experience y
on Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y) is positive if the worker is employed in a low-quality job, and
negative if the worker is employed in a high-quality job. This finding is intuitive since
experience increases (decreases) the diﬀerence between the worker’s output in a new job
and in a low (high) quality job. Similarly, we find that the eﬀect of the worker’s age t on
Vt (z0 , y)−Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y) is negative if the worker is employed in a low-quality job and positive if
the worker is employed in a high-quality job. This finding is also intuitive since age decreases
(increases) the diﬀerence between the present value of the worker’s output in a new job and
in a low (high) quality job. From the properties of Vt (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z Vt (ẑ, y), we conclude that
an employed worker moves from job to job with a probability p(θet (z, y)) that is decreasing
in the quality of his current job. Moreover, if the quality of his current job is suﬃciently low,
an employed worker moves from job to job with a probability p(θet (z, y)) that is increasing
in the worker’s experience and decreasing in the worker’s age (see Figure 5).

   Finally, we proceed to characterize the movements of workers from employment to un-
employment. From (2), it follows that an employed worker of type (y, t) moves into unem-
ployment with probability dt (z, y) = 1 if

                               Ut (y) > λe St (z, y) + (1 − λe )Vt (z, y),                        (11)

and with probability dt (z, y) = δ otherwise. The above expression is easy to understand.
The left-hand side of (11) is the value that the worker and his employer enjoy if the worker
moves into unemployment. The right-hand side of (11) is the value that the worker and his
employer enjoy if the worker stays on the job. When the left-hand side is greater than the
right-hand side, the worker and his employer find it optimal to separate with probability
one. Otherwise, nature separates the worker and his employer with probability δ. Notice
that, since the right-hand side of (11) is strictly increasing in z and the left-hand side of (11)
is independent of z, the probability dt (z, y) can be represented by a reservation quality rt (y)
such that dt (z, y) = 1 if z < rt (y) and dt (z, y) = δ if z ≥ rt (y).



                                                   18
        The reservation quality rt (y) depends on the worker’s experience y and age t. For the
calibrated values of the parameters, we find that the reservation quality is increasing in t,
it is hump-shaped in y for relatively young workers and decreasing in y for relatively old
workers (see Figure 6). These findings are intuitive. A higher t tends to lower the return
on accumulating an additional month of experience by staying on the job and, through this
channel, it tends to increase rt (y).8 A higher y has two countervailing eﬀects on rt (y). On
the one hand, a higher y tends to increase the diﬀerence between the worker’s output in the
job and at home and, hence, it tends to lower rt (y). On the other hand, since h(y) is concave,
a higher y tends to lower the return from accumulating additional experience by staying on
the job. Through this channel, a higher y tends to increase rt (y). For young workers, the
second eﬀect dominates for low values of y and the first eﬀect dominates for high values of
y. For older workers, the return to additional experience is low and, hence, the first eﬀect
always dominates.



3         Labor reallocation data
In this section, we describe the data that we use to calibrate and validate our model of labor
reallocation over the life cycle. Moreover, we describe how, from these data, we construct
the age profile of the workers’ transition rates across diﬀerent employment states, the tenure
profile of the workers’ transitions out of a job and the age profile of the workers’ wage.


3.1        Data and sample restrictions

We use the U.S. Census’ Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to calibrate
and evaluate our model of labor reallocation over the life cycle. The SIPP is a longitudinal
survey that follows the same individuals for periods up to four years. Each individual in the
    8
    In models that abstract from search on the job and human capital accumulation, the separation decision
involves a trade-oﬀ between the value of worker’s production in the current match and the sum of the value
of worker’s home production and the option value of searching for a better match. In these models, the
reservation quality rt (y) decreases with t because the option value of searching is lower for older workers.
In the calibrated version of our model, search on the job is almost as frequent as search oﬀ the job and
human capital accumulation is important. Hence, in our calibrated model, the separation decision involves
mainly a trade-oﬀ between the value of the worker’s home production and the sum of the value of the
worker’s production in the current match and the value of accumulating an additional month of experience.
In our models, the reservation quality rt (y) increases with t because the value of experience is lower for older
workers.


                                                       19
survey is assigned to one of four rotation groups and is interviewed once every four months, in
a staggered fashion, for the duration of the panel. When all rotation groups are interviewed,
a wave of four months is completed, and a new wave is started with the interview of the first
rotation group. Each interview collects data on the individual’s income and employment
status. For each week in the four months prior to the interview, the individual is asked
whether he was working in a job, absent without pay, or looking for a job. If the individual
reports to have had one or more job in a given month, he is asked about the identity of his
employers and about his wage with each employer. If the individual had multiple jobs, we
define as the dominant job the one where he worked the most hours. If the individual did not
have a job and did not look for one, he is asked about the reason behind his non-participation
(i.e. education, illness, discouragement, retirement).

   We restrict attention to the 1996 panel of the SIPP, which spans the period from De-
cember 1995 to February 2000. Moreover, we restrict attention to men between the ages of
18 and 66, who have a high school degree and do not own their own business. Given these
sample restrictions, we are left with 10,554 individuals and 300,234 monthly observations.
We choose to focus on individuals in a particular education group because the pattern of
labor reallocation varies significantly among workers with diﬀerent educational attainment,
while these diﬀerences are not captured by our model. We choose to focus on individuals
with a high school degree because they constitute the largest group in our data and because
they are representative of the median US worker.

   At the beginning of each month, we assign to each individual an employment status. To
this end, we use the reports of the individual for the first week of the month. We classify
the individual as employed (E) if he reports having a job and being either present or absent
without pay, either on layoﬀ or not. We classify the individual as unemployed (U) if he
reports having no job, but looking for work actively or being on layoﬀ. We classify the
individual as not in the labor force (N) if he reports having no job, not actively looking and
not being on layoﬀ. Further, we assign to each employed worker an employer and a wage,
based on his dominant job.




                                              20
3.2    Age profile of transitions within the labor force

The main objective of this paper is explaining the empirical age profile of workers’ transitions
between employment, unemployment and across diﬀerent employers. We construct these
empirical age profiles as follows. First, we say that an individual experiences a UE transition
in a given month if he is employed at the beginning of the month and employed at the
beginning of next month. Similarly, we say that an individual experiences an EU transition
if he is employed at the beginning of the month and unemployed at the beginning of the next
month. And we say that an individual experiences an EE transition if he is employed at
the beginning of the month and he is employed at some other firm at the beginning of next
month. Hence, we disregard individual transitions that take place at a frequency higher than
one month. We make this choice because, for computational tractability, our model period
is chosen to be a month rather than a week. Next, we define the monthly UE transition
rate for workers of a given age as the fraction of unemployed individuals of that age who
experience a UE transition. Similarly, we define the monthly EU rate for workers of a given
age as the fraction of employed workers of that age who experience an EU transition, and
the monthly EE rate as the fraction of employed workers who experience an EE transition.

   Figure 1 displays the raw and smoothed age profiles of the monthly UE rate. As one can
see, the monthly UE rate is approximately constant at 25 percent for workers between the
ages of 18 and 50, and it is sharply declining for workers older than 50. One can also see that
the raw age profile becomes very noisy for workers older than 60 due to the small number
of high school graduates who are unemployed late in their work life. In order to assess the
robustness of the smoothed age profile for high school graduates, Figure 1 also displays the
smoothed profile for the entire male population. Reassuringly, the two profiles are nearly on
top of each other.

   Figure 2 displays the raw and smoothed profiles of the monthly EU rate. As one can
see, the monthly EU rate is downward sloping throughout the life cycle, with a slope that
is markedly higher (in absolute value) for workers between the ages of 18 and 30 than for
workers between the ages of 30 and 65. The monthly EU rate is above 2 percent for 18 year
old workers, it is approximately 0.05 percent for 30 year old workers, and approximately 0.01
percent for 60 year old workers. Figure 2 also shows that the age profile of the EU rate for

                                              21
the entire male population is almost the same as the one for high-school graduates.

       Figure 3 plots the raw and smoothed profiles of the monthly EE rate. As one can see,
the monthly EE rate is downward sloping throughout the life cycle, but the slope varies less
with age than the slope of the EU rate. The monthly EE rate is around 5 percent for 18
year old workers, it is approximately 2 percent for 35 year old workers, and approximately 1
percent for workers above the age of 60. Figure 3 also shows that the age profile of the EE
rate for the entire male population is almost the same as the one for high-school graduates.9


3.3       Age profile of transitions in and out of the labor force

There are not only large diﬀerences in the frequency at which young and old workers move
between employment, unemployment and across diﬀerent employers, but also large diﬀer-
ences in the frequency at which young and old workers move in and out of the labor force.
In order to construct the age profile of workers’ transitions in and out of the labor force, we
proceed as follows. First, we say that a worker experiences a transition into the labor force
(a NL transition) if he is out of the labor force at the beginning of the month and either
employed or unemployed at the beginning of next month. Similarly, we say that a worker
experiences a transition out of the labor force (a LN transition) if he is either employed or
unemployed at the beginning of the month and he is out of the labor force at the beginning
of next month. Next, we define the NL transition rate for workers of a given age as the
fraction of non-participating workers of that age that experience a NL transition. We define
the LN rate for workers of a given age in an analogous way.
   9
    The average UE and EU rate that we compute using the SIPP are below those computed by Shimer (2007)
and Gorry (2011) using the CPS. Moreover, Gorry (2011) finds the age profile of the UE rate is declining
throughout the entire lifecycle, while we find that the UE rate is approximately constant for workers between
the age of 20 and 50. There are two reasons for these discrepancies. The first reason has to do with the data.
Nagypal (2008) demonstrated, using CPS re-interview data, the presence of significant classification error in
the CPS that misclassifies out-of-labor-force workers as unemployed; she shows that this error overstates the
average UE rate, e.g., by 26%. SIPP does not have this problem. Moreover, Nagypal (2008) points out the
importance of mismatch (attrition) error in the CPS, which is also biased towards workers in their 20’s. SIPP
data appears to be free of this error. The second reason for the discrepancy between our transition rates and
those reported by Shimer (2007) and Gorry (2011) has to do with the definition of these rates. Basically,
Shimer (2007) and Gorry (2011) define the transition rates as the probability that a worker experiences
that type of transition during a month. In contrast, we define the UE, EU and EE transition rates as the
probability that a worker is in a given employment state at the beginning of the month and in a diﬀerent
employment state at the beginning of the next month. Clearly, our definition of transition implies lower
rates than the one adopted by Shimer (2007) and Gorry (2011).



                                                     22
   Figure 7 displays the raw and smoothed age profiles of the monthly NL rate. Notice that
the monthly NL rate is steadily decreasing with age. For example, the monthly NL rate is
close to 12.5 percent for workers who are 20 years old, it drops oﬀ to 6 percent for workers
who are 40 years old, and it is lower than 2 percent for workers who are 60 years old. Figure
8 displays the raw and smoothed age profiles of the monthly LN rate. The monthly LN
rate is U-shaped over the life cycle. The monthly LN rate is above 4 percent for very young
workers, it declines to about 1 percent for workers between the ages of 25 and 55, and it
increases to 2.5 percent for workers older than 60.

   Our model can only account for some of the workers’ transitions in and out of the labor
force. In our model, workers enter the labor force for exogenous reasons (e.g. the end of
their formal education), and they participate in the labor market until they permanently exit
the labor force for exogenous reasons (e.g. a permanent illness or a permanent productivity
decline). Hence, our model can account for the transition of young workers from school to
the labor force and for the transition of old workers from the labor force into retirement (as
long as one views retirement as the eﬀect of an exogenous decline in productivity). However,
our model does not allow participating workers to move out and back into the labor force.
Hence, our model cannot account for middle-aged workers who temporarily move out of the
labor force because of some temporary illness or because of discouragement.

   In an attempt to minimize the discrepancy between the model and the data, we con-
structed a sample of the SIPP data from which we excluded workers who experience any
transitions out and into the labor force between the ages of 25 and 50. We found that there
are not many such workers. That is, most of the transitions of prime-aged workers out and
into the labor force are attributable to a small number of marginally attached workers. More
importantly, we found that, in the restricted dataset, the age profiles of the UE, EU and
EE rates, the age profile of wages and the tenure profiles of the EU and EE rates are very
similar to those in the unrestricted dataset. This finding reassures us that leaving marginal
workers in the dataset will not have a significant impact on our quantitative analysis.




                                             23
3.4    Tenure profile of transitions within the labor force

To calibrate the parameters of our model, we will make use of the empirical relationship
between a worker’s tenure on a job and the probability that the worker moves into a diﬀerent
job or into unemployment. Formally, we construct the tenure profile of the monthly EU and
EE as follows. The EU rate for workers of tenure t is defined as the number of employed
workers with tenure t who experience a EU transition in the subsequent month divided by
the number of employed workers with tenure t. Similarly, the EE rate for workers of tenure t
is defined as the number of employed workers with tenure t who experience an EE transition
in the subsequent month divided by the number of employed workers with tenure t.

   Figures 9 and 10 display the raw and smoothed tenure profiles of the monthly EU and
EE rates. The tenure profile of the EU rate is decreasing and convex. The EU rate is close
to 2 percent for workers who have been on the job for 3 months; it drops to 0.5 percent for
workers with 24 months of tenure, and to 0.3 percent for workers with 48 months of tenure.
The tenure profile of the monthly EE rate displays a similar pattern. For workers with 3
months of tenure, the EE rate is close to 4 percent. The EE rate drops oﬀ to 2 percent
for workers with 24 months of tenure, and it declines at a much lower rate for workers with
longer tenure. Notice that the shape of the tenure profile of the EU and EE rates that we
constructed using the SIPP is very similar to the shape of the tenure profile that Topel and
Ward (1992) construct using the NLSY.


3.5    Age profile of wages

To calibrate the parameters of our model, we will also make use of the empirical relationship
between a worker’s age and wage. Formally, we measure the wage of an employed worker
as the logarithm of the monthly wage and salary income at the worker’s dominant job. We
then construct the age profile of wages by averaging our measure of wages across each age
group. The resulting age profile in figure 11 has the usual concave shape, increasing quickly
early in the life cycle, then increasing at a much slower rate after the mid-30’s. As expected,
the population average wages are higher later in the life cycle than those of the high-school
education group, but the shape of the profiles is similar.



                                              24
4      Calibration, validation and application of the theory
In this section, we first calibrate our model using aggregate data on labor reallocation, such
as the unconditional mean of the UE, EU and EE rates and the mean of the EU and EE
rates conditional on the worker’s tenure on the job. Second, we validate our calibrated model
by showing that it correctly predicts the mean of the UE, EU and EE rates conditional on
the worker’s age. Finally, we apply our calibrated model in order to decompose the eﬀect of
age on the UE, EU and EE rates into the eﬀect of changes in work-life expectancy, changes
in human capital and changes in match quality. Similarly, we use the calibrated model
to decompose the growth of wages and productivity over the life cycle into the eﬀect of
human capital accumulation, match quality accumulation and improvements in the worker’s
contractual position.


4.1     Calibration

To begin the description of the strategy and outcome of the calibration, let us review the
parameters that describe our model. Preferences are described by the discount factor, β, and
the value of leisure b. The production process is described by the probability distribution of
the quality of a match, f(z), the probability that the quality of a match is observed, α, the
probability that the quality of a match changes, η, and the production function, h(y). We
restrict f(z) to be a 100-point approximation of a Weibull distribution with mean 1, scale
σ and shape φ. We also restrict g(y) to be of the form g(y) = (1 − ζ) + ζy ψ . The matching
process is described by the vacancy cost, k, the probability that an unemployed worker gets
to search, λu , the probability that an employed worker gets to search, λe , the probability
that a worker becomes unemployed for exogenous reasons, δ, and the matching probability
p(θ), which we restrict to be of the form p(θ) = min{θ1/2 , 1}.10 We set λu to 1, which is a
normalization that pins down the unit of measure for vacancies. Finally, the process of entry
and exit into the labor market is described by the probabilities {μt , ν t }.
  10
    Typically, the elasticity of the job finding probability function p with respect to θ is estimated using
data on the cyclical fluctuations of the UE rate and of the aggregate labor market tightness (see, e.g., Shimer
2005 and Menzio and Shi 2011). Since our model abstracts from cyclical fluctuations, we did not attempt
to estimate the elasticity of p. Instead, we chose an elasticity of .5, which is close to the value estimated by
Menzio and Shi (2011) using a model of directed search on the job that is similar to ours. Moreover, as a
robustness check, we carried out the quantitative analysis of the model using two alternative values for the
elasticity of p (0.3 and 0.7) and found no significant diﬀerences with respect to the benchmark case.


                                                      25
       Next, let us describe how we calibrate the parameters of the model. We set the model
period to be one month. We calibrate β so that the annual real interest rate in the model,
β −12 , is equal to 4 percent. We calibrate μt so that the fraction of workers of age t who
enter the labor market is the same in the model as in the data. Similarly, we calibrate ν t
so that the fraction of workers of age t who retire from the labor market is the same in
the model as in the data. The remaining parameters are calibrated so as to minimize the
distance between the value of some statistical moments in the data and in the model. In
particular, the statistical moments that we consider are the average UE, EU and EE rates,
the average EU and EE rates for workers with diﬀerent tenure, the average wage for workers
with diﬀerent age, and the average wage-to-leisure ratio. Heuristically, the average UE, EU
and EE rates are used to calibrate the search parameters k, δ and λe . The tenure profile of
the EU and EE rate is used to calibrate the production parameters α, η, σ and φ.11 The
age profile of wages is used to calibrate the human-capital parameters ζ and ψ. Finally, the
ratio of wages to home production–which Hall and Milgrom (2008) estimate to be 0.7–is
used to calibrate the parameter b.

       Most of our calibration strategy is standard (see, e.g., Shimer 2005). The main novelty
is to use the empirical tenure profile of the EU and EE rates to calibrate the probability
distribution of match quality, f(z), and the parameters α and η.12 Let us briefly explain why
the tenure profiles of the EU and EE rates are related to f (z), α and η. In our model, when
a firm and a worker do not know the quality of their match, the probability that–over the
next month–the worker moves into unemployment is δ and the probability that he moves
into another job is zero. When a firm and a worker know the quality of their match, the
probability that–over the next month–the worker moves into unemployment is dt (z, y) and
the probability that he moves into another job is (1 − dt (z, y))λe p(θet (z, y)), where dt (z, y)
and p(θet (z, y)) are decreasing in z. Therefore, the probability distribution of match quality,
f(z), the rate at which match quality is observed, α, and the rate at which match quality
changes, η, aﬀect the number of matches that reach a particular tenure and the fraction of
  11
     Notice that targeting the tenure profiles of the EU and EE rates does not automatically predispose the
model to match the age profiles of the EU and EE rates, because the tenure profile need not be the same for
workers of diﬀerent ages.
  12
     Moscarini (2003) uses the tenure profile of the exit-hazard rate to calibrate the rate at which a firm and
a worker learn about the quality of their match. Similarly, Menzio and Shi (2011) use the tenure profile of
the exit-hazard rate to calibrate the match-quality distribution. In this paper, we use both the tenure profile
of the EU hazard and the tenure profile of the EE hazard to calibrate the parameters of the model.

                                                      26
these matches that terminate because the workers move into unemployment or into another
job. Conversely, the empirical tenure profile of the EU and EE rates is informative about α,
η and f(z).

   Finally, we turn to the outcomes of the calibration. Table 1 reports the calibrated values
of the model parameters. Tables 2, 3 and 4 report the values of the target moments in the
data and in the model. The calibrated values of the search parameters k, δ and λe are,
respectively, 23, .002 and .66. The calibrated value of k implies that the expected cost of
hiring an unemployed worker of age 40 with 15 years of experience is equal to 1.8 months
of the worker’s expected output. The calibrated value of δ implies that only 1 out of 3
transitions from employment to unemployment are exogenous. The calibrated value of λe
implies that the main reason why unemployed workers have a much higher job finding rate
than employed workers is that unemployed workers choose to search for jobs that oﬀer lower
wages, not that unemployed workers are more likely to search. Given the calibrated values of
the search parameters, the average UE, EU and EE rates generated by the model are fairly
close to their empirical counterparts.

   The calibrated values of σ and φ are, respectively, 11.2 and 3.6. These parameter values
imply that there is a great deal of uncertainty about the quality of a new match. For example,
the productivity of a match in the 90th percentile of the distribution f (z) is approximately
3 times higher than the productivity of a match in the 10th percentile of the distribution.
The calibrated value of α is .26, which implies that it does not take long to learn the quality
of a match. In particular, it implies that more than 70 percent of firms and workers learn
the quality of their match during the first four months of their union. The calibrated value
of η is .0094, which implies that the quality of a match is very persistent. In particular, it
implies that, on average, the quality of a match changes once every 8 and a half years. Given
the calibrated value of these technology parameters, the model reproduces quite closely the
tenure profiles of the EU and EE rates that are observed in the data (see Table 3).

   The calibrated values of ζ and ψ are, respectively, 4.43 and .011. These values imply that
the eﬀect of an additional year of experience on a worker’s productivity falls dramatically with
the worker’s level of experience. For instance, the productivity of the worker approximately
doubles with the first 2.5 years of experience, and only increases by 45 percent with the next

                                              27
5 years of experience. Given the calibrated valued for ζ and ψ, the model reproduces quite
closely the age profile of average wages (see Table 4).

   The calibration reveals that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in the quality of firm-
worker formed matches. The search frictions that slow down the process of assignment of the
right workers to the right firms are modest, in the sense that workers are almost always able
to search the labor market and that firms pay a relatively small cost to open new vacancies.
Similarly, the learning frictions are modest, in the sense that firms and workers learn rather
quickly the quality of their match. Overall, the large heterogeneity in match quality and the
modest search and learning frictions add up to a fairly time consuming process of selection
of the right workers into the right firms.


4.2     Validation

In order to validate our model, we use data on labor reallocation disaggregated according
to the workers’ age. In particular, we show that the calibrated model correctly predicts the
average of the EE, EU and UE transition rates conditional on the workers’ age.


4.2.1   Lifecycle profile of the EE rate

The age profile of the EE rate predicted by the model is close to the age profile of the EE
rate that is observed in the data (see Figure 12). Specifically, the model correctly predicts
that the EE rate is decreasing throughout the life cycle and it correctly predicts the speed at
which it declines. For example, the model correctly predicts that the EE rate drops rapidly
for workers between the ages of 20 and 35, that it remains approximately constant for workers
between the ages of 35 and 50, and that it declines for older workers. The close proximity
between the age profile predicted by the model and the one observed in the data should also
be considered a success of the theory. In calibrating the parameters of the model we used
the tenure profile of the EE rate, which, obviously, is related to the age profile of the EE
rate. However, since the tenure profile of the EE rate need not be constant for workers of
diﬀerent age (and, in fact, it is not) and the fraction of workers starting new jobs at diﬀerent
ages is used in the calibration, our model is not “rigged” to fit the age profile of the EE rate.



                                               28
   Now, we can use the model to decompose the age variation of the EE rate into the
contribution of the three workers’ characteristics that vary with age: life-expectancy, match
quality and experience. To this aim, let us decompose the diﬀerence between the EE rate
for workers of age t, hee                                             ee
                       t , and the EE rate for workers of age t − 1, ht−1 , as follows

     hee   ee
      t − ht−1
     Z h                        i               Z h                            i
         R e          e              e
                                                      R e            e
   =       p
          y t
              (z, y)Φ t (y|z)dy   Ω  t (z)dz  −         p
                                                       y t−1
                                                             (z, y)Φ t (y|z)dy   Ωet (z)dz
     Z zh                          i              Zz h                            i
         R e             e              e
                                                        R e             e
   +       p
          y t−1
                (z, y)Φ  t (y|z)dy   Ω  t (z)dz −         p
                                                         y t−1
                                                               (z, y)Φ  t (y|z)dy   Ωet−1 (z)dz
     Z zh                          i                Zz h                               i
         R e             e              e
                                                          R e
   +       p (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy Ωt−1 (z)dz −
          y t−1
                                                             p (z, y)Φt−1 (y|z)dy Ωet−1 (z)dz,
                                                           y t−1
                                                                           e
          z                                           z
                                                                                              (12)
where Ωet (z) is the distribution of employed workers of age t across z, Φet (y|z) is the dis-
tribution of employed workers of age t across y conditional on z, and pet (z, y) is the prob-
ability that a worker (t, y) in a match of quality z experiences a job-to-job transition, i.e.
pet (z, y) = [1 − dt (z, y)] λe p(θet (z, y)). The first term on the right-hand side of (12) is the
diﬀerence between the actual EE rate for workers of age t and the counterfactual EE rate
for workers of age t − 1 if these workers had the same experience and match quality as
workers of age t. Following Chéron, Hairault and Langot (2007), we shall refer to this term
as the horizon eﬀect of age. The second term on the right-hand side of (12) is the diﬀerence
between the EE rate for workers of age t − 1 who counterfactually have the same experience
and match quality as workers of age t and the EE rate for workers of age t − 1 who coun-
terfactually have the same experience as workers of age t. We shall refer to this term as the
selection eﬀect of age. Finally, the last term on the right-hand side of (12) is the diﬀerence
between the EE rate for workers of age t − 1 who have the same experience as workers of
age t and the actual EE rate for workers of age t − 1. We shall refer to this term as the
experience eﬀect of age.

   Figure 13 plots the decomposition of hee   ee
                                         t − ht−1 into the horizon, selection and experience

eﬀects. The horizon eﬀect is negative because–as we discussed in section 3.4–workers with
a shorter work-life expectancy choose to search in submarkets where the vacancy to applicant
ratio is lower (as long as the quality of their current job is not too high). Quantitatively, the
horizon eﬀect is negligible until the age of 50 because a worker with more than 15 years of


                                                29
remaining work life behaves approximately like a worker with an infinite work life. Past the
age of 50, the horizon eﬀect becomes stronger and stronger. The selection eﬀect is negative
because workers of age t are selected into matches of higher quality than workers of age t − 1
and–as we discussed in section 3.4–workers in higher quality matches choose to search in
submarkets where the vacancy to applicant ratio is lower.13 Quantitatively, the selection
eﬀect is small after the age of 30 because workers who have been in the labor market for
more than 10 years have found high quality matches. Before the age of 30, the selection
eﬀect is quite strong. Finally, the experience eﬀect is positive because workers of age t have
accumulated more experience than workers of age t− 1 and–as we discussed in section 3.4–
workers with more experience choose to search in submarkets where the vacancy to applicant
ratio is higher (as long as the quality of their current job is not too high). Quantitatively,
though, the experience eﬀect is quite small.

       Figure 13 shows that the large decline in the EE rate for workers between the ages of
20 and 35 is almost entirely attributable to the selection eﬀect of age, i.e. to the fact that
workers move from low to high quality matches as they get older. Figure 13 also shows that
the EE rate for workers between the ages of 35 and 45 is approximately constant because,
in this part of the life cycle, the horizon, selection and experience eﬀects of age are all
negligible. Finally, Figure 13 shows that the decline in the EE rate for workers between the
ages of 45 and 65 is almost entirely attributable to the horizon eﬀect of age, i.e. to the fact
that workers’ work-life expectancy falls as they get older.


4.2.2      Lifecycle profile of the EU rate

The age profile of the EU rate predicted by the model is qualitatively close to the age profile
of the EU rate that is observed in the data (see Figure 14). In particular, the model correctly
predicts that the EU rate drops dramatically for workers between the ages of 18 and 30 and
that it declines at a much smaller rate for older workers. The close fit between the age profile
predicted by the model and the one observed in the data should also be considered a success
  13
     Between the ages of 18 and 19, the selection eﬀect is actually positive. This is because most 18 year old
workers who are employed are in matches of unknown quality and, hence, do not have an incentive to search
for better matches. The proportion of 19 year old employed workers who are in matches of unknown quality
is much lower and, for this reason, the selection eﬀect is positive. After the first year, the main diﬀerence
between older and younger worker is that the older ones are employed in better matches.



                                                     30
for our theory of labor reallocation. In fact, even though we used the tenure profile of the
EU rate in the calibration, our model is not necessarily predisposed to fit the age profile of
the EU rate because the tenure profile of the EU rate need not be the same for workers of
diﬀerent age.

   In order to understand the cause of age variation in the EU rate, we decompose the
diﬀerence between the EU rate for workers of age t, heu
                                                     t , and the EU rate for workers of age

t − 1, heu
        t−1 , as follows

      heu    eu
       t − ht−1
      Z h                       i             Z h                         i
          R            e            e
                                                   R
    =        d (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy Ωt (z)dz −
            y t
                                                     d (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy Ωet (z)dz
                                                    y t−1
                                                                 e

      Z h
        z
                                   i            Z h
                                                z
                                                                             i
          R              e            e
                                                     R             e
    +        d
            y t−1
                  (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy   Ωt (z)dz −        d
                                                      y t−1
                                                            (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy   Ωet−1 (z)dz
      Z zh                         i              Zz h                            i
          R              e            e
                                                       R
    +        d (z, y)Φt (y|z)dy Ωt−1 (z)dz −
            y t−1
                                                          d (z, y)Φt−1 (y|z)dy Ωet−1 (z)dz,
                                                        y t−1
                                                                      e
           z                                        z
                                                                                           (13)
The decomposition in (13) is the analogue for the EU rate of the decomposition in (12).
The first term on the right-hand side of (13) measures the contribution of the change in
work-life expectancy to the change in the EU rate between workers of age t − 1 and t. This
is the horizon eﬀect of age. The second term on the right-hand side of (13) measures the
contribution of the change in match quality to the change in the EU rate between workers
of age t − 1 and t. This is the selection eﬀect of age. Finally, the last term on the right-hand
side of (13) measures the contribution of the change in experience to the change in the EU
rate between workers of age t − 1 and t. This is the experience eﬀect of age.

   Figure 15 plots the decomposition of heu   eu
                                         t − ht−1 into the selection, experience and horizon

eﬀects. The horizon eﬀect is negative because workers with a shorter work-life expectancy
are more likely to leave their job as they have less to gain from accumulating an additional
month of experience. Quantitatively, though, the horizon eﬀect is rather small. The selection
eﬀect is negative because workers of age t tend to be employed in higher quality matches
than workers of age t − 1 and, hence, they are less likely to leave their job. Quantitatively,
the selection eﬀect is quite strong between the ages of 18 and 30, but it becomes negligible
afterwards. Finally, the experience eﬀect is positive early in the life cycle and negative
later on. In fact, workers of age t have more experience than workers of age t − 1 and, as

                                              31
illustrated in figure 6, workers with more experience are more likely to leave their job if young
and less likely to leave their job if old. Notice that the magnitude of the experience eﬀect
sharply declines with age because, according to our calibration, the marginal productivity
of experience falls rather quickly.

   Figure 15 shows that the sharp decline in the EU rate for workers between the ages of 18
and 30 is attributable to the fact that, during this part of the life cycle, the negative eﬀect
of age on the EU rate through the selection channel is much stronger than its positive eﬀect
through the experience channel. Moreover, Figure 15 shows that the small decline in the EU
rate for workers between the ages of 30 and 65 is due to the fact that, during this part of
the life cycle, the horizon, selection and experience eﬀects of age are all rather small.


4.2.3    Lifecycle profile of the UE rate

Figure 16 shows that the model also predicts quite well the empirical age profile of the UE
rate. In particular, the model correctly predicts that the UE rate remains approximately
constant for workers between the ages of 20 and 50 and that the UE rate sharply declines
for workers between the ages of 50 and 65. Since the calibration did not use any data on
the age variation of the UE rate, the fact that the model correctly predicts the empirical age
profile of the UE rate should be seen as another success of our theory.

   In order to understand the causes of the age variation in the UE rate, we decompose the
diﬀerence between the UE rate for workers of age t, hue
                                                     t , and the UE rate for workers of age

t − 1, hue
        t−1 , as follows
                                 R                         R
                 hue   ue
                  t − ht−1   =   y
                                   p(θut (y))Φut (y)dy − p(θut−1 (y))Φut (y)dy
                                                           y
                              R                         R                                   (14)
                             + y p(θut−1 (y))Φut (y)dy − y p(θut−1 (y))Φut−1 (y)dy,

where Φut (y) is the distribution of unemployed workers of age t across y. The decomposition
in (14) is similar to the decomposition in (12) and (13) for the EE and EU rates. The
first term on the right-hand side of (14) measures the contribution of the change in work-
life expectancy to the change in the UE rate between workers of age t − 1 and t. This
is the horizon eﬀect of age. The second term on the right-hand side of (14) measures the
contribution of the change in experience to the change in the UE rate between workers of


                                                32
age t − 1 and t. This is the experience eﬀect of age. Clearly, age does not aﬀect the UE rate
through its eﬀect on the selection of workers into higher quality matches.

   Figure 17 plots the decomposition of hue   ue
                                         t − ht−1 into the horizon eﬀect and the experience

eﬀect. The horizon eﬀect is negative because–as illustrated in figure 4–unemployed workers
with a shorter work-life expectancy choose to search in submarkets where the vacancy to
applicant ratio, and, hence, their job finding probability is lower. The experience eﬀect is
positive because workers of age t have more experience than workers of age t − 1 and–as
figure 4 shows–more experienced workers choose to search in submarkets where the vacancy
to applicant ratio and, hence, their job finding probability is higher. Overall, figure 17 shows
that the UE rate is approximately constant for workers between the ages of 20 and 50 because
both the horizon and experience eﬀects are negligible. Moreover, the UE rate declines sharply
for workers between the ages of 50 and 65 because the horizon eﬀect becomes strong, while
the experience eﬀect remains relatively small.


4.3    Application: Decomposing productivity and wage growth

In the previous subsections, we used the model to decompose the age variation in the UE,
EU and EE transition rates into the contribution of the age variation in work-life expectancy,
match quality and experience. Those decompositions shed light on the fundamental causes
of age variation in labor reallocation. In this subsection, we want to use the model to
decompose the age profile of labor productivity and wages.

   First, let ζ denote the productivity of an employed worker. Using the fact that ζ = zg(y),
we can decompose the growth rate of average labor productivity between the ages of t − 1
and t as follows

                    [Et log ζ − Et−1 log ζ] = [Et log g(y) − Et−1 log g(y)]
                                                                                           (15)
                                            + [Et log z − Et−1 log z],

where Et x denotes the average value of some variable x among workers of age t and Et−1 x
denotes the average among workers of age t − 1. The first term on the right-hand side of
(15) measures the growth rate between the ages of t − 1 and t of the average human capital
of employed workers. The second term is the growth rate between the ages of t − 1 and t
of average match quality of employed workers. Hence, (15) decomposes the growth rate of

                                              33
labor productivity into the contributions of the growth rates of human capital and of match
quality.

   Next, denote as ω the piece-rate for an employed worker and as w his wage. Using the
fact that w = ωzg(y), we can decompose the growth rate of the average wage between the
ages of t − 1 and t as follows

           [Et log ζ − Et−1 log ζ] = [Et log g(y) − Et−1 log g(y)]
                                                                                          (16)
                                   + [Et log z − Et−1 log z] + [Et log ω − Et−1 log ω],

The sum of the first two terms on the right-hand side of (16) is the growth rate of average
labor productivity among employed workers. The last term on the right-hand side of (16) is
the growth rate of the average piece rate among employed workers. Hence, (16) decomposes
the growth rate of wages into the contribution of the growth rates of human capital, match
quality and worker’s contractual power.

   Figure 18 plots the decomposition of the growth rate of labor productivity into the
contribution of the growth rate of human capital and of match quality. First, notice that
labor productivity growth decreases rapidly with age. Between the ages of 18 and 22, labor
productivity grows by 18 percent per year. Between the ages of 23 and 27, labor productivity
grows by 5.4 percent per year. And between the ages of 28 and 65, average productivity grows
only by .6 percent per year. Second, notice that both the accumulation of human capital
and the increase in match quality are both important sources of labor productivity growth.
In particular, between the ages of 18 and 30, the accumulation of human capital accounts for
74 percent, and the increase of match quality accounts for 25 percent of the overall growth
of labor productivity. Finally, Figure 18 shows very clearly that the assignment of the right
workers to the right firms is a process that lasts approximately 10 years, even though both
search and learning frictions are modest.

   Figure 19 plots the decomposition of the growth rate of wages into the contribution of the
growth rate of human capital, match quality and workers’ contractual power. First, notice
that average wages–just like labor productivity–are increasing in age, but at a rapidly
decreasing rate. The annual growth rate of wages is 18 percent between the ages of 18 and
22, 5.5 percent between the ages of 23 and 27, and .6 percent between the ages of 28 and 65.
Second, notice that the main engines of wage growth are the accumulation of human capital

                                               34
and the improvement in match quality, not the increase in workers’ contractual power. In
fact, between the ages of 18 and 30, the growth of human capital accounts for 76 percent of
wage growth, the improvement in match quality accounts for 23.8 percent of wage growth,
and the increase in workers’ contractual power only accounts for 0.2 percent of wage growth.
The workers’ contractual power contributes very little to wage growth because, according to
our calibration, search frictions are small and, hence, workers are always paid wages close to
their marginal product.

    The findings obtained from the decompositions (15) and (16) reveal the importance of
mismatch in the growth process of productivity and wages over the life cycle. Indeed, more
that 20 percent of the productivity and wage growth that workers experience during their
entire life cycle reflects the workers’ movement towards a more eﬃcient allocation of their
labor and towards a stronger contractual position. These findings have far-reaching impli-
cations. For example, they suggest that labor market policies that hinder workers’ mobility
(e.g. firing costs) have the potential to dramatically slow down the workers’ productivity
and wage growth over the life cycle. Similarly, such policies may significantly reduce the
aggregate level of labor productivity.



5     Conclusions
In this paper, we developed a directed search theory of workers’ transitions between employ-
ment, unemployment and across employers over the life cycle. The transitions of workers
across diﬀerent employment states are driven by diﬀerences in the quality of diﬀerent firm-
worker matches. The assignment of the right workers to the right firms is time consuming
because of the presence of both search and learning frictions. The velocity at which workers
move towards new firms is endogenous because search is directed and, hence, workers choose
whether to seek jobs that oﬀer high wages and are hard to find or jobs that oﬀer low wages
and are easy to find. We calibrated the theory using data on labor reallocation aggregated
across workers of diﬀerent ages. We validated the theory by showing that it correctly predicts
the empirical pattern of labor reallocation for workers of diﬀerent ages. Finally, we used the
theory to decompose the age variation of transition rates, wages and productivity into the
eﬀect of age variations in work-life expectancy, human capital and match quality.

                                             35
   The model proposed in this paper provides a successful and practical way to introduce
life cycle considerations into macroeconomic analysis of the labor market. The model is
successful because it accounts for the pattern of workers’ transitions across employment
states over the life cycle. The model is practical because, due to the block recursivity of
the equilibrium, it can be easily solved in the presence of aggregate shocks. For example,
it would be interesting to introduce cyclical fluctuations in aggregate productivity into the
framework and measure their eﬀect on the unemployment rate, transition rates and match
quality of workers of diﬀerent ages. This type of analysis would reveal which age groups are
most sensitive to cyclical productivity fluctuations and whether it is innocuous to abstract
from age heterogeneity when studying the cyclical volatility of aggregate unemployment and
vacancies. Similarly, it would be interesting to measure the eﬀect of changes in demographic
structure on aggregate unemployment, vacancies and reallocation, as well as on the growth
rate of wages and labor productivity. This type of analysis would reveal how much of the
recent slow-down in the growth rate of wages and labor productivity can be attributed to
the ageing of the baby boomers.




                                             36
References
 [1] Albrecht, J., P. Gautier and S. Vroman. 2006. “Equilibrium directed search with multiple
    applications”. Review of Economic Studies 73: 869—91.

 [2] Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay and J. Robin. 2007. “A Tractable Equilibrium
    Search Model with Experience Accumulation”. Manuscript, Bristol University.

 [3] Burdett, K., and D. Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Diﬀerentials, Employer Size, and Unem-
    ployment.” International Economic Review 39: 257—73.

 [4] Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright. 2001. “Pricing and Matching with Frictions.” Journal
    of Political Economy 109: 1060—85.

 [5] Burdett, K., C. Carillo-Tudela and M. Coles. 2011. “Human Capital Accumulation and
    Labor Market Equilibrium”. Forthcoming, International Economic Review 42: 597—616.

 [6] Burdett, K. and M. Coles. 2010. “Equilibrium Contracts with On-the-Job Learning and
    Search”. Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

 [7] Chéron, A., J.-O. Hairault, and F. Langot. 2008. “Life-Cycle Equilibrium Unemploy-
    ment”. IZA Discussion Papers 3396.

 [8] Chéron, A., J.-O. Hairault, and F. Langot. 2011. “Age-Dependent Employment Protec-
    tion”. Economic Journal 121: 1477—504.

 [9] Eeckhout, J., and P. Kircher. 2010. “Sorting and Decentralized Price Competition.”
    Econometrica 78: 539—74.

[10] Esteban-Pretel, J., and J. Fujimoto. 2011. “Life-Cycle Labor Search with Stochastic
    Match Quality”, Manuscript. GRIPS.

[11] Fu, C. 2011. “Training, Search and Wage Dynamics”. Review of Economic Dynamics
    14: 650—66.

[12] Galenianos, M., and P. Kircher. 2009. “Directed Search with Multiple Job Applications.”
    Journal of Economic Theory 144: 445—71.



                                             37
[13] Gorry, A. 2011. “Experience and Worker Flows”. Manuscript, University of California
    at Santa Cruz.

[14] Hall, R., and P. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment of the Wage
    Bargain.” American Economic Review 98: 1653—74.

[15] Menzio, G. and S. Shi. 2010a. “Block Recursive Equilibria for Stochastic Models of
    Search on the Job.” Journal of Economic Theory. 145: 1453—94.

[16] Menzio, G. and S. Shi. 2010b. “Directed Search on the Job, Heterogeneity, and Aggre-
    gate Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 100: 327—32.

[17] Menzio, G. and S. Shi. 2011. “Eﬃcient Search on the Job and the Business Cycle.”
    Journal of Political Economy 119: 468—510.

[18] Moen, E. 1997. “Competitive Search Equilibrium.” Journal of Political Economy 105:
    694—723.

[19] Montgomery, J. 1991. Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and Interindustry Wage Diﬀeren-
    tials. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 163—79.

[20] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment.” Review Economic Studies 61: 397—415.

[21] Moscarini, G. 2003. “Skill and Luck in the Theory of Turnover.” Manuscript, Yale
    University.

[22] Nagypal, E. 2008. “Worker Reallocation over the Business Cycle: The Importance of
    Employer to Employer Transitions”. Manuscript, Northwestern University.

[23] Pissarides, C. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies
    and Real Wages.” American Economic Review 75: 676—90.

[24] Postel-Vinay F., and J. Robin. 2001. “The Distribution of Earnings in an Equilibrium
    Search Model with State-Dependent Oﬀers and Counter-Oﬀers.” International Eco-
    nomic Review 43: 989—1016.




                                           38
[25] Postel-Vinay F., and J. Robin. 2002. “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
    Employer Heterogeneity.” Econometrica 70: 2295—350.

[26] Postel-Vinay, F. and H. Turon. 2010. “On-the-job Search, Productivity Shocks, and the
    Individual Earnings Process”, International Economic Review, 51: 599-629.

[27] Topel, R. and M. Ward. 1992. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men”, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 107: 439-79.

[28] Shi, S. 2009. “Directed Search for Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts.” Econometrica,
    77: 561-584.

[29] Shimer, R. 1996. “Contracts in a Frictional Labor Market.” Manuscript, M.I.T.

[30] Shimer, R. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and Vacancies.” American
    Economic Review 95: 25—49.

[31] Shimer, R. 2007. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment”. Manuscript, Uni-
    versity of Chicago.

[32] Van den Berg, G., and G. Ridder. 1998. “An Empirical Equilibrium Search Model of
    the Labor Market.” 66: 1183—221.

[33] Zhao, M., and M. Faig. “Labor Market Cycles, Unemployment Insurance Eligibility,
    and Moral Hazard.” Review of Economic Dynamics 15: 41—56.




                                           39
                                               Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1: The unemployment value function UT and the employment value
function VT satisfy the equilibrium conditions (iii) and (iv) if and only if

                     UT (y, ψ) = b
                                 (
                                          zg(y),             if z = z1 , z2 , ...zN(z) ,   (A1)
                   VT (z, y, ψ) =         P 0            0
                                            z 0 z g(y)f(z ), if z = z0 .

Notice that neither UT nor VT depend on the aggregate state of the economy ψ. Hence, we
can write UT (y, ψ) = U (y) and VT (z, y, ψ) = VT (z, y).

The market tightness function θT satisfies the equilibrium condition (ii) if and only if
                             ⎧     µ                 ¶
                             ⎨ q−1          k
                                                       , if x ≤ VT (z0 , y) − k,
              θT (x, y, ψ) =         VT (z0 , y) − x                                     (A2)
                             ⎩
                               0,                        else.

Notice that θT (x, y, ψ) depends on the value promised to the workers, x, the worker-specific
productivity, y, but not on the aggregate state of the economy, ψ. Hence, we can write
θT (x, y, ψ) = θT (x, y).

The unemployment policy function xuT satisfies the equilibrium condition (iii) if and only if
it solves the search problem

                                RT (y, ψ) = max p(θT (x, y)) [x − UT (y)] .                (A3)
                                               x


From (A2), it follows that x = VT (z0 , y) − k/q(θT (x, y)) for all x ≤ VT (z0 , y) − k, and
θT (x, y) = 0 for all x > VT (z0 , y) − k. Using these equalities, we can rewrite the search
problem (A3) as

                 RT (y, ψ) = max −kθT (x, y) + p(θT (x, y)) [VT (z0 , y) − UT (y)] .       (A4)
                                   x


Since x enters (A4) only through θT , we can rewrite the problem as

                            RT (y, ψ) = max −kθ + p(θ) [VT (z0 , y) − UT (y)] .            (A5)
                                         θ≥0




The objective function in (A5) is strictly concave in θ and does not depend on the aggregate


                                                     40
state of the economy, ψ. Hence, (A5) admits a unique solution θuT which does not depend
on ψ, i.e. θuT (y, ψ) = θuT (y). Similarly, RT (y, ψ) = RT (y). Given θuT , xuT must be such that

                                                                k
                              xuT (y, ψ) = VT (z0 , y) −              ,   if θuT (y) > 0,
                                                           q(θuT (y))                           (A6)
                              xuT (y, ψ) ≥ VT (z0 , y) − k,               if θuT (y) = 0.

There are many policy function xuT that solve (A6). However, the only diﬀerence between
these policies is the x that the worker chooses when he finds it optimal to visit an empty
submarket. Hence, without loss in generality, we can specialize (A7) to

                                                                          k
                                      xuT (y, ψ) = VT (z0 , y) −               .                (A7)
                                                                    q(θuT (y))

Notice that xTu does not depend on the aggegate state of the economy ψ. Hence, we can
write xuT (y, ψ) = xuT (y).

The employment policy function xeT satisfies the equilibrium condition (iv) if and only if it
solves the search problem
                                                         £                    ¤
                          ST (z, y, ψ) = max p(θT (x, y)) x − Eẑ|z VT (ẑ, y) .                (A8)
                                               x


Using (A2), we can rewrite the search problem (A8) as
                                                   £                              ¤
                      ST (z, y, ψ) = max −kθ + p(θ) VT (z0 , y) − Eẑ|z VT (ẑ, y) .            (A9)
                                         θ≥0




The objective function in (A9) is strictly concave in θ, it depends on the worker-specific
productivity y and on the match-specific productivity z but not on the aggregate state of
the economy, ψ. Hence, (A9) admits a unique solution θeT which depends on y and z but not
on ψ, i.e. θeT (z, y, ψ) = θeT (z, y). Similarly, ST (z, y, ψ) = ST (z, y). Given θeT , we can recover
xeT from
                                                                          k
                                    xeT (z, y, ψ) = VT (z0 , y) −                 .            (A10)
                                                                    q(θeT (z, y))
Again, note that xTe depends on the worker-specific productivity, y, the match-specific
productivity, z, but not on the aggregate state of the economy, ψ. Hence, we can write
xeT (z, y, ψ) = xeT (z, y).

The employment policy function dT satisfies the equilibrium condition (iv) if and only if it

                                                           41
solves the separation problem
                                             £                               ¤
                        max dUT (y) + (1 − d) Eẑ|z VT (ẑ, y) + λe ST (z, y) .              (A11)
                        d∈[δ,1]


The objective function in (A11) is linear in d, it depends on the worker-specific productivity,
y, and on the match-specific productivity, z, but not on the aggregate state of the economy,
ψ. Hence, (A11) admits generally a unique solution dT which depends on y and z but not
on ψ, i.e. dT (z, y, ψ) = dT (z, y).

The unemployment value function UT −1 satisfies the equilibrium condition (iii) if and only if

                                  UT −1 (y, ψ) = b + β [UT (y) + λu RT (y)] .                (A12)

Similarly, the employment value function VT −1 satisfies the equilibrium condition (iv) if and
only if for z = z1 , z2 , ...zN(z) we have
                                   ©                  £                                 ¤ª
    VT −1 (z, y, ψ) = zg(y) + β max dUT (ŷ) + (1 − d) Eẑ|z VT (ẑ, ŷ) + λe ST (z, ŷ) ,   (A13)
                                      d∈[δ,1]


and for z = z0 we have
                           P                             P
         Vt (z0 , y, ψ) = α z VT −1 (z, y)f (z) + (1 − α) z zg(y)f (z)
                               ©                     £                              ¤ª       (A14)
               +(1 − α)β max dUT (ŷ) + (1 − d) Eẑ|z0 VT (ẑ, ŷ) + λe ST (z0 , ŷ) .
                            d∈[δ,1]


Notice that neither UT −1 nor VT −1 depend on the aggregate state of the economy ψ. Hence,
we can write UT −1 (y, ψ) = UT −1 (y) and VT −1 (z, y, ψ) = VT −1 (z, y).

By repeating the above steps, it is straightforward to establish that the remaining equilibrium
value and policy functions are uniquely determined by the equilibrium conditions (ii), (iii)
and (iv) and that they are all independent of the aggregate state of the economy ψ. Hence,
an equilibrium exists, is unique and it is block recursive. The proof of the eﬃciency of the
equilibrium follows the same steps as the proof of part (iii) of Theorem 2 in Menzio and Shi
(2011) and is therefore omitted.                ¥




                                                      42
.



            Table 1: Calibrated Parameters
                    Description                       Value
            β       discount factor                   .9967
             b      home productivity                 2.210
            k       vacancy cost                      23.03
            λu      oﬀ the job search                 1.000
            λe      on the job search                 .6613
            δ       exogenous destruction             .0002
            σ       scale match productivity          11.25
            φ       shape match productivity          3.607
            α       match productivity learning       .2620
            η       match productivity shock          .0094
            ζ       human capital function            4.436
            ψ       human capital function            .0112




                Table 2: Average Transitions
                                UE       EU            EE
           Data                .254     .005          .018
           Model               .261     .006          .015




                Table 3: Transitions by Tenure
    Tenure           EU data   EU model     EE data          EE model
    4 months          .168       .131        .101              .101
    8 months          .212       .172          .191            .219
    12 months         .237       .188          .258            .306
    2 years           .269       .205          .380            .433
    5 years           .301       .232          .539            .529




                                 43
      Table 4: Log Wages by Age
Age   Data     Model         Age    Data    Model
21    0.7266   0.8003        42    1.3405   1.2933
24    0.9180   1.0140        45    1.3615   1.3105
27    1.0462   1.1166        48    1.3165   1.3256
30    1.1444   1.1761        51    1.3632   1.3378
33    1.2022   1.2168        54    1.4082   1.3471
36    1.2848   1.2477        57    1.4082   1.3534
39    1.3209   1.2726        60    1.3274   1.3567




                        44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
