                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           VERTICAL VERSUS HORIZONTAL INCENTIVES IN EDUCATION:
                    EVIDENCE FROM RANDOMIZED TRIALS

                                      Roland G. Fryer, Jr
                                         Tanaya Devi
                                      Richard T. Holden

                                     Working Paper 17752
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w17752


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 2012, Revised October 2017




This paper has been previously circulated as "Aligning Student, Parent, and Teacher Incentives:
Evidence from Houston Public Schools" and "Multitasking, Learning, and Incentives: A
Cautionary Tale." Special thanks to Terry Grier, Kaya Henderson, and Michelle Rhee for their
support and leadership during these experiments. We are grateful to Philippe Aghion, Will
Dobbie, Bob Gibbons, Oliver Hart, Bengt Holmstrom, Lawrence Katz, Steven Levitt, Derek
Neal, Suraj Prasad, Andrei Shleifer, John van Reenen, and seminar participants at the 7th
Australasian Organizational Economics Workshop, Chicago Booth and the Harvard/MIT applied
theory seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. The editor and three anonymous referees
provided detailed comments that greatly improved the paper. Brad Allan, Matt Davis, Blake
Heller, and Hannah Ruebeck provided exceptional research assistance, project management and
implementation support. Financial support from the Broad Foundation, District of Columbia
Public Schools, and the Liemandt Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Holden acknowledges
ARC Future Fellowship FT130101159. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2012 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr, Tanaya Devi, and Richard T. Holden. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical versus Horizontal Incentives in Education: Evidence from Randomized Trials
Roland G. Fryer, Jr, Tanaya Devi, and Richard T. Holden
NBER Working Paper No. 17752
January 2012, Revised October 2017
JEL No. I20

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper describes randomized field experiments in eighty-four urban public schools in two
cities designed to understand the impact of aligned incentives on student achievement. In
Washington DC, incentives were “horizontal” – provided to one agent (students) for various
inputs in the education production function (i.e. attendance, behavior, interim assessments,
homework, and uniforms). In Houston, TX, incentives were “vertical” – provided to multiple
agents (parents, teachers, and students) for a single input (math objectives). On outcomes for
which we provided direct incentives, there were large and statistically significant effects from
both treatments. Horizontal incentives led to increases in math and reading test scores. Vertical
incentives increased math achievement, but resulted in decreased reading, science, and social
studies test scores. We argue that the data is consistent with agents perceiving academic
achievement in various subjects as substitutes, not complements, in education production.

Roland G. Fryer, Jr                             Richard T. Holden
Department of Economics                         Australian School of Business
Harvard University                              University of New South Wales
Littauer Center 208                             Room 470B
Cambridge, MA 02138                             Sydney, NSW, 2052, AUSTRALIA
and NBER                                        richard.holden@unsw.edu.au
rolandfryer@edlabs.harvard.edu

Tanaya Devi
Harvard University
tanayadevi01@fas.harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17752
1       Introduction

Principal-agent models have been used to analyze problems as diverse as executive compensation,
regulation, organizational design, entrepreneurship, and accounting.1 As Kenneth Arrow points
out, “economic theory in recent years has recognized that [principal-agent problems] are almost
universal in the economy at least as one significant component of almost all transactions” (Arrow,
1986).
    In the classic framework, a principal hires an agent to perform a task for her. The agent bears
a private cost of taking actions. The principal does not observe the agent’s action, rather, she
observes a noisy measure of it (such as profits). It is this measure that is contractible, and it is
assumed that the the agent’s cost of e↵ort function, both parties’ preferences, and the stochastic
mapping from actions to outputs are common knowledge between principal and agent. There have
been several important extensions to the basic model (e.g., multitasking and repeated contracting),
but it is standard to assume that both the principal and the agent know how e↵ort a↵ects output.2
Yet, in many applications, this assumption seems implausible.
    Consider a few examples. In executive management, assuming that principals and agents know
the stochastic mapping from inputs to output is equivalent to assuming a CEO knows how her
actions will impact the collective goals of the board of directors. This requires knowledge of
the intensity of di↵ering board-member preferences and how those preferences are aggregated–a
complex issue about which board-members themselves are likely not fully informed. In education,
these assumptions require that students (or their teachers) know the intricacies of the education
production function even when econometricians with large data sets and sophisticated statistical
techniques are not certain of its functional form.3
    To examine the implications of relaxing this assumption for the design and efficacy of incentive
schemes, we develop a simple 2 ⇥ 2 conceptual apparatus–two periods and two tasks–which is both
a simplification and extension of the pioneering work of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991).4 In each


    1
      For classic treatments see Mirrlees (1975), Holmstrom (1979), Grossman and Hart (1983).
    2
      See Beaudry (1994), Chade and Silvers (2002), Kaya (2010), and Fryer, Holden, and Lang (2012) for notable
exceptions.
    3
      Conversely, there are many applications (e.g. computer science, engineering or manufacturing) where the stan-
dard assumption seems applicable.
    4
      See Acemoglu, Kremer, and Mian (2008) for a similar 2x2 multitasking model of education production that
addresses incentives for teacher productivity.


                                                        2
period, a risk-neutral principal o↵ers a take-it-or-leave-it linear incentive contract to an agent,
who, upon accepting the contract, takes two non-verifiable actions which we label “e↵ort.” E↵ort
generates a benefit to the principal and is related to an observable (and contractable) performance
measure. We assume that an agent’s type augments their e↵ort in producing output: higher type
agents have higher returns to e↵ort than lower type agents, all else equal. An important assumption
in the model is that neither the principal nor the agent know the mapping from actions to output.
    Solving the model yields four primary predictions. First, incentives for a given task lead to an
increase in e↵ort on that task. Second, incentives for a given task lead to a decrease in e↵ort on
the non-incentivized task. Further, the decrease in e↵ort on the non-incentivized task can be more
or less for higher-type agents relative to lower-type agents, depending on how substitutable those
tasks are in the cost of e↵ort function. Our final, and perhaps most distinguishing, theoretical
result concerns the persistent e↵ects of changes in incentives due to agents updating about their
ability types. We show that when the agent’s true ability on a given task is sufficiently low, the
learning that comes from the provision of incentives is detrimental to the principal. In the absence
of incentives the agent would exert some baseline level of e↵ort due to intrinsic motivation and
hence learn “little” about her ability. Providing incentives induces more e↵ort than this and hence
more learning about their ability type. When agents discover that they are lower-ability than they
previously believed, they exert lower e↵ort in period two for any tasks on which there is a positive
incentive slope (as in the case of optimal incentives). Thus, the average impact of an incentive
contract depends on the distribution across ability types, among other things.
    To better understand these predictions in a real-world laboratory, we analyze new data from a
randomized field experiment conducted in fifty traditionally low-performing public schools in Hous-
ton, Texas during the 2010-2011 school year.5 We provided financial incentives to students, their
parents, and their teachers for fifth graders in twenty-five treatment schools. Students received $2
per math objective mastered in Accelerated Math (AM), a software program that provides practice
and assessment of leveled math objectives to complement a primary math curriculum. Students
practice AM objectives independently or with assistance on paper worksheets that are scored elec-
tronically and verify mastery by taking a computerized test independently at school. Parents also

   5
     The original impetus of the experiment was to study the impact of aligning parent, teacher, and student incentives
on student achievement. The two-year evaluation of the experiment led to puzzling findings inconsistent with existing
theory.


                                                          3
received $2 for each objective their child mastered and $20 per parent-teacher conference attended
to discuss their student’s math performance. Teachers earned $6 for each parent-teacher confer-
ence held and up to $10,100 in performance bonuses for student achievement on standardized tests.
In total, we distributed $51,358 to 46 teachers, $430,986 to 1,821 parents, and $393,038 to 1,734
students across the 25 treatment schools.
   The experimental results are consistent with the predictions of the model: the good, the bad,
and the ugly. Throughout the text we report Intent-to-Treat (ITT) estimates.6 On outcomes for
which we provided direct incentives, there were very large and statistically significant treatment
e↵ects. Students in treatment schools mastered 1.087 (0.031) standard deviations (hereafter          )
more math objectives than control students. On average, treatment parents attended almost twice
as many parent-teacher conferences as control group parents. And, perhaps most important, these
behaviors translated into a 0.081          (0.025) increase in math achievement on Texas’s statewide
student assessment.
   Now, the bad and the ugly: the impact of our incentive scheme on reading achievement (which
was not incentivized) is -0.084 (0.026) – o↵setting the positive math e↵ect. And, while higher-
achieving students (measured from pre-treatment test scores) seemed to gain from the experiment
on nearly every dimension, lower-achieving students had significant and lasting negative treatment
e↵ects.
   Higher-achieving students master 1.66            more objectives, have parents who attend two more
parent-teacher conferences, have 0.228          higher standardized math test scores and equal reading
scores relative to high-achieving students in control schools. Conversely, lower-achieving students
master 0.686 more objectives, have parents who attend 1.5 more parent-teacher conferences, have
equal math test scores and 0.165 lower reading scores. Put di↵erently, higher-achieving students
put in significant e↵ort and were rewarded for that e↵ort in math without a deleterious impact in
reading. Lower-achieving students also increased e↵ort on the incentivized task, but did not increase
their math scores and their reading scores decreased significantly. These data are compatible with
predictions (i) through (iii) of the model.
   Consistent with the fourth – and most stark – prediction of the model, one year after taking the
incentives away, higher-achieving students continue to do well, maintaining a positive treatment

   6
       Treatment on the Treated estimates can be found in Appendix Table 1.


                                                        4
e↵ect in math and a zero e↵ect in reading. Lower-achieving students, however, exhibit large and
statistically significant decreases in both math [-.223           (0.056)] and reading achievement [-.170
(0.080)] after the incentives are removed. We find an identical pattern on a separate low stakes,
nationally normed, exam. We argue that this is most likely explained by students learning about
their own ability and not decreases in intrinsic motivation. The treatment e↵ect on the latter,
gleaned from survey data, is small and statistically insignificant.
    The paper concludes with three robustness checks to our interpretation of the data. First,
we consider the extent to which sample attrition threatens our estimates by calculating lower
bound treatment e↵ects (Lee 2009). Second, we account for multiple hypothesis testing by using
Boneferonni corrected p-values to account for the family-wise error rate. Our findings are virtually
una↵ected in both cases.
    Third, and more generally, our principal-agent model predicts that if we observe that students
within the treatment group experience a “bad shock” – in the sense that they underperform on
the on the 2010-11 state math test relative to the amount of e↵ort they exerted in AM – they
will infer that they are low ability and perform worse (weakly) on their 2011-12 standardized tests
than students who experience a “good shock.” The data seem to support this hypothesis. Students
who experience “bad shocks” score 0.252 (0.055) lower than students whose test scores are best
predicted by their e↵ort in AM, while students who experience “good shocks” score 0.498 (0.061)
higher– a di↵erence of 0.75 between receiving a“bad shock” versus a “good shock” in 2010-11 on
students’ 2011-12 test scores.
    The contribution of this paper is three fold. First, we extend the classic multitask principal-
agent model to a multi period, multi-type, setting in which the agent does not know the production
function, but can learn it over time.7 Second, we demonstrate, using data from a randomized
experiment, that the e↵ort substitution problem is larger for low-ability types.8 Third, we show
   7
      See Fryer, Holden, and Lang (2012) for a single task model with similar features. Beaudry (1994) also studies
a setting where the principal knows the mapping from action to output but the agent does not. In his model there
are two types of agent and two possible output levels. Focusing on separating perfect Bayesian equilibria he shows
that high types receive a higher base wage and a lower bonus than low types. See also Chade and Silvers (2001)
and Kaya (2010). Our also relates to the so-called informed principal problem in mechanisms design first analyzed
by Myerson (1983) and Maskin and Tirole (1990, 1992). This large literature studies studies the equilibrium choice
of mechanisms by a mechanism designer who possess private information. The key di↵erence is that our focus is
on a specific environment with hidden actions after the contracting stage, rather than on characterizing the set of
equilibria in very general hidden information settings. One way to see this di↵erence is that in Maskin and Tirole
(1992) actions are observable and verifiable.
    8
      There is a growing literature on the use of financial incentives to increase student achievement in primary


                                                        5
that student incentives can have a persistent negative impact on student test scores using multiple
measures – a cautionary tale on the design of incentives when agents do not know the production
function.9
    The next section presents a multi-period, multitasking principal-agent model. Section 3 provides
details of the field experiment and its implementation. Section 4 describes the data collected,
research design, and econometric framework used in the analysis. Section 5 presents estimates of
the impact of the treatment on various test score and non-test score outcomes. The final section
concludes with a more speculative discussion of the implications of the model and experimental
data for the design of incentive schemes. There are three online appendices. Online A provides
technical proofs of the propositions detailed in Section 2, along with other mathematical details.
Online Appendix B is an implementation supplement that provides details on the timing of our
experimental roll-out and critical milestones reached. Online Appendix C is a data appendix
that provides details on how we construct our covariates and our samples from the school district
administrative files used in our analysis.


2     A Multi-period, Multitasking Model with Learning

2.1    Statement of the problem

In each of two periods, a risk-neutral principal o↵ers a take-it-or-leave-it incentive contract to
an agent, who, upon accepting the contract, takes two non-verifiable actions e1 and e2 . We will
typically refer to these actions as e↵ort. Each action takes values in R+ , and generates a benefit
on task i of ↵i ei to the principal and a performance measure mi = ↵i ei + ✏i where ✏i ⇠ N (0,                  2
                                                                                                                i)

and is independent of everything else. We will sometimes refer to the level of ↵i as the “type” of
the agent on task i.
    We assume that only the mi ’s are contractable, and the principal o↵ers a linear incentive
contract of the form s + b1 m1 + b2 m2 that the agent can accept or reject. If the agent accepts she
then makes her e↵ort choice(s), the performance measure is realized, and the principal pays the
agent according to the contract.
(Bettinger 2010, Fryer 2011a), secondary (Angrist and Lavy 2009, Fryer 2011a, Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton 2009),
and postsecondary (Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos 2009, Oosterbeek et al. 2010) education.
   9
     Psychologists often warn of the potential negative e↵ects of incentives due to intrinsic motivation. Our model
and data suggests a di↵erent mechanism: rational, but potentially incorrect, learning about one’s type.


                                                        6
   A key assumption of our model is that neither the principal nor the agent knows the true value
of ↵1 and ↵2 . Both have a prior probability probability distribution ↵i ⇠ N (↵i , µ2i ). We assume
that it is common knowledge between the principal and agent that ↵ does not change over time,
and the ✏i s are independent of each other and i.i.d. over time.
   We further assume that the agent has preferences that can be represented by a utility function
that exhibits constant absolute risk aversion (CARA):
                                                             ✓                                   ◆
                                                                   1
                                       u(x, e) =   exp       ⌘ x     (c1 e21 + c2 e22 )   e1 e2       ,
                                                                   2

where x is the monetary payment she receives. Let U be the certainty equivalent of the agent’s
outside option and normalize this to zero. Notice that the parameter                                  (which we assume to be
strictly positive) measures the degree of substitutability between the tasks.10
   Finally, we assume that the agent is myopic and unable to borrow, and we normalized the
common discount factor to 1.


2.2      Interpretation of the Model

We pause briefly to map the somewhat abstract formulation above into the experimental data we
will o↵er below. One can think of task 1 as math and task 2 as reading. E↵orts on these tasks is
e↵ort devoted to learning–of which homework is a significant component but the ✏ shocks represent
the noisy relationship between measured homework e↵ort and “true” learning. In the context
of the experiment we will think of e↵ort on task 1 (math) as doing the incentivized homework
problems. The outputs m1 and m2 are the (noisily) measured homework e↵ort on math and reading
respectively. The incentive slope b is the payment per measured homework problem (typically two
dollars); c1 and c2 reflect the marginal cost of e↵ort on math and reading homework respectively.


2.3      Theoretical Analysis

2.3.1      One Period and E↵ort Substitution

The one-period version of the model is very closely related to the classic Holmstrom-Milgrom multi-
task model (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991). The main di↵erence, captured by the parameter ↵ is

  10                     p
       In fact 0 <          c1 c2 .


                                                                   7
the uncertainty about agent ability. This changes the agent’s certainty equivalent and complicates
the analysis somewhat, but the main forces in Holmstrom-Milgrom remain. In the appendix we
provide a solution to the one-period case and show that the equilibrium e↵ort levels are given by

                                       ↵1 b1 c2 + ⌘b22 µ22   ↵ 2 b2
                             e⇤1 =                                             ,                 (1)
                                     c1 + ⌘b1 µ1 c2 + 2⌘b2 µ22
                                             2 2           2               2


and symmetrically for task 2.
   Now notice that when there is no uncertainty about ↵i (i.e. µ2i = 0), we get the classic
Holmstrom-Milgrom e↵ort function as equation (1) becomes


                                                 ↵ 1 b1 c 2   ↵ 2 b2
                                         e⇤1 =                  2
                                                                       ,                         (2)
                                                     c1 c2

and symmetrically for task 2. It is immediately clear that e⇤1 is increasing in b1 and decreasing in
b2 , and symmetrically for e⇤2 . We have thus proved:

Proposition 1 An increase in incentives bi on task i leads to an increase in agent e↵ort on task
i and a decrease in agent e↵ort on the other task j.

   We are also interested in how this e↵ort substitution problem di↵ers by agent type. A simple
way to think about type is to consider two agents drawn from di↵erent ability distributions, with
one having a higher mean than the other.
   Taking that approach, notice from equation (1) that

                             @ 2 e⇤1        b21 ⌘µ21 + c1 b22 ⌘µ22 c2 +            2
                                     =                                                     .
                            @b2 @↵2       2      b21 ⌘µ21 + c1 b22 ⌘µ22 + c2           2



This can be positive or negative, although for small uncertainty about ↵i (i.e. µ2i close to zero) it
is negative. We thus have

Proposition 2 For sufficiently small uncertainty about ability, an increase in incentives bi on task
i leads to a smaller decrease in agent e↵ort on task j for higher type agents than lower type agents,
but in general the sign is ambiguous.

It is therefore an empirical matter as to whether higher ability agents su↵er a smaller e↵ort substi-
tution problem. In fact, even when one sets bj equal to zero–as is the case in the experiment where

                                                       8
reading homework is not incentivized–the sign of the cross partial above is ambiguous.


2.3.2   Two Periods and Agent Updating

Now consider the two-period problem that the principal faces. She cannot change the agent’s
actions in period 1, but after period one the agent updates her belief about ↵1 and ↵2 based on
the outputs her actions generated. Thus, the choice of b1 and b2 in period 1 can a↵ect the agent’s
actions in period two through these beliefs. After taking actions (e11 , e12 ) (superscripts index the
period) and observing outputs (m11 , m12 ) the agent’s posterior belief about her ability on task i are:

                                              ✓       2
                                                              ◆          ✓                 ◆
                                                      i                          µ2i
                             E[↵|mi ] = ↵¯i                       + mi                         .    (3)
                                                  µ2i +   2
                                                          i                  µ2i +     2
                                                                                       i

   In forming her posterior, the agent puts some weight on her prior, and some weight on first
period output, which depends on her e↵ort and her true ability. This obviously bears strong
similarities to the classic career concerns model of Holmstrom (1982) in terms of the way the agent
updates about her ability (see also, very closely related, Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole (1999a,b)).
   There are two things to note. The first is the role that the signal-to-noise ratio plays in terms of
how much weight is placed on the prior and how much on first-period output. Second the agent’s
posterior is increasing in period 1 output, mi , which itself depends on ability ↵i and the intensity
of incentives bi . This will play a key role. The principal can increase expected output by using
more intense incentives in period 1. Thus, she can to some degree control how surprised the agent
is. This come at a cost, however, because the agent’s individual rationality constraint must be
satisfied, and that depends on the how costly e↵ort for the agent is, relative to her subjective belief
about her ability.
   To highlight the e↵ect of updating on incentive design we first consider the case where there is a
single task. Furthermore, we are interested in settings where the principal faces multiple agents but
is constrained to o↵er a single contract. To that end, suppose the principal faces a continuum of
agents who each perform a single task. The following result shows that incentives in period 1 lead
“higher type” agents to update positively about their ability and “lower type” agents to update
negatively, and that this leads to reduced e↵ort from the lower types.

Proposition 3 Consider a single contract with positive incentives on task 1 in period 1 o↵ered to


                                                          9
all agents. Then there exists a cuto↵ level of ability ↵
                                                       ˆ 1 such that for all types above this e↵ort on
task 1 in period 2 increases and for all types below this it decreases.

   When the agent’s true ability on task 1 is sufficiently low the learning that comes from the
provision of incentives leads to lower second-period e↵ort. In the absence of incentives the agent
would exert some baseline level of e↵ort due to intrinsic motivation (in our model literally zero)
and hence learn “little” (again, literally zero in our model) about her ability. Providing incentives
induces more e↵ort than this and hence more learning about ability. When agents discover that
they are lower-ability than they thought they exert lower e↵ort in period two for any tasks on
which there is a positive incentive slope (as in the case of optimal incentives). Indeed, the agent’s
first-order condition for the single task means that e↵ort in any period is given by

                                             E[↵1 ]b1 c2 + 2⌘22
                                     e⇤1 =                       .
                                             c1 + 2⌘12 c2 + 2⌘22

   The fact that there is a cuto↵ type, above which increased period-one incentives lead to a
positive update and below which incentives lead to a negative update stems from the fact that
more intense incentives in period 1 lead to a Blackwell-more-informative experiment about agent
ability. But Bayes Rule implies that the expectation of the conditional expectation of ability given
period 1 output must equal the unconditional expectation. Thus, when the experiment leads to
some agents updating positively about their ability, it must also lead (from an ex ante perspective)
to some agents updating negatively.
   It is natural to ask whether agents getting more precise information about their ability is a
good or bad thing from a welfare perspective. We will return to this issue in the conclusion, but a
basic starting point is that, due to moral hazard, the e↵ort levels are second-best e↵ort levels (i.e.
below the social optimum), and hence “low” types believing that they are higher ability then they
actually are may be beneficial.
   We also note that Proposition 3 was stated for a second period incentive intensity b equal to the
first period incentive intensity. After period 1 output is realized, however, the optimal incentive
scheme may change. Since the principal faces a continuum of agents, the law of large number implies
that the distribution of abilities observed by the principal is the same as the prior. However, any
given agent’s posterior belief about ability has lower variance and this would lead the optimal


                                                   10
incentive intensity to increase in period 2.


2.3.3   Two Periods, Two Tasks

We now consider learning in the two-task setting. When abilities on the tasks are statistically
independent for each agent the two-task case is simply a replication of the one-task case analyzed
above. The more interesting setting is where abilities are correlated. To that end, suppose that for
a given agent abilities on the two tasks are drawn from a joint normal distribution with variance-
covariance matrix:                             0               1
                                                   µ21   ⇢
                                          ⌃=@                  A.
                                                   ⇢     µ22

    A given agent’s updating about beliefs works as in the one task case above, other than that
they condition on both first-period outcomes m1 , m2 in forming posterior beliefs about ability on
both tasks. A straightforward consequence of this is that Proposition 3 extends to spillovers on the
second task in the following sense.

Proposition 4 Suppose period 1 incentives on task 1 are positive, period 1 incentives on task 2
are zero, and ⇢ is strictly positive. The there exists a “cuto↵ type” ↵
                                                                      ˆ 2 such that period two e↵ort
on task 2 is lower for all types ↵2 < ↵
                                      ˆ 2 and higher for all types ↵2 > ↵
                                                                        ˆ2.

    This “spillover e↵ect” implies that negative (positive) updating that comes from learning about
ability on one task a↵ects beliefs about ability on other tasks. The strength of this e↵ect, of course,
depends on how strongly correlated abilities are across types. But, it provides for the sobering
possibility that incentives for one subject may lead an agent to believe they are low ability in other
subjects.


3    Program Details

Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh largest school district in the nation
with 202,773 students. Eighty-eight percent of HISD students are black or Hispanic. Roughly 80
percent of all students are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch and roughly 30 percent of students
have limited English proficiency.



                                                   11
    Table 1 provides a bird’s-eye view of the demonstration project. To begin the field experiment,
we followed standard protocols. First, we garnered support from the district superintendent and
other key district personnel. Following their approval, a letter was sent to seventy-one elementary
school principals who had the lowest math performance in the school district in the previous year.
In August 2010, we met with interested principals to discuss the details of the experiment and
provided a five day window for schools to opt into the randomization. Schools that signed up to
participate serve as the basis for our matched-pair randomization. All randomization was done
at the school level. Prior to the randomization, all teachers in the experimental group signed
a non-binding commitment form vowing to use the Accelerated Math curriculum to supplement
and complement their regular math instruction and indicating their intention to give all students
a chance to master Accelerated Math objectives on a regular basis regardless of their treatment
assignment.11 After treatment and control schools were chosen, treatment schools were alerted
that they would participate in the incentive program. Control schools were informed that they
were not chosen, but they would still receive the Accelerated Math software – just not the financial
incentives.12 HISD decided that students and parents at selected schools would be automatically
enrolled in the program. Parents could choose not to participate and return a signed opt-out form
at any point during the school year.13 HISD also decided that students and parents were required
to participate jointly: students could not participate without their parents and vice versa. Students
and parents received their first incentive payments on October 20, 2010 and their last incentive
payment on June 1, 2011; teachers received incentives with their regular paychecks.14
    Table 2 describes di↵erences between schools that signed up to participate and other elementary
schools in HISD with at least one fifth grade class across a set of covariates. Experimental schools
have a higher concentration of minority students and teachers with low-value added. All other
covariates are statistically similar.


  11
      This was the strongest compliance mechanism that the Harvard Institutional Review Board would allow for
this experiment. Teachers whose data revealed that they were not using the program were targeted with reminders
to use the curriculum to supplement and complement their normal classroom instruction. All such directives were
non-binding and did not a↵ect district performance assessments or bonuses.
   12
      Schools varied in how they provided computer access to students (e.g. some schools had laptop carts, others
had desktops in each classroom, and others had shared computer labs), but there was no known systematic variation
between treatment and control.
   13
      Less than 1%, 2 out of 1695 parents opted out of the program.
   14
      In the few cases in which parents were school district employees, we paid them separately from their paycheck.


                                                        12
A. Students
    Students begin the program year by taking an initial diagnostic assessment to measure mastery
of math concepts, after which AM creates customized practice assignments that focus specifically
on areas of weakness. Teachers assign these customized practice sheets, and students are then
able to print the assignments and take them home to work on (with or without their parents).
Each assignment has six questions, and students must answer at least five questions correctly to
receive credit.15 After students scan their completed assignments into AM, the assignments are
graded electronically. Teachers then administer an AM test that serves as the basis for potential
rewards; students are given credit for official mastery by answering at least four out of five questions
correctly. Students earned $2 for every objective mastered in this way. Students who mastered
200 objectives were declared “Math Stars” and received a $100 completion bonus with a special
certificate.16

B. Parents
    Parents of children at treatment schools earned up to $160 for attending eight parent-teacher
review sessions ($20/each) in which teachers presented student progress using Accelerated Math
Progress Monitoring dashboards. Appendix Figure 1 provides a typical example. Parents and
teachers were both required to sign and submit the student progress dashboards and submit them
to their school’s Math Stars coordinator in order to receive credit. Additionally, parents earned $2
for their child’s mastery of each AM curriculum objective, so long as they attended at least one
conference with their child’s teacher. This requirement also applied retroactively: if a parent first

   15
      Accelerated Math does not have a set scope and sequence that must be followed. While the adaptive assessment
assigns a set of objectives for a student to work on, the student can work on these lessons in any order they choose,
and teachers can assign additional objectives that were not initially assigned through the adaptive assessment.
   16
      Experimental estimates of AM’s treatment e↵ect on independent, nationally-normed assessments have shown
no statistically significant evidence that AM enhances math achievement. Ysseldyke and Bolt (2007) randomly
assign elementary and middle school classes to receive access to the Accelerated Math curriculum. They find that
treatment classes do not outperform control classes in terms of math achievement on the TerraNova, a popular
nationally-normed assessment. Lambert and Algozzine (2009) also randomly assign classes of students to receive
access to the AM curriculum to generate causal estimates of the impact of the program on math achievement in
elementary and middle school classrooms (N=36 elementary classrooms, N=46 middle school classrooms, divided
evenly between treatment and control). Lambert and Algozzine do not find any statistically significant di↵erences
between treatment and control students in math achievement as measured by the TerraNova assessment. Nunnery
and Ross (2007) use a quasi-experimental design to compare student performance in nine Texas elementary schools
and two Texas middle schools who implemented the full School Renaissance Program (including Accelerated Math)
to nine comparison schools designated by the Texas Education Agency as demographically similar. Once the study’s
results were adjusted to account for clustering, Nunnery and Ross’s (2007) analysis reveals no statistically significant
evidence of improved math performance for elementary or middle school students.


                                                          13
attended a conference during the final pay period, the parent would receive a lump sum of $2 for
each objective mastered by their child to date. Parents were not instructed on how to help their
children complete math worksheets.

C. Teachers
    Fifth grade math teachers at treatment schools received $6 for each academic conference held
with a parent in addition to being eligible for monetary bonuses through the HISD ASPIRE pro-
gram, which rewards teachers and principals for improved student achievement. Each treatment
school also appointed a Math Stars coordinator responsible for collecting parent/teacher confer-
ence verification forms and organizing the distribution of student reward certificates, among other
duties. Coordinators received an individual stipend of $500, which was not tied to performance.
    Over the length of the program the average student received $226.67 with a total of $393,038
distributed to students. The average parent received $236.68 with a total of $430,986 distributed
to parents. The average teacher received $1,116.48 with a total of $51,358 distributed to teachers.
Incentives payments totaled $875,382.
    One may worry that the experiment has incentives for teachers, parents, and students whereas
the model has a single agent. Note: if parent and teacher e↵ort has a non-negative e↵ect on
student e↵ort, then this is isormorphic to our single agent model with more intense incentives and
analogous to the monitoring intensity principle in Milgrom and Roberts (1992). Given the lack of
impact on direct outcomes in many previous experiments using financial incentives, we chose to
align incentives (Angrist and Lavy 2009, Fryer 2011a) to ensure a strong “first stage.”


4    Data, Research Design, and Econometric Model

A. Data
    We collected both administrative and survey data from treatment and control schools. The
administrative data includes first and last name, birth date, address, race, gender, free lunch
eligibility, behavioral incidents, attendance, special education status, limited English proficiency
(LEP) status, and four measures of student achievement: TAKS math and ELA and STAAR math
and reading assessments. Toward the end of the treatment year, the TAKS assessments were
administered between April 12 and April 23, 2011, with a retake administered from May 23 to


                                                14
May 25, 2011. At the end of the follwing year, the STAAR assessments were administered from
April 24 to April 25, 2012. We use administrative data from 2008-09 and 2009-10 (pre-treatment)
to construct baseline controls with 2010-11(treatment) and 2011-12 (post-treatment) data for two
outcome measures.
    Our initial set of outcome variables are the direct outcomes that we provided incentives for:
mastering math objectives via Accelerated Math and attending parent-teacher conferences. We
also examine a set of indirect outcomes that were not directly incentivized, including TAKS math
and ELA scale scores, Stanford 10 math and ELA scale scores, and several survey outcomes.
    We use a parsimonious set of controls to aid in precision and to correct for any potential
imbalance between treatment and control. The most important controls are reading and math
achievement test scores from the previous two years and their squares, which we include in all
regressions. Previous years’ test scores are available for most students who were in the district in
previous years (see Table 3 for exact percentages of experimental group students with valid test
scores from previous years). We also include an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if
a student is missing a test score from a previous year and zero otherwise.
    Other individual-level controls include a mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive set of
race dummies pulled from each school district’s administrative files, indicators for free lunch eligi-
bility, special education status, and whether a student demonstrates limited English proficiency.17
Special education and LEP status are determined by HISD Special Education Services and the
HISD Language Proficiency Assessment Committee.
    We also construct three school-level control variables: percent of student body that is black,
percent Hispanic, and percent free lunch eligible. For school-level variables, we construct demo-
graphic variables for every 5th grade student in the district enrollment file in the experimental year
and then take the mean value of these variables for each school. We assign each student who was
present in an experimental school before October 1 to the first school they are registered with in
the Accelerated Math database. Outside the experimental group, we assign each student to the

   17
      A student is income-eligible for free lunch if her family income is below 130 percent of the federal poverty
guidelines, or categorically eligible if (1) the student’s household receives assistance under the Food Stamp Program,
the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR), or the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program (TANF); (2) the student was enrolled in Head Start on the basis of meeting that program’s low-income
criteria; (3) the student is homeless; (4) the student is a migrant child; or (5) the student is a runaway child receiving
assistance from a program under the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act and is identified by the local educational
liaison.


                                                           15
first school they attend according to the HISD attendance files, since we are unable to determine
exactly when they begin attending school in HISD. We construct the school-level variables based
on these school assignments.
   To supplement each district’s administrative data, we administered a survey to all parents and
students in treatment and control schools.18 The data from the student survey includes information
about time use, spending habits, parental involvement, attitudes toward learning, perceptions about
the value of education, behavior in school, and Ryan’s (1982) Intrinsic Motivation Inventory. The
parent survey includes basic demographics such as parental education and family structure as well
as questions about time use, parental involvement, and expectations.
   To aid in survey administration, incentives were o↵ered at the teacher level for percentages of
student and parent surveys completed. Teachers in treatment and control schools were eligible
to receive rewards according to the number of students they taught: teachers with between 1-20
students could earn $250, while teachers with 100 or more students could earn $500 (with fifty
dollar gradations in between). Teachers only received their rewards if at least ninety percent of the
student surveys and at least seventy-five percent of parent surveys were completed.
   In all, 93.4 percent of student surveys and 82.8 percent of parent surveys were returned in
treatment schools; 83.4 percent of student surveys and 63.3 percent of parents surveys were returned
in control schools. These response rates are relatively high compared to response rates in similar
survey administrations in urban environments (Parks et al. 2003, Guite et al. 2006, Fryer 2010).
   Table 3 provides descriptive statistics of all HISD 5th grade students as well as those in our
experimental group, subdivided into treatment and control. The first column provides the mean,
standard deviation, and number of observations for each variable used in our analysis for all HISD
5th grade students. The second column provides the mean, standard deviation, and number of
observations for the same set of variables for treatment schools. The third column provides identical
data for control schools. The fourth column displays the p-values from a t-test of whether treatment
and control means are statistically equivalent. See Online Appendix C for details on how each
variable was constructed.
   Within the experimental group, treatment and control students are fairly balanced, although
treatment schools have more black students and fewer white, Asian, LEP, and gifted and talented

  18
       Parent surveys were available in English and Spanish.


                                                          16
students. Treatment schools also have lower previous year scores in TAKS math. A joint significance
test yields a p-value of 0.643, suggesting that the randomization is collectively balanced along the
observable dimensions we consider.
    To complement these data, Appendix Figure 2 shows the geographic distribution of treatment
and control schools, as well as census tract poverty rates. These maps confirm that our treatment
and control schools are similarly distributed across space and are more likely to be in higher poverty
areas of a city.

B. Research Design
    We use a matched-pair randomization procedure similar to those recommended by Imai et
al. (2009) and Greevy et al. (2004) to partition the set of interested schools into treatment and
control.19 Recall, we invited seventy-one schools to sign up for the randomization. Fifty-nine schools
chose to sign up. To conserve costs, we eliminated the nine schools with the largest enrollment
among the 59 eligible schools that were interested in participating, leaving 50 schools from which
to construct 25 matched pairs.
    To increase the likelihood that our control and treatment groups were balanced on a variable
that was correlated with our outcomes of interest, we used past standardized test scores to construct
our matched pairs. First, we ordered the full set of 50 schools by the sum of their mean reading
and math test scores in the previous year. Then we designated every two schools from this ordered
list as a “matched pair” and randomly drew one member of the matched pair into the treatment
group and one into the control group.

C. Econometric model
    To estimate the causal impact of providing financial incentives on outcomes, we estimate Intent-
To-Treat (ITT) e↵ects, i.e., di↵erences between treatment and control group means. Let Zs be an
indicator for assignment to treatment, let Xi be a vector of baseline covariates measured at the
individual level, and let Xs denote school-level variables; Xi and Xs comprise our parsimonious

  19
     There is an active debate on which randomization procedures have the best properties. Imbens (2011) summarizes
a series of claims made in the literature and shows that both stratified randomization and matched-pairs can increase
power in small samples. Simulation evidence presented in Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) supports these findings,
though for large samples there is little gain from di↵erent methods of randomization over a pure single draw. Imai et
al. (2009) derive properties of matched-pair cluster randomization estimators and demonstrate large efficiency gains
relative to pure simple cluster randomization.


                                                         17
set of controls. Moreover, let       m   denote a mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive set of
matched pair indicators. The ITT e↵ect, ⇡, is estimated from the equation below:


                         achievementi,m = ↵ + Xi + Xs + Zs ⇡ +               m✓   + "i,m                      (4)


     The ITT is an average of the causal e↵ects for students in schools that were randomly selected
for treatment at the beginning of the year and students in schools that signed up for treatment but
were not chosen. In other words, ITT provides an estimate of the impact of being o↵ered a chance
to participate in the experiment. All student mobility between schools after random assignment is
ignored. We only include students who were in treatment and control schools as of October 1 in
the year of treatment.20 In HISD, school began August 23, 2010; the first student payments were
distributed October 20, 2010.


5        Empirical Analysis

5.1      Direct Outcomes

Table 4A includes ITT estimates on outcomes for which we provided incentives – AM objectives
mastered and parent-teacher conferences attended. Objectives mastered are measured in                      units.
Results with and without our parsimonious set of controls are presented in columns (1) and (2),
respectively. In all cases, we include matched pair fixed e↵ects. Standard errors are in parenthesis
below each estimate. To streamline the presentation of the experimental results, we focus the dis-
cussion in the text on the regressions which include our parsimonious set of controls. All qualitative
results are the same in the regressions without controls.
     The impact of the financial incentive treatment is statistically significant across both of the
direct outcomes we explore. The ITT estimate of the e↵ect of incentives on objectives mastered
in AM is 1.087 (0.031). Treatment parents attended 1.572 (0.099) more parent conferences. Put
di↵erently, our aligned incentive scheme caused a 125% increase in the number of AM objectives
mastered and an 87% increase in the number of parent-teacher conferences attended in treatment


    20
     This is due to a limitation of the attendance data files provided by HISD. Accelerated Math registration data
confirms students who were present in experimental schools from the beginning of treatment. Using first school
attended from the HISD attendance files or October 1 school does not alter the results.


                                                       18
versus control schools.21
    In addition, we were able to calculate the price elasticity of demand for math objectives by
examining the change in AM objectives mastered before and after two unexpected price shocks
as seen in Figure 1. After five months of rewarding math objective mastery at a rate of $2 per
objective, we (without prompt or advance warning) raised the reward for an objective mastered
in AM to $4 for four weeks starting in mid-February and then from $2 to $6 for one week at
the beginning of May. Treatment students responded by increasing their productivity; the rate
of objective mastery increased from 2.05 objectives per week at the price of $2 per objective up
to 3.52 objectives per week at $4 per objective, and 5.80 objectives per week at $6 per objective.
Taken at face value, this implies a price elasticity of demand of 0.87.
    Taken together, the evidence on the number of objectives mastered and parent conferences
attended in treatment versus control schools as well as the response to unexpected price shocks
implies that our incentive scheme significantly influenced student and parent behavior.


5.2    Indirect Outcomes

In this section, we investigate a series of indirect outcomes – standardized test scores, student
investment, parental involvement, attendance, and intrinsic motivation – that are correlated with
the outcomes for which we provided incentives. Theoretically, due to misalignment, moral hazard,
or psychological factors, the e↵ects of our incentive scheme on this set of outcomes is ambiguous.
For these, and other reasons, Kerr (1975) notoriously referred to investigating impacts on indirect
outcomes as “the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B.” Still, given the correlation between
outcomes such as standardized test scores and income, health, and the likelihood of incarceration,
they may be more aligned with the outcomes of ultimate interest than our direct outcomes (Neal
and Johnson 1996, Fryer 2011b).


A. Student Test Scores
    Panel A of Table 4B presents estimates of the e↵ect of incentives on testing outcomes for which
students were not given incentives. These outcomes include Texas’ state-mandated standardized
   21
      The average control school actively mastered objectives during 8.16 of 9 payment periods. One school never
began implementing the program and six stopped utilizing the program at some point during the year. Of these six,
one ceased active use during February, four stopped during March, and one stopped during April. All twenty-five
treatment schools actively mastered objectives throughout the duration of the program.


                                                       19
test (TAKS). The math and ELA assessments are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one across the city sample. Estimates without and with our parsimonious set of controls
are presented in columns (1) and (2), respectively. As before, standard errors are in parentheses
below each estimate.
    ITT estimates reveal that treatment students outperform control students by 0.081 (.025) in
TAKS math and underperform in TAKS ELA by 0.077 (.027).22

B. Student and Parent Engagement
    The survey results reported in Panel B of Table 4B report measures of student and parent
engagement. Students were asked a variety of survey questions including “Did your parents check
whether you had done your homework more this year or last year?” and “What subject do you
like more, math or reading?” Parents were also asked a variety of questions including “Do you ask
your 5th grade student more often about how he/she is doing in Math class or Reading class?”
Answers to these questions are coded as binary measures and treatment e↵ects are reported as a
percentage change. Details on variable construction from survey responses are outlined in Online
Appendix C.
    Treatment parents were 7.1 (2.7) percentage points more likely, relative to the control mean of
31 percent, to report that they checked their student’s homework more during the treatment year
than in the pre-treatment year. Moreover, the increased parental investment was skewed heavily
towards math. Treatment parents were 12.2 (2.8) percentage points more likely to ask more about
math than reading homework, and treated students were 11.2 (2.3) percentage points more likely
to report a preference for math over reading.

C. Attendance and Intrinsic Motivation
  22
     It may be surprising that the impact on math scores is not larger, given the increase in e↵ort on mastering
math objectives that were correlated with the Texas state test. One potential explanation is that the objectives
in AM are not aligned with those assessed on TAKS. Using Accelerated Math’s alignment map, we found that of
the 152 objectives in the AM Texas 5th grade library, only 105 (69.1 percent) align with any Texas state math
standards (TEKS). Texas state standard alignments are available at http://www.renlearn.com/fundingcenter/
statestandardalignments/texas.aspx Furthermore, matching the AM curriculum to Texas Essential Knowledge
and Skills (TEKS) standards in the six sections of the TAKS math assessment reveals the AM curriculum to be
heavily unbalanced; 91 out of the 105 items are aligned with only 3 sections of the TAKS assessment (1, 4, and
6). The treatment e↵ect on the aligned sections is modest in size and statistically significant, 0.137 (.028). The
treatment e↵ect on the remaining (non-aligned) portions of the test is small and statistically insignificant, 0.026
(.030). Not shown in tabular form. Another, non-competing, explanation is that students substituted e↵ort from
another activity that was important for increasing test scores (i.e. paying attention in class) to mastering math
objectives.


                                                        20
    The first row of Panel C in Table 4 reports results for student attendance – a proxy for e↵ort.
The treatment e↵ect on attendance rates are 0.050 (0.027) higher than their control counterparts.
This amounts to treatment students attending roughly one half of an extra day of school per year.
    One of the major criticisms of the use of incentives to boost student achievement is that the
incentives may destroy a student’s “love of learning.” In other words, providing extrinsic rewards
can crowd out intrinsic motivation in some situations. There is a debate in social psychology on
this issue – see Cameron and Pierce (1994) for a meta-analysis.
    To measure the impact of our incentive experiments on intrinsic motivation, we administered
the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, developed by Ryan (1982), to students in our experimental
groups.23 The instrument assesses participants’ interest/enjoyment, perceived competence, e↵ort,
value/usefulness, pressure and tension, and perceived choice while performing a given activity.
There is a subscale score for each of those six categories. We only include the interest/enjoyment
subscale in our surveys, as it is considered the self-report measure of intrinsic motivation. To get
an overall intrinsic motivation score, we sum the values for these statements (reversing the sign on
statements where stronger responses indicate less intrinsic motivation). Only students with valid
responses to all statements are included in our analysis of the overall score, as non-response may
be confused with low intrinsic motivation.
    The final row of Table 4B provides estimates of the impact of our incentive program on the
overall intrinsic motivation score of students in our experimental group. The ITT e↵ect of incentives
on intrinsic motivation is almost exactly zero – 0.006 (0.06).


5.3     Heterogenous Treatment E↵ects

Table 5 investigates treatment e↵ects on number of objectives mastered and state test scores for a
set of predetermined subsamples – gender, race/ethnicity, previous year’s test score, and whether
a student is eligible for free or reduced price lunch.24
    All regressions include our parsimonious set of controls. Gender is divided into two categories
and race/ethnicity is divided into five categories: non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic,
non-Hispanic Asian and non-Hispanic other race. We only include a racial/ethnic category in

   23
     The inventory has been used in several experiments related to intrinsic motivation and self-regulation [e.g., Ryan,
Koestner, and Deci (1991) and Deci et al. (1994)].
  24
     All other outcomes are in Appendix Table 2.


                                                          21
our analysis if there are at least one hundred students from that racial/ethnic category in our
experimental group; only black and Hispanic subgroups meet this criteria. Eligibility for free lunch
is used as an income proxy. We also partition students into quintiles according to their baseline
TAKS math scores and report treatment e↵ects for the top and bottom quintiles.
   The treatment e↵ect on objectives mastered is statistically larger for girls (1.159 ) than for
boys (1.012 ). Hispanic students made the strongest gains on math tests. They also mastered
more objectives while their parents attended fewer conferences. Students eligible for free lunch
showed statistically larger and statistically significant gains on TAKS Math (0.144 ). They also
lost less ground in reading; however, the inter-group di↵erences are only marginally significant in
reading.
   The most noticeable and robust di↵erences occur when we stratify on previous year test scores.
Consistent with Proposition 2 from Section 2, high-ability students gain most from the experiment,
both in comparison to high-ability students in control schools or low-ability students in treatment
schools. For instance, high-ability students master 1.66 (.117) more objectives, have parents who
attend two more parent-teacher conferences, have 0.228 (.082) higher standardized math test scores
and equal reading scores relative to high-ability students in control schools (see Appendix Table 2
for a larger set of subgroup results). Conversely, low-ability students master 0.686 (0.047) more
objectives, but score 0.165 (0.063) lower in reading and have similar math test scores compared
with low-ability students in control schools. In other words, the e↵ort substitution problem is less
for high ability students.


5.4   Post-Treatment Outcomes

The treatment ended with a final payment to students in June of 2011. A full year after the
experiment, we collected data on post-treatment test scores; math and reading state tests as well
as Stanford 10 for treatment and control students during late spring of their sixth grade year.
   Recall that in the model, low-ability and high-ability students who are induced to put forth
additional e↵ort on a given task learn their type when they observe the results of their additional
exertion of e↵ort and that high-ability agents have lower cost of displaced e↵ort. If agents base
future e↵ort on their beliefs about their ability-type and update their beliefs in this way, the
provision of incentives could lead low-ability agents to exert less e↵ort in the future, while high-


                                                22
ability agents increase their expected return to e↵ort uopn learning they are a high-ability agent
and exert more e↵ort in the future (see Proposition 4).
   Table 6 examines lasting treatment e↵ects on standardized test scores and attendance in the
year following treatment. Column 1 displays the treatment e↵ects that persisted one full year after
all financial incentives were withdrawn for the full group of students with valid 2011-12 test scores.
Columns 2 and 3 display the same results for the subgroups of students in the top and bottom
quintiles of pre-treatment math test scores.
   In columns 5 and 6, we restrict our sample to treatment students only and regressed year 1 state
test scores on objectives mastered (a measure of e↵ort exerted in math) and predicted the residuals
for each student. These residuals capture the di↵erence between a student’s expected score on the
state test (based upon e↵ort, as measured by objectives mastered) and her actual score. Students
were divided into quintiles based upon the size of this residual, with students whose residual is the
most negative in the bottom quintile or, “bad shock” group and students with the largest residuals
in the top quintile or, “good shock” group. Columns 5 and 6 report the coefficient on a dummy for
being in the top or bottom quintile in a regression of second year test scores on residual quintiles
and our standard set of controls, including two years of lagged test scores. Point estimates are
relative to the median quintile, which is omitted from the regression.
   While post-treatment e↵ects in the full sample are statistically insignificant in math (0.042 (0.029),
negative e↵ects linger in reading (-0.071 (.029)). More interestingly, the subgroups reveal stark
di↵erences between higher and lower achieving students, as well as di↵erences based upon what
students may have learned about their ability from their first year e↵ort and resulting test scores.
The negative e↵ect on the reading scores of lower-achieving students persist, as lower-achieving
treatment students score 0.170 (.080) lower than lower-achieving control students, and there are
significant spillovers into math achievement, where lower-achieving treatment students are outper-
formed by 0.223 (.056). Conversely, higher-achieving treatment students outperform their control
group peers by 0.135 (.080) in math and 0.103 (.086) in reading.




                                                 23
6     Robustness Checks

In this section, we explore the robustness of our results to two potential threats to validity and
conclude by exploring further theoretical predictions.


6.1   Attrition and Bounding

A potential worry is that our estimates use the sample of students for which we have state test
scores immediately following treatment. If students in treatment schools and control schools have
di↵erent rates of selection into this sample, our results may be biased. A simple test for selection
bias is to investigate the impact of the treatment o↵er on the probability of having valid test
score data. The results of this test are reported in Table 7. In the treatment year, there were
no significant di↵erences between treatment and control students on the likelihood of being in the
sample. In the post-treatment year, however, treatment students are 3% less likely to have a valid
math or reading test score. Non-treated parents were significantly less likely to return our survey.
    To address the potential issues that arise with di↵erential attrition, we provide bounds on
our estimates. Consistent with Lee (2009), our bounding method, calculated separately for each
outcome, drops the highest-achieving lottery winners until response rates are equal across treatment
and control. If n is the excess number of treatment responses, we drop the n treated students
with the most favorable values for each variable. These bounds therefore approximate a worst-case
scenario, that is, what we would see if the excess treatment respondents were the “best” respondents
on each measure. This approach is almost certainly too conservative.
    Yet, as Table 8 demonstrates, it does not significantly alter our main results. In all cases,
statistical significance is maintained and in two of the six cases are the estimated treatment e↵ects
statistically di↵erent than the bounded estimates. Math and ELA estimated – due to the fact that
there was only a 3% di↵erence between treatment and control – does not alter the results. The
impacts on parent conferences attended change considerably, but are still statistically significant.


6.2   Family-Wise Error Correction

A second concern is that we are detecting false positives due to multiple hypothesis-testing. To
address this Appendix Table 3 displays Bonferonni corrected p-values for our the main hypotheses.



                                                 24
The Bonferonni is the simplest and most conservative method to control the Family-Wise Error
Rate.
    Column (1) displays the p-value for our regression for the six main hypotheses presented in the
paper and column (2) presents Bonferonni corrected p-values. Five out of the six null hypotheses
continue to be rejected at the 5% level and the remaining on is rejected at the 10% level. In other
words, the results seem robust to the most conservative correction for multiple hypothesis tests.


6.3     Further Theoretical Predictions


A. Learning
    Consistent with the model, we observe that students within the treatment group who experience
a “bad shock” in the sense that they underperform on the on the 2010-11 state math test relative
to the amount of e↵ort they exerted in AM perform far worse on their 2011-12 standardized tests
than students who experience “good shock” in their 2010-11 state math test scores relative to the
amount of e↵ort they exerted in AM. Students who experience “bad shocks” score 0.252 (0.055)
lower than students whose test scores are best predicted by their e↵ort in AM, while students who
experience “good shocks” score 0.498 (0.061) higher– a stark di↵erence of 0.75 between receiving
a“bad shock” versus a “good shock” in 2010-11 on students’ 2011-12 test scores.

B. Discouragement Effects
    An alternative interpretation of our findings is that individuals in the treatment group who
did well were “encouraged” by their results (and potentially their parents and teachers based on
their results) and students who did not do well were “discouraged.” Put di↵erently, the underlying
mechanism may not be rational learning about ability, but rather discouragement about the link
between e↵ort and output. Unfortunately, our experiment was not implemented in a way that
allows one to distinguish between students learning about their ability and student learning about
the production function.


7     Conclusion

Individuals, even school children, respond to incentives. How we design those incentives to ellicit
desirable short and longer term responses is far less clear. We demonstrate these complexities with

                                                25
a model and a field experiment.
    The model has four predictions. First, incentives for a given task lead to an increase in e↵ort
on that task. Second, incentives for a given task lead to a decrease in e↵ort on the non-incentivized
task. Further, the decrease in e↵ort on the non-incentivized task can be more or less for higher-type
agents relative to lower-type agents, depending on how substitutable those tasks are in the cost
of e↵ort function. Fourth, when the agent’s true ability on a given task is sufficiently low, the
learning that comes from the provision of incentives is detrimental to the principal. In the absence
of incentives the agent would exert some baseline level of e↵ort due to intrinsic motivation and
hence learn “little” about her ability. Providing incentives induces more e↵ort than this and hence
more learning about their ability type. When agents discover that they are lower-ability than they
previously believed, they exert lower e↵ort in period two for any tasks on which there is a positive
incentive slope (as in the case of optimal incentives).
    To better understand these predictions in a real-world laboratory, we analyze new data from
a randomized field experiment conducted in fifty traditionally low-performing public schools in
Houston, Texas during the 2010-2011 school year. We argue that the data from the field experiment
are consistent with the model, though other explanations are possible. Higher-achieving students
master more objectives, have parents who attend more parent-teacher conferences, have higher
standardized math test scores and equal reading scores relative to high-achieving students in non-
treated schools. Conversely, lower-achieving students master more objectives, have parents who
attend more parent-teacher conferences, have equal math test scores and lower reading scores. Put
di↵erently, higher-achieving students put in significant e↵ort and were rewarded for that e↵ort in
math without a deleterious impact in reading. Lower-achieving students also increased e↵ort on
the incentivized task, but did not increase their math scores and their reading scores decreased
significantly.
    Consistent with the fourth prediction of the model, higher-achieving students continue to do
well, maintaining a positive treatment e↵ect in math and a zero e↵ect in reading, one year after
the incentives are taken away. Lower-achieving students, however, exhibit large and statistically
significant decreases in both math and reading achievement after the incentives are removed. We
argue that this is most likely explained by students learning about their own ability though we
cannot rule out the possibility that they updated their priors on the production function in a way


                                                 26
that might explain these results.
   Finally, it is worth pausing to consider the welfare implications of learning one’s true ability
under this model. The principal’s goal is to increase e↵ort among the agents. Agents, however,
weight the cost of e↵ort with the benefit of that e↵ort. Reduced e↵ort on the part of the agent as
an optimal response to new information may be welfare enhancing. Conversely, in a multitasking
framework, where abilities across tasks are not perfectly correlated, learning one’s ability on task A
may cause students to underinvest in task B. Moreover, if abilities change over time, then optimal
investments are more complex and the possibiity of not learning the correct investment profile over
time grows. In other words, the welfare implications are unclear.
   Taken together, both the theoretical model and the experimental results o↵er a strong caution-
ary tale on the use of financial incentives when individuals may not know the stochastic mapping
from e↵ort to output.




References

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Michael Kremer, and Atif Mian. 2008. “Incentives in Markets, Firms, and

        Governments.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2): 273-306.

 [2] Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services for

        College Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal:

        Applied Economics, 1(1): 136-163.

 [3] Angrist, Josh D., and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The E↵ect of High-Stakes High School Achievement

        Awards: Evidence from a Group-Randomized Trial.” American Economic Review, 99(4):

        1384-1414.

 [4] Beaudry, Paul. 1994. “Why an informed principal may leave rents to an agent.” International

        Economic Review, 35(4): 821-832.

 [5] Bettinger, Eric. 2010. “Paying to Learn: The E↵ect of Financial Incentives on Elementary

        School Test Scores.” NBER Working Paper No. 16333.



                                                 27
 [6] Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice

        in Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

        1(4): 200-232.

 [7] Cameron, Judy, and W. David Pierce. 1994. “Reinforcement, Reward, and Intrinsic Motivation:

        A Meta-Analysis.” Review of Educational Research, 64(3): 363-423.

 [8] Chade, Hector, and Randy Silvers. 2002. “Informed Principal, Moral Hazard, and the Value

        of a More Informative Technology” Economic Letters, 74: 291-300.

 [9] Deci, Edward L., Haleh Eghrari, Brian C. Patrick and Dean R. Leone. 1994. “Facilitating

        Internalization: The Self-Determination Theory Perspective.” Journal of Personality, 62(1):

        119-142.

[10] Dewatripont, Mathias, Ian Jewitt and Jean Tirole. 1999a. “The Economics of Career Concerns,

        Part I: Comparing Information Structures.” The Review of Economic Studies, 66(1): 183-

        198.

[11] Dewatripont, Mathias, Ian Jewitt and Jean Tirole. 1999b. “The Economics of Career Concerns,

        Part II: Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies.” The Review

        of Economic Studies, 66(1): 199-217.

[12] Fryer, Roland G. 2010. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence From Ran-

        domized Trials.” NBER Working Paper No. 15898.

[13] Fryer, Roland G. 2011a. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence From

        Randomized Trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (4).

[14] Fryer, Roland G. 2011b. “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of

        Discrimination.” Forthcoming in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, Orley Ashen-

        felter and David Card eds.

[15] Fryer, Roland G., Richard T. Holden, and Ruitian Lang. 2012. “Principals and ‘Clueless’

        Agents.” Unpublished manuscript.

[16] Greevy, Robert, Bo Lu, and Je↵rey H. Silber. 2004. “Optimal multivariate matching before


                                                28
        randomization.” Biostatistics, 5: 263-275.

[17] Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1983. “An Analysis of the Principal Agent Problem.”

        Econometrica, 51(1): 7-45.

[18] Guite, Hilary, Charlotte Clark, and G. Ackrill. 2006. “The Impact of Physical and Urban

        Environment on Mental Well-Being.” Public Health, 120(12): 1117-1126.

[19] Holmstrom, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” The Bell Journal of Economics,

        10(1): 74-91.

[20] Holmstrom, Bengt. 1982. “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective.” in Essays

        in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck, Helsinki: Swedish School of

        Economics.

[21] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal Agent Analyses: Incentive

        Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organiza-

        tion, 7: 24-52.

[22] Imai, Kosuke, Gary King, and Clayton Nall. 2009. “The Essential Role of Pair Matching in

        Cluster Randomized Experiments.” Statistical Science, 24(1): 29-53.

[23] Imbens, Guido. 2011. “Experimental Design for Unit and Cluster Randomized Trials.” Con-

        ference Paper, International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.

[24] Kaya, Ayça. 2010. “When Does it Pay to Get Informed?” International Economic Review,

        51(2): 533-551.

[25] Kerr, Steven. 1975. “On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for B.” The Academy of

        Management Journal, 18(4): 769-783.

[26] Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” Review

        of Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 437-456.

[27] Lambert, Robert G., and Bob Algozzine. 2009 “Accelerated Math Evaluation Re-

        port.” Center for Educational Research and Evaluation, University of North Car-

        olina Charlotte. http://education.uncc.edu/ceme/sites/education.uncc.edu.ceme/


                                                29
       files/media/pdfs/amreport_final.pdf

[28] Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole. 1990. “The Principal-Agent Relationship with an Informed

       Principal: The Case of Private Values.” Econometrica, 58(2): 379-409.

[29] Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole. 1992. “The Principal-Agent Relationship with an Informed

       Principal, II: Common Values.” Econometrica, 60(1): 1-42.

[30] Milgrom, Paul R., and John Roberts. 1992. Economics, organization, and management. En-

       glewood Cli↵s, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

[31] Mirrlees, James A. 1975. “The Theory of Moral Hazard and Unobservable Behavior - Part I.”

       mimeo, Nuffield College, Oxford.

[32] Myerson, Roger B. 1983. “Mechanism Design by an Informed Principal.” Econometrica, 51(6):

       1767-1797.

[33] Nunnery, John A., and Steven M. Ross. 2007. “The E↵ects of the School Renaissance Program

       on Student Achievement in Reading and Mathematics.” Resarch in the Schools, 14(1):

       40-59.

[34] Oosterbeek, Hessel, Edwin Leuven, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2010. “The E↵ect of Financial

       Rewards on Students’ Acheivement: Evidence From a Randomized Experiment.” Journal

       of the European Economic Association, 8(6): 1243-1265.

[35] Ryan, Richard M. 1982. “Control and Information in the Intrapersonal Sphere: An Extension

       of Cognitive Evaluation Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63: 397-

       427.

[36] Ryan, Richard M., Richard Koestner, and Edward L. Deci. 1991. “Ego-Involved Persistence:

       When Free-Choice Behavior is Not Intrinsically Motivated.” Motivation and Emotion,

       15(3): 185-205.

[37] Ysseldyke, Jim, and Daniel M. Bolt. 2007. “E↵ect of technology-enhanced continuous progress

       monitoring on math achievement.” School Psychology Review, 36(3): 453.




                                              30
                                                  7
!
                                                                                                        {$6}
     Objectives Mastered, per student, per week
                                                  6                                        !
                                                  5                                        !

                                                  4
                                                                                           !
                                                                                    {$4}
                                                                                           !                       Treatment
                                                  3
                                                                                                                   Control
                                                                                           !
                                                  2
                                                                                           !
                                                  1
                                                                                           !
                                                  0
                                                      1   2      3    4     5        6     !   7   8a   8b     9
                                                                            Pay Period
                                                                                           !
                                                              Figure 1: Objectives Mastered by Pay Period
                                                               Figure!1:!Objectives!Mastered!by!Pay!Period!
      Notes: The vertical axis represents the average number of Accelerated Math (AM) objectives mastered by the
    Notes:!The!vertical!axis!represents!the!average!number!of!Accelerated!Math!(AM)!objectives!mastered!by!the!
    average student per week. The horizontal axis represents each pay period. Prices in braces above individual points
    average!student!per!week.!The!horizontal!axis!represents!each!pay!period.!Prices!in!braces!above!individual!
     indicate changes in the price paid to treatment students per objective mastered in AM. If no price is indicated in
    points!indicate!changes!in!the!price!paid!to!treatment!students!per!objective!mastered!in!AM.!If!no!price!is!
       braces above a point, treatment students were paid $2 per objective during that pay period. Control students
    indicated!in!braces!above!a!point,!treatment!students!were!paid!$2!per!objective!during!that!pay!period.!
                                             were never paid at any price level.
    Control!students!were!never!paid!at!any!price!level.!
                                               Table 1: Summary of Math Stars Houston Incentives Experiment

                                50 (of 70 eligible) HISD schools opted in to participate, 25 schools randomly chosen for treatment. All treatment and
Schools                         control schools were provided complete Accelerated Mathematics software, training, and implementation materials
                                (handouts and practice exercises).

Treatment Group                 1,693 5th grade students: 27.5% black, 70.1% Hispanic, 55.5% free lunch eligible

Control Group                   1,735 5th grade students: 25.7% black, 68.2% Hispanic, 53.6% free lunch eligible

                                TAKS State Assessment, STAAR State Assessment (post-treatment),Number of Math Objectives Mastered, Parent
Outcomes of Interest
                                Conference Attendance, Measures of Parent Involvement, Measures of Student Motivation and E↵ort

Test Dates                      Year 1: TAKS: April 12-23, 2011; TAKS Retake: May 23-25, 2011; Stanford 10: May 8-10, 2011
                                Year 2: STAAR: April 24-25, 2012

Objectives Database             Students took a diagnostic test and were assigned math objectives to practice based upon their measured deficiencies.

Incentive Structure             Students paid $2 per objective to practice a math objective and pass a short test to ensure they mastered it.

Additional Incentives           $100 for mastering 200th objective (cumulatively)

Frequency of Rewards            Paydays were held every 3-4 weeks

Operations                      $875,000 distributed in incentives payments, 99% consent rate. 2 dedicated project managers.

   Notes. Each row describes an aspect of treatment indicated in the first column. Entries are descriptions of the schools, students, outcomes of interest, testing dates,
objectives database, incentive structure, additional incentives, frequency of rewards and operations. See Appendix A for more details. The numbers of treatment and control
students given are for those students who have non-missing reading or math test scores.
               Table 2: Pre-Treatment Characteristics of Non-Experimental and Experimental Schools
                                           Non-Exp.         Exp.    E vs. NE                                T vs. C
                                           5th Grade 5th Grade       p-value    Treatment    Control        p-value
 Teacher Characteristics
    Percent male                              0.161         0.183     0.105        0.174       0.191         0.317
                                            (0.079)       (0.078)                (0.074)     (0.082)
    Percent black                             0.322         0.370     0.307        0.366       0.374         0.777
                                            (0.255)       (0.292)                (0.330)     (0.257)
    Percent Hispanic                          0.343         0.365     0.547        0.352       0.377         0.417
                                            (0.213)       (0.202)                (0.222)     (0.183)
    Percent white                             0.290         0.222     0.033        0.236       0.207         0.668
                                            (0.233)       (0.158)                (0.141)     (0.176)
    Percent Asian                             0.034         0.032     0.798        0.029       0.035         0.315
                                            (0.039)       (0.032)                (0.030)     (0.035)
    Percent other race                        0.010         0.011     0.838        0.015       0.007         0.224
                                            (0.015)       (0.022)                (0.026)     (0.016)
    Mean teacher salary / 1000               51.942        52.079     0.674       52.088      52.071         0.523
                                            (2.058)       (1.848)                (1.706)     (2.014)
    Mean years teaching experience           11.878        12.082     0.657       12.222      11.942         0.326
                                            (2.781)       (2.656)                (2.476)     (2.870)
    Mean Teacher Value Added: Math            0.040        -0.162     0.031       -0.211      -0.113         0.456
                                            (0.468)       (0.586)                (0.417)     (0.722)
    Mean Teacher Value Added: Reading        0.040         -0.121     0.080       -0.128      -0.113         0.779
                                            (0.465)       (0.566)                (0.411)     (0.696)
 Student Body Characteristics
    # of suspensions per student             0.096         0.106      0.606       0.087        0.126         0.883
                                            (0.096)       (0.155)                (0.108)     (0.192)
    # of days suspended per student          0.214         0.261      0.365        0.225       0.297         0.925
                                            (0.988)       (0.344)                (0.290)     (0.395)
    Total Enrollment (Pre-treatment)        727.467       593.068     0.000      606.522     579.251         0.718
                                           (202.807) (142.169)                  (163.744) (117.878)

 Number of Schools                             130           50                       25           25

NOTES: This table reports school-level summary statistics for our aligned incentives experiment. The non-
experimental sample includes all HISD schools with at least one 5th grade class in 2009-10. Column (3) reports
p-values on the null hypthesis of equal means in the experimental and non-experimental sample. Column (6) reports
the same p-value for treatment and control schools. Each test uses heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, and the
latter test controls for matched-pair fixed effects.
                                   Table 3: Student Pre-Treatment Characteristics
                                                          HISD                                T vs. C.
                                                        5th Grade Treatment         Control   p-value
               Student Characteristics
                  Male                                    0.510       0.526           0.525   0.504
                                                         (0.500)     (0.499)        (0.500)
                  White                                   0.078       0.019           0.046   0.000
                                                         (0.268)     (0.138)        (0.211)
                  Black                                   0.248       0.275           0.257   0.015
                                                         (0.432)     (0.447)        (0.437)
                  Hispanic                                0.632       0.701           0.682   0.876
                                                         (0.482)     (0.458)        (0.466)
                  Asian                                   0.030       0.001           0.009   0.002
                                                         (0.172)     (0.035)        (0.094)
                  Other Race                              0.012       0.003           0.006   0.364
                                                         (0.109)     (0.055)        (0.077)
                  Special Education Services              0.098       0.108           0.086   0.668
                                                         (0.297)     (0.311)        (0.281)
                  Limited English Proficient              0.307       0.293           0.336   0.017
                                                         (0.461)     (0.455)        (0.473)
                  Gifted and Talented                     0.193       0.138           0.166   0.040
                                                         (0.394)     (0.345)        (0.373)
                  Economically Disadvantaged              0.828       0.929           0.909   0.219
                                                         (0.377)     (0.257)        (0.287)
                  Free or Reduced Price Lunch             0.513       0.555           0.536   0.349
                                                         (0.500)     (0.497)        (0.499)
                  State Math (Pre-treatment)              0.000       -0.142         -0.082   0.043
                                                         (1.000)     (0.944)        (0.954)
                  State ELA (Pre-treatment)               0.000       -0.166         -0.152   0.629
                                                         (1.000)     (0.934)        (0.956)
                  Missing Pre-treatment Math Scores       0.129       0.117           0.114   0.448
                                                         (0.336)     (0.321)        (0.317)
                  Missing Pre-treatment ELA Scores        0.134       0.125           0.122   0.514
                                                         (0.340)     (0.331)        (0.327)
                  p-value from joint F-test                                                   0.643

               Student Outcomes
                  Participated in Program                  0.111        0.966        0.001    0.000
                                                          (0.314)      (0.180)      (0.034)
                  Periods Treated                          0.944        8.473        0.003    0.000
                                                          (2.717)      (1.739)      (0.107)

               Observations                                15389        1693         1735      3428

NOTES: This table reports summary statistics for our aligned incentives experiment. The sample is restricted to
5th grade students with valid test score data for the 2010 - 2011 school year. Column (4) reports p-values on the null
hypothesis of equal means in treatment and control groups using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and controls
for matched-pair fixed effects.
                      Table 4a - Mean Effect Sizes (Intent to Treat Estimates): Direct Outcomes
                                                            Raw               Controlled
                         Parent Conferences Attended 1.639***                  1.572***
                                                          (0.089)               (0.099)
                                                            2052                 2052
                         Objectives Mastered             0.978***              1.087***
                                                          (0.029)               (0.031)
                                                            3292                 3292

Notes: This table reports ITT estimates of the effects of our aligned incentives experiment on various test scores and
survey responses in the treatment year. The number of objectives mastered is standardized to have mean zero and
standard deviation one in the experimental sample. Raw regressions include controls for previous test scores, their
squares, and matched-pair fixed effects. Controlled regressions also include controls for the gender, race, free lunch
eligibility, special education status, and whether the student spoke English as second language. Standard errors are
robust to heteroskedasticity. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at
10 percent level.
                     Table 4b - Mean Effect Sizes (Intent to Treat Estimates): Indirect Outcomes
                                                                      Raw           Controlled
                     A. Student Achievement
                        State Math                                 0.077***          0.081***
                                                                     (0.024)          (0.025)
                                                                      3128             3128
                        State ELA                                  -0.084***        -0.077***
                                                                     (0.026)          (0.027)
                                                                      3108             3108
                        Aligned State Math                         0.129***          0.137***
                                                                     (0.027)          (0.028)
                                                                      3090             3090
                        Unaligned State Math                          0.023            0.026
                                                                     (0.029)          (0.030)
                                                                      3090             3090
                     B. Survey Outcomes
                        Parents check HW more                         0.036         0.071***
                                                                    (0.024)           (0.027)
                                                                      2041             2041
                        Student prefers Math to Reading            0.118***         0.112***
                                                                    (0.021)           (0.023)
                                                                      2356             2356
                        Parent asks about Math more than Rdg. 0.115***              0.122***
                                                                    (0.024)           (0.028)
                                                                      1908             1908
                     C. Attendance and Motivation
                        Attendance                                   0.045*           0.050*
                                                                    (0.026)           (0.027)
                                                                      3187             3187
                        Intrinsic Motivation                          0.041            0.006
                                                                    (0.056)           (0.060)
                                                                      2004             2004

Notes: This table reports ITT estimates of the effects of our aligned incentives experiment on various test scores and
survey responses in the treatment year. Testing and attendance variables are drawn from HISD attendance files and
standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 among 5th graders with valid test scores. The survey
responses included here are coded as zero-one variables; The effort and intrinsic motivation indices are constructed
from separate survey responses; their construction is outlined in detail in the text of this paper and Online Appendix
B. Raw regressions include controls for previous test scores, their squares, and matched-pair fixed effects. Controlled
regressions also include controls for the gender, race, free lunch eligibility, special education status, and whether the
student spoke English as second language. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. *** = significant at 1
percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                         Table 5: Mean Effect Sizes (Intent to Treat) By Subsample
                          Full                   Gender                            Race                            Free Lunch                                Math Quintile
                        Sample         Male       Female   p-value     Black      Hispanic p-value          Yes         No              p-value     Bottom        Top      p-value
A. Incentivized Outcomes
Objectives Mastered 1.087***        1.012***     1.159***                0.816***     1.114***               1.096***     1.055***                 0.686***     1.660***
                        (0.031)      (0.045)      (0.043)      0.017      (0.045)      (0.045)     0.000      (0.043)      (0.047)       0.519      (0.047)      (0.117)         0.000
                         3292         1728         1554                     857         2283                   1774         1492                      694          423
B. Non-Incentivized Outcomes
State Math             0.081***     0.106***       0.040                  -0.002      0.104***               0.144***       -0.006                  -0.004      0.228***
                        (0.025)      (0.035)      (0.037)      0.183      (0.056)      (0.033)     0.101      (0.034)      (0.037)       0.003     (0.049)       (0.082)         0.011
                         3128         1636         1491                     828         2165                   1687          1421                    663           428
State ELA             -0.077***      -0.067*     -0.090**                 -0.069      -0.076**                -0.033      -0.122***               -0.165***       0.023
                        (0.027)      (0.037)      (0.039)      0.678      (0.071)      (0.033)     0.926      (0.038)      (0.041)       0.106     (0.063)       (0.083)         0.060
                         3108         1616         1491                     821         2151                   1677          1411                    659           427

      NOTES: This table reports ITT estimates of the effects of the experiment on incentivized and non-incentivized outcomes in the treatment year for a variety of
      subsamples. All regressions follow the controlled specification described in the notes of previous tables. All test outcomes are standardized to have mean zero and
      standard deviation one among all HISD fifth graders. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, and * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                     Table 6: Mean Effect Sizes (Intent to Treat) on Post-Treatment Outcomes By Subsample
                                                 Full   Previous Year Math Achievement                      Bad     Good
                                               Sample   Bottom Quintile       Top Quintile    p-value      Shock    Shock            p-value
                         State Math             -0.042      -0.223***            0.134*                 -0.252*** 0.498***
                                               (0.029)        (0.056)            (0.078)       0.000      (0.055)  (0.061)            0.000
                                                 2461           511                332                      375      230
                         State Reading        -0.071**       -0.170**             0.103                 -0.196*** 0.156**
                                               (0.029)        (0.080)            (0.086)       0.013      (0.056)  (0.063)            0.000
                                                 2458           516                336                      375      230
                         Stanford 10 Math -0.060**           -0.142**             0.069                 -0.225*** 0.370***
                                               (0.029)        (0.066)            (0.072)       0.021      (0.055)  (0.065)            0.000
                                                 2445           517                335                      375      230
                         Stanford 10 ELA -0.077**             -0.135*             0.099                  -0.158** 0.203***
                                               (0.033)        (0.080)            (0.087)       0.037      (0.063)  (0.072)            0.000
                                                 2564           553                335                      375      230
                         Attendance             0.011          0.084              0.018                    -0.070   0.040
                                               (0.035)        (0.091)            (0.070)       0.538      (0.075)  (0.072)            0.147
                                                 2598           588                342                      375      230

Notes: Columns 1-3 report ITT estimates of the effects of the experiment on year 2 test scores and attendance. Columns 5 and 6 report regression coefficients from
a regression of year 2 outcomes on dummies for whether a student received a large negative shock relative to his or her predicted year 1 test score (predicted by
objectives mastered in Accelerated Math, a measure of effort). Students are broken into quintiles by the size their residuals from a regression of year 1 test scores
on objectives mastered, and students with large negative residuals are in the bottom quintile, having received a while students with large positive residuals are in
the top quintile, having received a . Coefficients in this regression are reported relative to the third quuintile, who experienced the median shock. The sample is
restricted to the treatment group for this regression. All regressions follow the controlled specification described in the notes of previous tables. All test outcomes
are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one among all HISD fifth graders. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
and * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                    Table 7 - Attrition
                                                                              Raw      Controlled
                            Attrited - State Math (Treatment)               0.013*         0.005
                                                                            (0.007)      (0.006)
                                                                              3428         3428
                            Attrited - State ELA (Treatment)                 0.007        -0.004
                                                                            (0.007)      (0.006)
                                                                              3428         3428
                            Attrited - State Math (Post-treatment)           -0.007     -0.031**
                                                                            (0.015)      (0.016)
                                                                              3428         3428
                            Attrited - State ELA (Post-treatment)            -0.001      -0.029*
                                                                            (0.016)      (0.016)
                                                                              3428         3428
                            Attrited - Parent Conferences                 -0.291***    -0.325***
                                                                            (0.015)      (0.015)
                                                                              3428         3428
                            Attrited - Accelerated Math Objectives         -0.015**    -0.022***
                                                                            (0.006)      (0.006)
                                                                              3428         3428

NOTES: This table reports ITT estimates of the effects of our aligned incentives experiment on whether a student is
missing various test scores and survey responses. Each attrition measure is coded as a one if a given student does
not have valid scores or survey respones for that outcome and a zero otherwise. Raw regressions include controls for
previous test scores, their squares, and matched-pair fixed effects. Controlled regressions also include controls for the
gender, race, free lunch eligibility, special education status, and whether the student spoke English as second language.
Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level.
                                        Table 8 Attrition-Bounded Estimates
                                                    Observed ITT Attrition-Bounded ITT              p-value
                  State Math (Treatment)                0.081***           0.074***
                                                         (0.025)            (0.025)                  0.844
                                                          3128               3120
                  State ELA (Treatment)                -0.077***          -0.086***
                                                         (0.027)            (0.027)                  0.803
                                                          3108               3101
                  State Math (Post-Treatment)            -0.042            -0.065**
                                                         (0.029)            (0.029)                  0.573
                                                          2461               2423
                  State Reading (Post-Treatment)        -0.071**          -0.090***
                                                         (0.029)            (0.029)                  0.645
                                                          2458               2424
                  Parent Conferences Attended           1.572***           0.661***
                                                         (0.099)            (0.101)                  0.000
                                                          2052               1647
                  Objectives Mastered                   1.087***           1.000***
                                                         (0.031)            (0.028)                  0.038
                                                          3292               3255

NOTES: This table reports ITT estimates of the effects of our aligned incentives experiment on whether a student is
missing various test scores and survey responses. Each attrition measure is coded as a one if a given student does
not have valid scores or survey respones for that outcome and a zero otherwise. Raw regressions include controls for
previous test scores, their squares, and matched-pair fixed effects. Controlled regressions also include controls for the
gender, race, free lunch eligibility, special education status, and whether the student spoke English as second language.
Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level.
