                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          OIL PRICES, EXHAUSTIBLE RESOURCES, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                          James D. Hamilton

                                         Working Paper 17759
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17759


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Oil Prices, Exhaustible Resources, and Economic Growth
James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 17759
January 2012
JEL No. O40,Q30,Q41,Q43

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper explores details behind the phenomenal increase in global crude oil production over the
last century and a half and the implications if that trend should be reversed. I document that a key
feature of the growth in production has been exploitation of new geographic areas rather than application
of better technology to existing sources, and suggest that the end of that era could come soon. The
economic dislocations that historically followed temporary oil supply disruptions are reviewed, and
the possible implications of that experience for what the transition era could look like are explored.


James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
1     Oil prices and the economics of resource exhaustion.

One of the most elegant theories in economics is Hotelling’s (1931) characterization of the

price of an exhaustible natural resource.    From the perspective of overall social welfare,

production today needs to be balanced against the consideration that, once consumed, the

resource will be unavailable to future generations.     One option for society would be to

produce more of the commodity today, invest the current marginal benefits net of extraction

costs in some other form of productive capital, and thereby accumulate benefits over time at

the rate of interest earned on productive capital. An alternative is to save the resource so

it can be used in the future. Optimal use of the resource over time calls for equating these

two returns. This socially optimal plan could be implemented in a competitive equilibrium

if the price of the resource net of marginal production cost rises at the rate of interest. For

such a price path, the owner of the mine is just indiﬀerent between extracting a little bit

more of the resource today or leaving it in the ground to be exploited at higher profit in the

future.

    This theory is compelling and elegant, but very hard to reconcile with the observed

behavior of prices over the first century and a half of the oil industry. Figure 1 plots the

real price of crude petroleum since 1860. Oil has never been as costly as it was at the birth

of the industry. Prior to Edwin Drake’s first oil well in Pennsylvania in 1859, people were

getting illuminants using very expensive methods.1 The term kerosene, which we still use

today to refer to a refined petroleum product, was actually a brand name used in the 1850s

for a liquid manufactured from asphalt or coal, a process which was then, as it still is now,


                                              3
quite expensive.2 Derrick’s Handbook (1898) reported that Drake had no trouble selling all

the oil his well could produce in 1859 at a price of $20/barrel. Given the 24-fold increase

in estimates of consumer prices since 1859, that would correspond to a price in 2010 dollars

a little below $500/barrel. As drillers producing the new-found “rock oil” from other wells

brought more of the product to the market, the price quickly fell, averaging $9.31/barrel for

1860 (the first year shown in Figure 1). In 2010 prices, that corresponds to $232 a barrel,

still far above anything seen subsequently.     Even ignoring the initial half-century of the

industry, the price of oil in real terms continued to drop from 1900 to 1970. And despite

episodes of higher prices in the 1970s and 2000s, throughout the period from 1992-1999, the

price of oil in real terms remained below the level reached in 1920.

   There are two traditional explanations for why Hotelling’s theory appears to be at odds

with the long-run behavior of crude oil prices. The first is that although oil is in principle

an exhaustible resource, in practice the supply has always been perceived to be so vast,

and the date at which it will finally be exhausted has been thought to be so far into the

future, that finiteness of the resource had essentially no relevance for the current price. This

interpretation could be reconciled with the Hotelling solution if one hypothesizes a tiny rent

accruing to owners of the resource that indeed does grow at the rate of interest, but in

practice has always been suﬃciently small that the observed price is practically the same as

the marginal extraction cost.

   A second eﬀort to save Hotelling’s theory appeals to the role of technological progress,

which could lower marginal extraction costs (e.g., Slade, 1982), lead to discovery of new fields



                                               4
(Dasgupta and Heal, 1979; Arrow and Chang, 1982), or allow the exploitation of resources

previously thought not to be economically accessible (Pindyck, 1978). In generalizations of

the Hotelling formulation, these can give rise to episodes or long periods in which the real

price of oil is observed to fall, although eventually the price would begin to rise according to

these models. Krautkraemer (1998) has a nice survey of theories of this type and examination

of their empirical success at fitting the observed data.

   Although it can sometimes be helpful to think about technological progress in broad,

abstract terms, there is also much insight to be had from looking in some detail at the

specific factors that allowed global oil production to increase almost without interruption

over the last 150 years. For this purpose, I begin by examining some of the long-run trends

in U.S. oil production.



1.1    Oil production in the United States, 1859-2010.

Certainly the technology for extracting oil from beneath the earth’s surface has evolved

profoundly over time.     Although Drake’s original well was steam-powered, some of the

early drills were driven through rock by foot power, such as the spring-pole method. The

workers would kick a heavy bit at the end of the rope down into the rock, and spring action

from the compressed pole would lift the bit back up.        After some time at this, the drill

would be lifted out and a bucket lowered to bail out the debris.         Of course subsequent

years produced rapid advances over these first primitive eﬀorts— better sources of power,

improved casing technology, and vastly superior knowledge of where oil might be found.


                                               5
Other key innovations included the adoption of rotary drilling at the turn of the century,

in which circulating fluid lifted debris out of the hole, and secondary recovery methods first

developed in the 1920s, in which water, air, or gas is injected into oil wells to repressurize

the reservoir and allow more of the oil to be lifted to the surface.

   Figure 2 plots the annual oil production levels for Pennsylvania and New York, where

the industry began, from 1862 to 2010.      Production increased by a factor of 10 between

1862 and 1891. However, it is a mistake to view this as the result of application of better

technology to the initially exploited fields. Production from the original Oil Creek District

in fact peaked in 1874 (Williamson and Daum, 1959, p. 378). The production gains instead

came primarily from development of new fields, most importantly the Bradford field near

the Pennsylvania-New York border, but also from Butler, Clarion, and Armstrong Counties.

Nevertheless, it is unquestionably the case that better drilling techniques than used in Oil

Creek were necessary in order to reach the greater depths of the Bradford formation.

   One also sees quite clearly in Figure 2 the benefits of the secondary recovery methods

applied in the 1920s, which succeeded in producing much additional oil from the Bradford

formation and elsewhere in the state. However, it is worth noting that these methods never

lifted production in Pennsylvania back to where it had been in 1891.       In 2010— with the

truly awesome technological advances of the century and a half since the industry began,

and with the price of oil 5 times as high (in real terms) as it had been in 1891— Pennsylvania

and New York produced under 4 million barrels of crude oil. That’s only 12% of what had

been produced in 1891— 120 years ago— and about the level that the sturdy farmers with



                                               6
their spring-poles were getting out of the ground back in 1868.

   Although Pennsylvania was the most important source of U.S. oil production in the

19th century, the nation’s oil production continued to increase even after Pennsylvanian

production peaked in 1891. The reason is that later in the century, new sources of oil were

also being obtained from neighboring West Virginia and Ohio (see Figure 3). Production

from these two states was rising rapidly even as production from Pennsylvania and New

York started to fall. Ohio production would continue to rise before peaking in 1896, and

West Virginia did not peak until 1900.

   These four states together accounted for 90% of U.S. production in 1896, with the peak

in production from the region as a whole coming that year (see Figure 4). Overall U.S. pro-

duction declined for a few years with falling supplies from Appalachia, but quickly returned

to establishing new highs in 1900, thanks to growth in production from new areas in the

central United States, details of which are shown in Figure 5. Note the diﬀerence in scale,

with the vertical axes in Figure 5 spanning 6 times the magnitude of corresponding axes in

Figure 3. Each of the regions featured in Figure 5 would eventually produce far more oil

than Appalachia ever did. These areas began producing much later than Appalachia, and

each peaked much later than Appalachia. The combined production of Illinois and Indiana

peaked in 1940, Kansas-Nebraska in 1957, the southwest in 1960, and Wyoming in 1970.

   Far more important for U.S. total production were the four states shown in Figure 6,

which uses a vertical scale 2.5 times that for Figure 5. California, Oklahoma, Texas, and

Louisiana account for 70% of all the oil ever produced in the United States.    Production



                                             7
from Oklahoma reached a peak in 1927, though it was still able to produce at 80% of that

level as recently as 1970 before entering a modern phase of decline that now leaves it at 25%

of the 1927 production levels.    Texas managed to grow its oil production until 1972, and

today produces about a third of what it did then. California production continued to grow

until 1985 before peaking. The graph for Louisiana (bottom panel of Figure 6) includes all

the U.S. production from the Gulf of Mexico, growing production from which helped bring

the state’s indicated production for 2010 up to a value only 33% below its peak in 1971.

   Figure 7 plots production histories for the two regions whose development began latest

in U.S. history. Production from Alaska peaked in 1988. North Dakota is the only state

that continues to set all-time records for production, thanks in part to use of new drilling

techniques for recovering oil from shale formations. To put the new Williston Basin produc-

tion in perspective, the 138 million barrels produced in North Dakota and Montana in 2010

is about half of what the state of Oklahoma produced in 1927 and a fifth of what the state

of Alaska produced in 1988.      However, the potential for these fields looks very promising

and further significant increases from 2010 levels seems assured.

   The experience for the U.S. thus admits a quite clear summary. Production from every

state has followed a pattern of initial increase followed by eventual decline. The feature that

nonetheless allowed the total production for the U.S. to exhibit a seemingly uninterrupted

upward trend over the course of a century was the fact that new, more promising areas

were always coming into production at the same time that mature fields were dying out (see

Figure 8). Total U.S. production continued to grow before peaking in 1970, long after the



                                               8
original fields in Appalachia and the central U.S. were well into decline.

   And the decline in production from both individual regions within the U.S. as well as

the United States as a whole has come despite phenomenal improvements in technology

over time.   Production from the Gulf of Mexico has made a very important contribution

to slowing the rate of decline over the most recent decade. Some of this production today

is coming from wells that begin a mile below sea level and bore from there through up

to a half-dozen more miles of rock— try doing that with three guys kicking a spring-pole

down! The decline in U.S. production has further come despite aggressive drilling in very

challenging environments and widespread adoption of secondary and now tertiary recovery

methods. The rise and fall of production from individual states seems much more closely

related to discoveries of new fields and their eventual depletion than to the sorts of price

incentives or technological innovations on which economists are accustomed to focus.

   Notwithstanding, technological improvements continue to bring significant new fields

into play. The most important recent development has been horizontal rather than verti-

cal drilling through hydrocarbon-bearing formations accompanied by injection of fluids to

induce small fractures in the rock.   These methods have allowed access to hydrocarbons

trapped in rock whose permeability or depth prevented removal using traditional methods.

The new methods have enabled phenomenal increases in supplies of natural gas as well as

significant new oil production in areas such as North Dakota and Texas. Wickstrom, et. al.

(2011) speculated that application of hydraulic fracturing to the Utica Shale formation in

Ohio might eventually produce several billion barrels of oil, which would be more than the



                                              9
cumulative production from the state up to this point. If that indeed turns out to be the

case, it could lead to a third peak in the graphs in Figure 3 for the Appalachian region that

exceeds either of the first two, though for comparison the projected lifetime output from

Utica would still only correspond to a few years of production from Texas at that state’s

peak.

   Obviously price incentives and technological innovations matter a great deal. More oil

will be brought to the surface at a price of $100 a barrel than at $10 a barrel, and more

oil can be produced with the new technology than with the old.        But it seems a mistake

to overstate the operative elasticities.   By 1960, the real price of oil had fallen to a level

that was 1/3 its value in 1900. Over the same period, U.S. production of crude oil grew

to become 55 times what it had been in 1900.         On the other hand, the real price of oil

rose 8-fold from 1970 to 2010, while U.S. production of oil fell by 43% over those same 40

years. The increase in production from 1900 to 1960 thus could in no way be attributed

to the response to price incentives. Likewise, neither huge price incentives nor impressive

technological improvements were suﬃcient to prevent the decline in production from 1970 to

2010. Further exploitation of oﬀshore or deep shale resources may help put U.S. production

back on an upward trend for the next decade, but it seems unlikely ever again to reach the

levels seen in 1970.




                                               10
1.2    World oil production, 1973-2010.

Despite the peak in U.S. production in 1970, world oil production was to grow to a level in

2010 that is 60% higher than it had been in 1970. The mechanics of this growth are the same

as allowed total U.S. production to continue to increase long after production from the initial

areas entered into decline— increases from new fields in other countries more than oﬀset the

declines from the United States.    For example, the North Sea and Mexico accounted for

only 1% of world production in 1970, but had grown to 13% of total world output by 1999.

But production from the North Sea peaked in that year, and in 2010 is only at 54% of the

peak level (see Figure 9). Cantarell, which is Mexico’s main producing field, also appears

to have passed peak production, with the country now at 75% of its 2004 oil production.

   Production from members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)

must be interpreted from a much diﬀerent perspective. The episodes of declining production

one sees in the bottom panel of Figure 10 have little to do with geological depletion but

instead often reflect dramatic geopolitical events such as the OPEC embargo of 1973-74,

the Iranian revolution in 1978-1979, the Iranian revolution and beginning of the Iran-Iraq

War 1978-1981, and the first Persian Gulf war in 1990-91, events that will be reviewed in

more detail in the following section. In addition, Saudi Arabia in particular (top panel) has

often made a deliberate decision to increase or decrease production in an eﬀort to mitigate

price increases or decreases. For example, Saudi Arabia cut production to try to hold up

prices during the weak oil market 1981-85 and recession of 2001, and boosted production

to make up for output lost from other producing countries during the two Persian Gulf


                                              11
wars.   However, the decline in Saudi Arabian production since 2005 would have to be

attributed to diﬀerent considerations from those that explain the earlier historical data. The

kingdom’s magnificent Ghawar field has been in production since 1951, and in recent years

had accounted for perhaps 6% of total world production all by itself. There is considerable

speculation that Ghawar may have peaked, though this is diﬃcult to confirm. What we do

know is that, for whatever reason, Saudi Arabia produced 600,000 fewer barrels each day in

2010 than it did in 2005, and with growing Saudi consumption of their own oil, the drop in

exports from Saudi Arabia has been even more dramatic.

   A mix of factors has clearly also contributed to stagnating production from other OPEC

members over the last 5 years. Promising new fields in Angola have allowed that country

to double its production since 2003.    In Nigeria and Iraq, conflicts and unrest have held

back what appears to be promising geological potential. In Venezuela and Iran, it is hard to

know how much more might be produced with better functioning governments. But again,

although there is a complicated mix of diﬀerent factors at work in diﬀerent countries, the

bottom line is that the total production from OPEC has essentially been flat since 2005.

   At the same time, some other countries continue to register increases in oil production

(see Figure 11).   China has doubled its oil production since 1982, though its three most

important fields (Daqing, Shengli, and Liaohe) peaked in the mid 1990s (Kambara and

Howe, 2007). Canadian oil production continues to increase as a result of the contribution

of oil sands.   Unfortunately, exploitation of this resource is far more costly in terms of

capital and energy inputs and environmental externalities relative to conventional sources,



                                             12
and it is diﬃcult to see it ever accounting for a major fraction of total world oil production.

Other regions such as Brazil, central Asia, and Africa have also seen significant gains in oil

production (bottom panel of Figure 11). Overall, global production of oil from all sources

was essentially constant from 2005 to 2010 (see Figure 12).



1.3    Reconciling historical experience with the theory of exhaustible

       resources.

The evidence from the preceding subsections can be summarized as follows. When one looks

at individual oil-producing regions, one does not see a pattern of continuing increases as a

result of ongoing technological progress. Instead there has inevitably been an initial gain as

key new fields were developed followed by subsequent decline. Technological progress and

the incentives of higher prices can temporarily reverse that decline, as was seen for example

in the impressive resurgence of Pennsylvanian production in the 1920s. In recent years these

same factors have allowed U.S. production to grow rather than decline, and that trend in the

U.S. may continue for some time. However, these factors have historically appeared to be

distinctly secondary to the broad reality that after a certain period of exploitation, annual

flow rates of production from a given area are going to start to decline. Those encouraged

by the 10% increase in U.S. oil production between 2008 and 2010 should remember that

the level of U.S. production in 2010 is still 25% below where it had been in 1990 (when the

real price of oil was half of what it is today) and 43% below the level of 1970 (when the real

price of oil was 1/8 of what it is today).


                                              13
   Some may argue that the peaking of production from individual areas is governed by quite

diﬀerent economic considerations than would apply to the final peaking of total production

from all world sources combined. Certainly in an environment in which the market is pricing

oil as an essentially inexhaustible resource, the pattern of peaking documented extensively

above is perfectly understandable, given that so far there have always been enough new

fields somewhere in the world to take the place of declining production from mature regions.

One could also reason that, even if the price of oil has historically been following some

kind of Hotelling path, fields with diﬀerent marginal extraction costs would logically be

developed at diﬀerent times. Smith (2011) further noted that, according to the Hotelling

model, the date at which global production peaks would be determined endogenously by

the cumulative amount that could eventually be extracted and the projected time path

for the demand function.     His analysis suggests that the date for an eventual peak in

global oil production should be determined by these economic considerations rather than

the engineering mechanics that have produced the historical record for individual regions

detailed above.

   However, my reading of the historical evidence is as follows. (1) For much of the history

of the industry, oil has been priced essentially as if it were an inexhaustible resource. (2)

Although technological progress and enhanced recovery techniques can temporarily boost

production flows from mature fields, it is not reasonable to view these factors as the primary

determinants of annual production rates from a given field.      (3) The historical source of

increasing global oil production is exploitation of new geographical areas, a process whose



                                             14
promise at the global level is obviously limited. The combined implication of these three

observations is that, at some point there will need to be a shift in how the price of oil is

determined, with considerations of resource exhaustion playing a bigger role than they have

historically.

   A factor accelerating the date of that transition is the phenomenal growth of demand for

oil from the emerging economies. Eight emerging economies— Brazil, China, Hong Kong,

India, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand— accounted for 43% of the increase in

world petroleum consumption between 1998 and 2005 and for 135% of the increase between

2005 and 2010 (the rest of the world decreased its petroleum consumption over the latter

                                                    3
period in response to the big increase in price).       And, as Hamilton (2009a) noted, one could

easily imagine the growth in demand from the emerging economies continuing.             One has

only to compare China’s one passenger vehicle per 30 residents today with the one vehicle

per 1.3 residents seen in the United States, or China’s 2010 annual petroleum consumption

of 2.5 barrels per person with Mexico’s 6.7 or the United States’ 22.4. Even if the world sees

phenomenal success in finding new sources of oil over the next decade, it could prove quite

challenging to keep up with both depletion from mature fields and rapid growth in demand

from the emerging economies, another reason to conclude that the era in which petroleum

is regarded as an essentially unlimited resource has now ended.

   Some might infer that the decrease in Saudi Arabian production since 2005 reflects not

an inability to maintain production flows from the mature Ghawar field but instead is a

deliberate response to recognition of a growing importance of the scarcity rent. For example,



                                               15
Hamilton (2009a) noted the following story on April 13, 2008 from Reuters news service:


     Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah said he had ordered some new oil discoveries left

     untapped to preserve oil wealth in the world’s top exporter for future generations,

     the oﬃcial Saudi Press Agency (SPA) reported.

     “I keep no secret from you that when there were some new finds, I told them,

     ‘no, leave it in the ground, with grace from God, our children need it’,” King

     Abdullah said in remarks made late on Saturday, SPA said.


   If that is indeed the interpretation, it is curious that we would see the private optimizing

choices predicted by Hotelling manifest by sovereign governments rather than the fields under

control of private oil companies. In any case, it must be acknowledged that calculation of

the correct Hotelling price is almost insurmountably diﬃcult. It is hard enough for the best

forecasters accurately to predict supply and demand for the coming year. But the critical

calculation required by Hotelling is to evaluate the transversality condition that the resource

be exhausted when the price reaches that of a backstop technology or alternatively over the

infinite time horizon if no such backstop exists. That calculation is orders of magnitudes

more diﬃcult than the seemingly simpler task of just predicting next year’s supply and

demand.

   One could argue that the combined decisions of the many participants in world oil markets

can make a better determination of what the answer to the above calculation should be than

can any individual, meaning that if the current price seems inconsistent with a scenario

in which global oil production will soon reach a peak, then such a scenario is perhaps not

                                              16
the most likely outcome.     But saying that the implicit judgment from the market is the

best guess available is not the same thing as saying that this guess is going to prove to be

correct.   The historical record surely dictates that we take seriously the possibility that

the world could soon reach a point from which a continuous decline in the annual flow rate

of production could not be avoided, and inquire whether the transition to a pricing path

consistent with that reality could prove to be a fairly jarring event. For this reason, it seems

worthwhile to review the historical record on the economic response to previous episodes in

which the price or supply of oil changed dramatically, to which we now turn in the next

section.




2     Oil prices and economic growth.

2.1    Historical oil price shocks.

There have been a number of episodes over the last half century in which conflicts in the

Middle East have led to significant disruptions in production of crude oil. These include

closure of the Suez Canal following the conflict between Egypt, Israel, Britain, and France

in October 1956, the oil embargo implemented by the Arab members of OPEC following the

Arab-Israeli War in October 1973, the Iranian revolution beginning in November 1978, the

Iran-Iraq War beginning in September of 1980, and the first Persian Gulf war beginning in

August 1990. Figure 13 summarizes the consequences of these 5 events for world oil supplies.

In each panel, the solid line displays the drop in production from the aﬀected areas expressed



                                              17
as a percentage of total world production prior to the crisis. In each episode, there were

some oﬀsetting increases in production elsewhere in the world. The dashed lines in Figure

13 indicate the magnitude of the actual decline in total global production following each

event, again expressed as a fraction of world production.      Each of these 5 episodes was

followed by a decrease in world oil production of 4-9%.

   There have also been some other more minor supply disruptions over this period. These

include the combined eﬀects of the second Persian Gulf war and strikes in Venezuela be-

ginning in December 2002, and the Libyan revolution in February 2011. The disruption in

supply associated with either of these episodes was about 2% of total global production at

the time, or less than a third the size of the average event in Figure 13.

   There are other episodes since World War II when the price of oil rose abruptly in the

absence of a significant physical disruption in the supply of oil. Most notable of these would

be the broad upswing in the price of oil beginning in 2004, which accelerated sharply in

2007. The principal cause of this oil spike appears to have been strong demand for oil from

the emerging economies confronting the stagnating global production levels documented in

the previous sections (see Kilian, 2008, 2009, Hamilton, 2009b and Kilian and Hicks, 2011).

Less dramatic price increases followed the economic recovery from the East Asian Crisis

in 1997, dislocations associated with post World War II growth in 1947, and the Korean

conflict in 1952-53. Table 1 summarizes a series of historical episodes discussed in Hamilton

(forthcoming [b]). It is interesting that of the 11 episodes listed, 10 of these were followed

by a recession in the United States. The recession of 1960 is the only U.S. postwar recession



                                             18
that was not preceded by a spike in the price of crude oil.

   A large empirical literature has investigated the connection between oil prices and real

economic growth. Early studies documenting a statistically significant negative correlation

include Rasche and Tatom (1977, 1981) and Santini (1985). Empirical analysis of dynamic

forecasting regressions found that oil price changes could help improve forecasts of U.S. real

output growth (Hamilton, 1983; Burbidge and Harrison, 1984; Gisser and Goodwin, 1986).

However, these specifications, which were based on linear relations between the log change in

oil prices and the log of real output growth, broke down when the dramatic oil price decreases

of the mid-1980s were not followed by an economic boom. On the contrary, the mid-1980s

appeared to be associated with recession conditions in the oil-producing states (Hamilton

and Owyang, forthcoming). Mork (1989) found a much better fit to a model that allowed for

oil price decreases to have a diﬀerent eﬀect on the economy from oil price increases, though

Hooker (1996) demonstrated that this modification still had trouble describing subsequent

data.   Other papers finding a significant connection between oil price increases and poor

economic performance include Santini (1992, 1994), Rotemberg and Woodford (1996), Daniel

(1997), and Carruth, Hooker and Oswald (1998).

   Alternative nonlinear dynamic relations seem to have a significantly better fit to U.S.

data than Mork’s simple asymmetric formulation.         Loungani (1986) and Davis (1987a,

1987b) found that oil price decreases could actually reduce economic growth, consistent

with the claim that sectorial reallocations could be an important part of the economic

transmission mechanism resulting from changes in oil prices in either direction.     Ferderer



                                             19
(1996), Elder and Serletis (2010), and Jo (2011) showed that an increase in oil price volatility

itself tends to predict slower GDP growth, while Lee, Ni, and Ratti (1995) found that oil

price increases seem to aﬀect the economy less if they occur following an episode of high

volatility.   Hamilton (2003) estimated a flexible nonlinear form and found evidence for a

threshold eﬀect, in which an oil price increase that simply reverses a previous decrease seems

to have little eﬀect on the economy.     Hamilton (1996), Raymond and Rich (1997), Davis

and Haltiwanger (2001) and Balke, Brown and Yücel (2002) produced evidence in support

of related specifications, while Carlton (2010) and Ravazzolo and Rothman (2010) reported

that the Hamilton (2003) specification performed well in an out-of-sample forecasting exercise

using data as it would have been available in real time. Kilian and Vigfusson (forthcoming

[a]) found weaker (though still statistically significant) evidence of nonlinearity than reported

by other researchers. Hamilton (forthcoming [a]) attributed their weaker evidence to use of

a shorter data set and changes in specification from other researchers.

    A negative eﬀect of oil prices on real output has also been reported for a number of other

countries, particularly when nonlinear functional forms have been employed. Mork, Olsen

and Mysen (1994) found that oil price increases were followed by reductions in real GDP

growth in 6 of the 7 OECD countries investigated, the one exception being the oil exporter

Norway. Cuñado and Pérez de Gracia (2003) found a negative correlation between oil prices

changes and industrial production growth rates in 13 out of 14 European economies, with

a nonlinear function of oil prices making a statistically significant contribution to forecast

growth rates for 11 of these. Jiménez-Rodríguez and Sánchez (2005) found a statistically



                                               20
significant negative nonlinear relation between oil prices and real GDP growth in the U.S.,

Canada, Euro area overall, and 5 out of 6 European countries, though not in Norway or

Japan.    Kim (forthcoming) found a nonlinear relation in a panel of 6 countries, while

Engemann, Kliesen, and Owyang (forthcoming) found that oil prices helped predict economic

recessions in most of the countries they investigated.     Daniel, et. al. (2011) also found

supporting evidence in most of the 11 countries they studied. By contrast, Rasmussen and

Roitman (2011) found much less evidence for economic eﬀects of oil shocks in an analysis of

144 countries. However, their use of this larger sample of countries required using annual

rather than the monthly or quarterly data used in the other research cited above. Insofar

as the eﬀects are high frequency and cyclical, they may be less apparent in annual average

data. Kilian (2009) has argued that the source of the oil price increase is also important, with

increases that result from strong global demand appearing to have more benign implications

for U.S. real GDP growth than oil price increases that result from shortages of supply.

   Blanchard and Galí (2010) found evidence that the eﬀects of oil shocks on the economy

have decreased over time, which they attributed to the absence of other adverse shocks that

had historically coincided with some big oil price movements, a falling value of the share

of oil in total expenses, more flexible labor markets, and better management of monetary

policy.   Baumeister and Peersman (2011) also found that an oil price increase of a given

size seems to have a decreasing eﬀect over time, but noted that the declining price-elasticity

of demand meant that a given physical disruption had a bigger eﬀect on price and turned

out to have a similar eﬀect on output as in the earlier data.        Ramey and Vine (2012)



                                              21
attributed the declining coeﬃcients relating real GDP growth to oil prices to the fact that

the oil shocks of the 1970s were accompanied by rationing, which would have magnified the

economic dislocations. Ramey and Vine found that once they correct for this, the economic

eﬀects have been fairly stable over time.



2.2    Interpreting the historical evidence.

The equation below reports the regression estimates from equation (3.8) of Hamilton (2003),

which is based on data from 1949:Q2 to 2001:Q3.                   Here yt represents the quarterly log

change in real GDP. The specification implies that oil prices do not matter unless they

make a new high relative to values seen over the previous 3 years. If oil prices make a new

high, o#
       t is the amount by which the log of the producer price index at the end of quarter t


exceeds its maximum over the preceding 3 years, whereas o#
                                                         t is zero if they do not. Standard


errors appear in parentheses, and both yt and o#
                                               t have been multiplied by 100 to express as


percentage rates:


                    yt =   0.98 + 0.22 yt−1 + 0.10 yt−2 − 0.08yt−3 − 0.15 yt−4
                           (0.13)      (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.07)     (0.07)

                           − 0.024o#           #           #           #
                                   t−1 − 0.021ot−2 − 0.018ot−3 − 0.042ot−4 .                       (1)
                             (0.014)            (0.014)        (0.014)      (0.014)


Two aspects of this relation are puzzling from the perspective of economic theory. First,

the eﬀects of an oil price increase take some time to show up in real GDP, with the biggest

drop in GDP growth appearing a full year after the price of oil first increases. Second, the

size of the estimated eﬀect is quite large. If the price of oil exceeds its 3-year high by 10%,

the relation predicts that real GDP growth would be 0.42% slower (at a quarterly rate) 4

                                                          22
quarters later, with a modest additional decline coming from the dynamic implications of

o#
 t−4 for yt−1 , yt−2 , and yt−3 .


    To understand why eﬀects of this magnitude are puzzling,4 suppose we thought of the

level of real GDP (Y ) as depending on capital K, labor N , and energy E according to the

production function,

                                           Y = F (K, N, E).

Profit maximization suggests that the marginal product of energy should equal its relative

price, denoted PE /P :
                                                 ∂F
                                                    = PE /P.
                                                 ∂E

Multiplying the above equation by E/F implies that the elasticity of output with respect to

energy use should be given by γ, the dollar value of expenditures on energy as a fraction of

GDP:
                                          ∂ ln F   PE E
                                                 =      = γ.                             (2)
                                          ∂ ln E   PY

Suppose we thought that wages adjust instantaneously to maintain full employment and that

changes in investment take much longer than a few quarters to make a significant diﬀerence

for the capital stock. Then neither K nor N would respond to a change in the real price of

energy, and

                                      ∂ ln Y          ∂ ln F ∂ ln E
                                                  =                                      (3)
                                    ∂ ln PE /P        ∂ ln E ∂ ln PE /P
                                                  = γθ


for θ the price-elasticity of energy demand.

                                                      23
   The energy expenditure share is a small number— the value of crude oil consumed by

the United States in 2010 corresponds to less than 4% of total GDP. Moreover, the short-

run price elasticity of demand θ is also very small (Dahl, 1993). Hence it seems that any

significant observed response to historical oil price increases could not be attributed to the

direct eﬀects of decreased energy use on productivity, but instead would have to arise from

forces that lead to underemployment of labor and underutilization of capital. Such eﬀects

are likely to operate from changes in the composition of demand rather than the physical

process of production itself.5 Unlike the above mechanism based on aggregate supply eﬀects,

the demand eﬀects could be most significant when the price-elasticity of demand is low.

   For example, suppose that the demand for energy is completely inelastic in the short run,

so that consumers try to purchase the same physical quantity E of energy despite the energy

price increase. Then nominal saving or spending on other goods or services must decline

by E∆PE when the price of energy goes up. Letting C denote real consumption spending

and PC the price of consumption goods,

                                     ∂ ln C      PE E
                                               =      = γC
                                 ∂ ln(PE /PC )   PC C

for γ C the energy expenditure share in total consumption. Again, for the aggregate economy

γ C is a modest number. Currently about 6% of total U.S. consumer spending is devoted to

energy goods and services6 , though for the lower 60% of U.S. households by income, the share

is closer to 10% (Carroll, 2011). And although the increased spending on energy represents

income for someone else, it can take a considerable amount of time for oil company profits to

be translated into higher dividends for shareholders or increased investment expenditures.

                                             24
Recycling the receipts of oil exporting countries on increased spending on U.S.-produced

goods and services can take even longer. These delays may be quite important in determining

the overall level of spending that governs short-run business cycle dynamics.

   Edelstein and Kilian (2009) conducted an extensive investigation of U.S. monthly spend-

ing patterns over 1970 to 2006, looking at bivariate autoregressions of measures of consump-

tion spending on their own lags and on lags of energy prices. They scaled the energy price

measure so that a one unit increase would correspond to a 1% drop in total consumption

spending if consumers were to try to maintain real energy purchases at their original levels.

Figure 14 reproduces some of their key results.    The top panel shows that, as expected,

an increase in energy prices is followed by a decrease in overall real consumption spending.

However, the same two puzzles mentioned in connection with (1) occur again here. First,

although consumers’ spending power first fell at date 0 on the graph, the decline in con-

sumption spending is not immediate but continues to increase in size up to a year after the

initial shock. Second, although the initial shock corresponded to an event that might have

forced a consumer to cut total spending by 1%, after 12 months, we see total spending down

2.2%.

   The details of Edelstein’s and Kilian’s other analysis suggest some explanations for both

the dynamics and the apparent multiplier eﬀects.      The second panel in Figure 14 looks

at one particular component of consumption spending, namely spending on motor vehicles

and parts.   Here the decline is essentially immediate, and quite large relative to normal

expenditures on this particular category. The drop in demand for domestically manufactured



                                             25
motor vehicles could lead to idled capital and labor as a result of traditional Keynesian

frictions in adjusting wages and prices, and could be an explanation for both the multiplier

and the dynamics observed in the data.      Hamilton (1988) showed that multiplier eﬀects

could also arise in a strictly neoclassical model with perfectly flexible wages and prices. In

that model, the technological costs associated with trying to reallocate specialized labor

or capital could result in a temporary period of unemployment as laid-oﬀ workers wait for

demand for their sector to resume. Bresnahan and Ramey (1993), Hamilton (2009b), and

Ramey and Vine (2012) demonstrated the economic importance of shifts in motor vehicle

demand in the recessions that followed several historical oil shocks.

   Another feature of the consumer response to an energy price increase uncovered by Edel-

stein and Kilian is a sharp and immediate drop in consumer sentiment (see the bottom panel

of Figure 14). Again, this could produce changes in spending patterns whose consequences

accumulate over time through Keynesian and other multiplier eﬀects.

   Bohi (1989) was among the early doubters of the thesis that oil prices were an important

contributing factor in postwar recessions, noting that the industries in which one sees the

biggest response were not those for which energy represented the biggest component of total

costs. However, subsequent analyses allowing for nonlinearities found eﬀects for industries

for which energy costs were important both for their own production as well as for the

demand for their goods (Lee and Ni, 2002; Herrera, Lagalo and Wada, 2010).

   Bernanke, Gertler and Watson (1997) suggested that another mechanism by which oil

price increases might have aﬀected aggregate demand is through a contractionary response



                                             26
of monetary policy. They presented simulations suggesting that , if the Federal Reserve had

kept interest rates from rising subsequent to historical oil shocks, most of the output decline

could have been avoided. However, Hamilton and Herrera (2004) demonstrated that this

conclusion resulted from the authors’ assumption that the eﬀects of oil price shocks could

be captured by 7 monthly lags of oil prices, a specification that left out the biggest eﬀects

found by earlier researchers. When the Bernanke, et. al. analysis is reproduced using 12

lags instead of 7, the conclusion from their exercise would be that even quite extraordinarily

expansionary monetary policy could not have eliminated the contractionary eﬀects of an oil

price shock.

   Hamilton (2009b) noted that what happened in the early stages of the 2007-2009 recession

was quite consistent with the pattern observed in the recessions that followed earlier oil

shocks. Spending on the larger domestically manufactured light vehicles plunged even as

sales of smaller imported cars went up.      Had it not been for the lost production from

the domestic auto sector, U.S. real GDP would have grown 1.2% during the first year of

the recession. Historical regressions based on energy prices would have predicted much of

the falling consumer sentiment and slower consumer spending during the first year of the

downturn. Figure 15 updates and extends a calculation from Hamilton (2009b), in which

the specific parameter values from the historically estimated regression (1) were used in

a dynamic simulation to predict what would have happened to real GDP over the period

2007:Q4 to 2009:Q3 based solely on the changes in oil prices. The pattern and much of the

magnitude of the initial downturn are consistent with the historical experience.



                                              27
   Of course, there is no question that the financial crisis in the fall of 2008 was a much more

significant event in turning what had been a modest slowdown up to that point into what

is now being referred to as the Great Recession. Even so, Hamilton (2009b) noted that the

magnitude of the problems with mortgage delinquencies could only have been aggravated by

the weaker economy, and suggested that the oil price spike of 2007-2008 should be counted

as an important factor contributing to the early stages of that recession as well as a number

of earlier episodes.



2.3    Implications for future economic growth and climate change.

The increases in world petroleum production over the first 150 years of the industry have

been quite impressive.    But given the details behind that growth, it would be prudent

to acknowledge the possibility that world production could soon peak or enter a period of

rocky plateau. If we should enter such an era, what does the observed economic response

to past historical oil supply disruptions and price increases suggest could be in store for the

economy?

   The above analysis suggests that historically the biggest economic eﬀects have come from

cyclical factors that led to underutilization of labor and capital and drove output below the

level that would be associated with full employment. If we are asking about the character of

an alternative long-run growth path, most economists would be more comfortable assuming

that the economy would operate close to potential along the adjustment path. For purposes

of that question, the relatively small value for the energy expenditure share γ in equation


                                              28
(2) would seem to suggest a modest elasticity of total output with respect to energy use and

relatively minor eﬀects.

   One detail worth noting, however, is that historically the energy share has changed

dramatically over time. Figure 16 plots the consumption expenditure share γ C since 1959.

Precisely because demand is very price-inelastic in the short run, when the real price of

oil doubles, the share nearly does as well. The relatively low share in the late 1990s and

early 2000s, to which Blanchard and Galí (2010) attributed part of the apparent reduced

sensitivity of the economy to oil shocks, basically disappeared with the subsequent price

increases.   If a peaking of global production does result in further big increases in the

price of oil, it is quite possible that the expenditure share would increase significantly from

where it is now, in which case even a frictionless neoclassical model would conclude that the

economic consequences of reduced energy use would have to be significant.

   In addition to the response of supply to these price increases discussed in Section 1, an-

other key parameter is the long-run price-elasticity of demand. Here one might take comfort

from the observation that, given time, the adjustments of demand to the oil price increases

of the 1970s were significant. For example, U.S. petroleum consumption declined 17% be-

tween 1978 and 1985 at the same time that U.S. real GDP increased by 21%.            However,

Dargay and Gately (2010) attributed much of this conservation to one-time eﬀects, such as

switching away from using oil for electricity generation and space heating, that would be

diﬃcult to repeat on an ongoing basis. Knittel (forthcoming) was more optimistic, noting

that there has been ongoing technological improvement in engine and automobile design over



                                              29
time, with most of this historically being devoted to making cars larger and more powerful

rather than more fuel-eﬃcient. If the latter were to become everyone’s priority, significant

reductions in oil consumption might come from this source.

   Knowing what the future will bring in terms of adaptation of both the supply and demand

for petroleum is inherently diﬃcult.   However, it is not nearly as hard to summarize the

past. Coping with a final peak in world oil production could look pretty similar to what

we observed as the economy adapted to the production plateau encountered over 2005-2009.

That experience appeared to have much in common with previous historical episodes that

resulted from temporary geopolitical conflict, being associated with significant declines in

employment and output.     If the future decades look like the last 5 years, we are in for a

rough time.

   Most economists view the economic growth of the last century and a half as being fueled

by ongoing technological progress. Without question, that progress has been most impres-

sive.   But there may also have been an important component of luck in terms of finding

and exploiting a resource that was extremely valuable and useful but ultimately finite and

exhaustible.   It is not clear how easy it will be to adapt to the end of that era of good

fortune.

   Let me close with a few observations on the implications for climate change.     Clearly

reduced consumption of petroleum by itself would mean lower greenhouse gas emissions.

Moreover, since GDP growth has historically been the single biggest factor influencing the

growth of emissions (Hamilton and Turton, 2002), the prospects for potentially rocky eco-



                                            30
nomic growth explored above would be another factor slowing growth of emissions.           But

the key question in terms of climate impact is what we might do instead, since many of

the alternative sources of transportation fuel have a significantly bigger carbon footprint

than those we relied on in the past. For example, creating a barrel of synthetic crude from

surface-mined Canadian oil sands may emit twice as much carbon dioxide equivalents as are

associated with producing a barrel of conventional crude, while in-situ processing of oil sands

could produce three times as much (Charpentier, Bergerson and MacLean, 2009). This is

not quite as alarming as it sounds, since greenhouse gas emissions associated with produc-

tion of the crude itself are still dwarfed by those released when the gasoline is combusted in

the end-use vehicle. The median study surveyed by Charpentier, Bergerson and MacLean

(2009) concluded that on a well-to-wheel basis, vehicles driven by gasoline produced from

surface-mined oil sands would emit 17% more grams of carbon dioxide equivalent per kilo-

meter driven compared to gasoline from conventional petroleum.         Enhanced oil recovery

and conversion of natural gas to liquid fuels are also associated with higher greenhouse gas

emissions per kilometer driven than conventional petroleum, though these increases are more

modest than those for oil sands. On the other hand, creating liquid fuels from coal or oil

shale could increase well-to-wheel emissions by up to a factor of two (Brandt and Farrell,

2007).

   In any case, if the question is whether the world should decrease combustion of gasoline

produced from conventional petroleum sources, we may not have any choice.




                                              31
Notes

   1
       See Fouquet and Pearson (2006, 2012) on the history of the cost of illumination.

   2
       See for example Williamson and Daum (1959, pp. 44-48).

   3
       Data source: Total petroleum consumption, EIA (http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/

iedindex3.cfm?tid=5&pid=5&aid=2&cid=regions&syid=1980&eyid=2010&unit=TBPD)

   4
       The discussion in this paragraph is adapted from Hamilton (forthcoming [a]).

   5
       Other neoclassical models explore the possibility of asymmetric or multiplier eﬀects

arising through utilization of capital (Finn, 2000) or putty-clay capital (Atkeson and Kehoe,

1999).     Related general equilibrium investigations include Kim and Loungani (1992) and

Leduc and Sill (2004).

   6
       See BEA Table 2.3.5.u (http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/nipa_underlying/SelectTable.asp).




                                               32
   References
   Arrow, Kenneth J. and Sheldon Chang (1982), “Optimal Pricing, Use and Exploration of

Uncertain Natural Resource Stocks,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

9, pp. 1-10.

   Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe (1999), “Models of Energy Use: Putty-putty

Versus Putty-clay,” American Economic Review 89, pp. 1028-1043.

   Balke, Nathan S., Stephen P.A. Brown, and Mine Yücel (2002), “Oil Price Shocks and

the U.S. Economy: Where Does the Asymmetry Originate?,” Energy Journal 23, pp. 27-52.

   Baumeister, Christiane and Gert Peersman (2011), “Time-Varying Eﬀects of Oil Supply

Shocks on the U.S. Economy”, working paper, Bank of Canada.

   Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson (1997), “Systematic Monetary Policy

and the Eﬀects of Oil Price Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1997, pp.

91-142.

   Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Galí (2010), “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Oil Price

Shocks: Why are the 2000s so Diﬀerent from the 1970s?” in Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler

(eds.), International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, pp. 373-428, University of Chicago

Press (Chicago, IL).

   Bohi, Douglas R. (1989), Energy Price Shocks and Macroeconomic Performance, Wash-

ington D.C.: Resources for the Future.

   Brandt, Adam R., and Alexander E. Farrell (2007), “Scraping the Bottom of the Bar-

rel: Greenhouse Gas Emission Consequences of a Transition to Low-Quality and Synthetic



                                          33
Petroleum Resources,” Climatic Change 84, pp. 241-263.

   Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Valerie A. Ramey (1993), “Segment Shifts and Capacity

Utilization in the U.S. Automobile Industry,” American Economic Review Papers and Pro-

ceedings 83, pp. 213-218.

   Burbidge, John, and Alan Harrison (1984), “Testing for the Eﬀects of Oil-Price Rises

Using Vector Autoregressions,” International Economic Review 25, pp. 459-484.

   Carlton, Amelie Benear (2010), “Oil Prices and Real-time Output Frowth,” Working

paper, University of Houston.

   Carroll, Daniel (2011), “The Cost of Food and Energy across Consumers,” Economic

Trends (March 14), Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/

trends/2011/0411/01houcon.cfm).

   Carruth, Alan A., Mark A. Hooker, and Andrew J. Oswald (1998), “Unemployment Equi-

libria and Input Prices: Theory and Evidence from the United States,” Review of Economics

and Statistics 80, pp. 621-628.

   Charpentier, Alex D., Joule A Bergerson and Heather L MacLean (2009), “Understanding

the Canadian Oil Sands Industry’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Environmental Research

Letters 4, pp. 1-11.

   Cuñado, Juncal and Fernando Pérez de Gracia (2003), “Do Oil Price Shocks Matter?

Evidence for some European Countries,” Energy Economics 25, pp. 137—154.

   Dahl, Carol A. (1993), “A Survey of Oil Demand Elasticities for Developing Countries,”

OPEC Review 17(Winter), pp. 399-419.



                                           34
   Daniel, Betty C. (1997), “International Interdependence of National Growth Rates: A

Structural Trends Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, pp. 73-96.

   _____, Christian M. Hafner, Hans Manner, and Léopold Simar (2011), “Asymmetries

in Business Cycles: The Role of Oil Production”, working paper, University of Albany.

   Dargay, Joyce M. and Dermot Gately (2010), “World Oil Demand’s Shift toward Faster

Growing and Less Price-Responsive Products and Regions,” Energy Policy 38, pp. 6261-

6277.

   Dasgupta, Partha, and Geoﬀrey Heal (1979), Economic Theory and Exhaustible Re-

sources, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

   Davis, Steven J. (1987a), “Fluctuations in the Pace of Labor Reallocation,” in Karl

Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer (eds.), Empirical Studies of Velocity, Real Exchange Rates,

Unemployment and Productivity, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 24,

Amsterdam: North Holland.

   _____ (1987b), “Allocative Disturbances and Specific Capital in Real Business Cycle

Theories,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 77, pp. 326-332.

   _____ and John Haltiwanger (2001), “Sectoral Job Creation and Destruction Re-

sponses to Oil Price Changes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 48, pp. 465-512.

   Derrick’s Hand-Book of Petroleum: A Complete Chronological and Statistical Review

of Petroleum Developments from 1859 to 1898 (1898), Oil City, PA: Derrick Publishing

Company, Obtained through Google Books.

   Edelstein, Paul and Lutz Kilian (2009), “How Sensitive are Consumer Expenditures to



                                           35
Retail Energy Prices?”, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, pp. 766-779.

   Elder, John and Apostolos Serletis (2010), “Oil Price Uncertainty,” Journal of Money,

Credit and Banking 42, pp. 1138-1159

   Engemann, Kristie M. Kevin L. Kliesen, and Michael T. Owyang (forthcoming), “Do

Oil Shocks Drive Business Cycles? Some U.S. and International Evidence,” Macroeconomic

Dynamics.

   Ferderer, J. Peter (1996), “Oil Price Volatility and the Macroeconomy: A Solution to

the Asymmetry Puzzle,” Journal of Macroeconomics 18, pp. 1-16.

   Finn, Mary G. (2000), “Perfect Competition and the Eﬀects of Energy Price Increases

on Economic Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, pp. 400-416.

   Foote, Christopher L. and Jane S. Little (2011), “Oil and the Macroeconomy in a Chang-

ing World: A Conference Summary,” Public Policy Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Bank

of Boston.

   Fouquet, Roger and Peter J.G. Pearson (2006), “Seven Centuries of Energy Services:

The Price and Use of Light in the United Kingdom (1300-2000),” Energy Journal 27, pp.

139-177.

   _____ and _____ (2012), “The Long Run Demand for Lighting: Elasticities and

Rebound Eﬀects in Diﬀerent Phases of Economic Development,” Economics of Energy and

Environmental Policy 1, pp. 1-18.

   Gisser, Micha, and Thomas H. Goodwin (1986), “Crude Oil and the Macroeconomy:

Tests of Some Popular Notions,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 18, pp. 95-103.



                                           36
   Hamilton, Clive, and Hal Turton (2002), “Determinants of Emissions Growth in OECD

Countries,” Energy Policy 30, pp. 63—71.

   Hamilton, James D. (1983), “Oil and the Macroeconomy Since World War II,” Journal

of Political Economy 91, pp. 228-248.

   _____ (1988), “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle,”

Journal of Political Economy 96, pp. 593-617.

   _____ (1996), “This is What Happened to the Oil Price Macroeconomy Relation,”

Journal of Monetary Economics 38, pp. 215-220.

   _____ (2003), “What is an Oil Shock?”, Journal of Econometrics 113, pp. 363-398.

   _____ (2009a), “Understanding Crude Oil Prices,” Energy Journal 30, pp. 179-206.

   _____ (2009b), “Causes and Consequences of the Oil shock of 2007-08,” Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2009, pp. 215-261.

   _____ (forthcoming [a]), “Nonlinearities and the Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Oil Prices,”

Macroeconomic Dynamics.

   _____ (forthcoming [b]), “Historical Oil Shocks,” Handbook of Major Events in Eco-

nomic History, edited by Randall Parker and Robert Whaples, Routledge.

   _____, and Ana Maria Herrera (2004), “Oil Shocks and Aggregate Macroeconomic

Behavior: The Role of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36, pp.

265-286

   _____, and Michael T. Owyang (forthcoming), “The Propagation of Regional Reces-

sions,” forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.



                                           37
   Herrera, Ana María, Latika Gupta Lagalo and Tatsuma Wada (forthcoming), “Oil Price

Shocks and Industrial Production: Is the Relationship Linear?,” Macroeconomic Dynamics.

   Hooker, Mark A. (1996), “What Happened to the Oil Price-Macroeconomy Relation-

ship?”, Journal of Monetary Economics 38, pp. 195-213.

   Hotelling, Harold (1931), “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Journal of Political

Economy 39, pp. 137-75.

   Jenkins, Gilbert (1985), Oil Economists’ Handbook, London: British Petroleum Com-

pany.

   Jiménez-Rodríguez, Rebeca and Marcelo Sánchez (2005), “Oil Price Shocks and Real

GDP Growth: Empirical Evidence for some OECD Countries,” Applied Economics 37, pp.

201—228.

   Jo, Soojin (2011), “The Eﬀects of Oil Price Uncertainty on the Macroeconomy,” working

paper, UCSD.

   Kambara, Tatsu and Christopher Howe (2007), China and the Global Energy Crisis,

Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

   Kilian, Lutz (2008), ““The Economic Eﬀects of Energy Price Shocks,” Journal of Eco-

nomic Literature 46, pp. 871-909.

   _____ (2009), “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply

Shocks in the Crude Oil Market”, American Economic Review 99, pp. 1053-1069.

   _____, and Bruce Hicks (2011), “Did Unexpectedly Strong Economic Growth Cause

the Oil Price Shock of 2003-2008?”, working paper, University of Michigan.



                                            38
   _____ and Robert J. Vigfusson (forthcoming [a]), “Are the Responses of the U.S.

Economy Asymmetric in Energy Price Increases and Decreases?”, Quantitative Economics.

   ____ and _____ (forthcoming [b]), “Nonlinearities in the Oil-Output Relationship,”

Macroeconomic Dynamics.

   Kim, Dong Heon (forthcoming), “What is an Oil Shock? Panel Data Evidence,” Empir-

ical Economics.

   Kim, In-Moo and Prakash Loungani (1992), “The Role of Energy in Real Business Cycle

Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics 29, pp. 173-189.

   Knittel, Christopher R. (forthcoming), “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute

Trade-oﬀs and Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector,” American Economic Re-

view.

   Krautkraemer, Jeﬀrey A. (1998), “Nonrenewable Resource Scarcity,” Journal of Eco-

nomic Literature 36, pp. 2065-2107.

   Leduc, Sylvain and Keith Sill (2004), “A Quantitative Analysis of Oil-Price Shocks,

Systematic Monetary Policy, and Economic Downturns,” Journal of Monetary Economics

51, pp. 781-808.

   Lee, Kiseok and Shawn Ni (2002), “On the Dynamic Eﬀects of Oil Price Shocks: A Study

Using Industry Level Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, pp. 823—852.

   _____, _____, and Ronald A. Ratti (1995), “Oil Shocks and the Macroeconomy:

The Role of Price Variability,” Energy Journal 16, pp. 39-56.

   Loungani, Prakash (1986), “Oil Price Shocks and the Dispersion Hypothesis,” Review of



                                            39
Economics and Statistics 68, pp. 536-539.

   Mork, Knut A. (1989), “Oil and the Macroeconomy When Prices Go Up and Down: An

Extension of Hamilton’s Results,” Journal of Political Economy 91, pp. 740-744.

   _____, Øystein Olsen, and Hans Terje Mysen (1994), “Macroeconomic Responses to

Oil Price Increases and Decreases in Seven OECD Countries,” Energy Journal 15, no. 4, pp.

19-35.

   Pindyck, Robert S. (1978), “The Optimal Exploration and Production of Nonrenewable

Resources,” Journal of Political Economy 86, pp. 841-861.

   Ramey, Valerie A. and Daniel J. Vine (2012), “Oil, Automobiles, and the U.S. Economy:

How Much Have Things Really Changed? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011.

   Rasche, R. H., and J. A. Tatom (1977), “Energy Resources and Potential GNP,” Federal

Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 59 (June), pp. 10-24.

   _____, and _____ (1981), “Energy Price Shocks, Aggregate Supply, and Monetary

Policy: The Theory and International Evidence.” In K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds.,

Supply Shocks, Incentives, and National Wealth, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on

Public Policy, vol. 14, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

   Rasmussen, Tobias N. and Agustín Roitman (2011), “Oil Shocks in a Global Perspective:

Are they Really that Bad?”, working paper, IMF.

   Ravazzolo, Francesco and Philip Rothman (2010), “Oil and U.S. GDP: A Real-Time

Out-of-Sample Examination,” Working paper, East Carolina University.

   Raymond, Jennie E., and Robert W. Rich (1997), “Oil and the Macroeconomy: A Markov



                                            40
State-Switching Approach,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29 (May), pp. 193-213.

Erratum 29 (November, Part 1), p. 555.

   Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1996), “Imperfect Competition and the

Eﬀects of Energy Price Increases,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28 (part 1), pp.

549-577.

   Santini, Danilo J. (1985), “The Energy-Squeeze Model: Energy Price Dynamics in U.S.

Business Cycles,” International Journal of Energy Systems 5, pp. 18-25.

   _____ (1992), “Energy and the Macroeconomy: Capital Spending After an Energy

Cost Shock,” in J. Moroney, ed., Advances in the Economics of Energy and Resources, vol.

7, Greenwich, CN: J.A.I. Press.

   _____ (1994), “Verification of Energy’s Role as a Determinant of U.S. Economic Ac-

tivity,” in J. Moroney, ed., Advances in the Economics of Energy and Resources, vol. 8,

Greenwich, CN: J.A.I. Press.

   Slade, Margaret E. (1982), “Trends in Natural Resource Commodity Prices: An Analysis

of the Time Domain,” Journal of Environmental and Economic Management 9, pp. 122-137.

   Smith, James L. (2011), “On The Portents of Peak Oil (And Other Indicators of Resource

Scarcity),” working paper, Southern Methodist University.

   Wickstrom, Larry, Chris Perry, Matthew Erenpreiss, and Ron Riley (2011), “The Marcel-

lus and Utica Shale Plays in Ohio,” presentation at the Ohio Oil and Gas Association Meet-

ing, March 11 (http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/portals/10/energy/Marcellus_Utica_presentation_

OOGAL.pdf).



                                           41
   Williamson, Harold F., and Arnold R. Daum (1959), The American Petroleum Industry:

The Age of Illumination 1859-1899, Evanson: Northwestern University Press.




                                          42
Table 1. Summary of significant postwar events.

   Gasoline       Crude oil price      Crude oil or       Key factors        Business cycle
   shortages         increase         gasoline price                             peak
                                         controls
Nov 47- Dec 47     Nov 47-Jan 48            no          strong demand,          Nov 48
                      (37%)            (threatened)    supply constraints
    May 52         Jun 53 (10%)             yes              strike,             Jul 53
                                                         controls lifted
Nov 56-Dec 56      Jan 57-Feb 57          yes             Suez Crisis           Aug 57
  (Europe)             (9%)             (Europe)
    none                none               no                   ---             Apr 60
    none            Feb 69 (7%)            no             strike, strong        Dec 69
                    Nov 70 (8%)                         demand, supply
                                                            constraints
    Jun 73         Apr 73-Sep 73           yes           strong demand,         Nov 73
                       (16%)                           supply constraints,
Dec 73- Mar 74     Nov 73-Feb 74                        OAPEC embargo
                       (51%)
 May 79-Jul 79     May 79-Jan 80           yes         Iranian revolution       Jan 80
                       (57%)
     none          Nov 80-Feb 81           yes           Iran-Iraq War,          Jul 81
                       (45%)                             controls lifted
     none          Aug 90-Oct 90           no              Gulf War I            Jul 90
                       (93%)
     none          Dec 99-Nov 00           no           strong demand           Mar 01
                       (38%)
     none          Nov 02-Mar 03           no          Venezuela unrest,         none
                       (28%)                              Gulf War II
     none          Feb 07-Jun 08           no           strong demand,          Dec 07
                      (145%)                            stagnant supply

Source: Hamilton (forthcoming [b]).




                                          43
  250




  200




  150




  100




   50




    0
         1860     1880     1900     1920        1940   1960    1980     2000

Figure 1. Price of oil in 2010 dollars per barrel, 1860-2010. Data source: 1861-2010
from BP, Statistical Review of World Energy 2010; 1860 from Jenkins (1985, Table 18)
(which appears to be the original source for the early values of the BP series) and
Historical Statistics of the United States, Table E 135-166, Consumer Prices Indexes
(BLS), All Items, 1800 to 1970.




                                           44
                                      PA and NY
  35000



  30000



  25000



  20000



  15000



  10000



   5000



      0
            1860     1880     1900      1920     1940     1960      1980     2000

Figure 2. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from the states of
Pennsylvania and New York combined. Data sources: see Appendix.




                                            45
                                                     PA and NY
  35000
  30000
  25000
  20000
  15000
  10000
   5000
      0
          1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                           OH
  35000
  30000
  25000
  20000
  15000
  10000
   5000
      0
          1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                           WV
  35000
  30000
  25000
  20000
  15000
  10000
   5000
      0
          1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


Figure 3. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from the states of
Pennsylvania and New York combined (top panel), Ohio (middle panel), and West
Virginia (bottom panel).




                                                           46
  60,000

  50,000

  40,000
                                                                                                                           OH
  30,000                                                                                                                   WV
                                                                                                                           PA-NY
  20,000

  10,000

       0
           1859
                  1869
                         1879
                                1889
                                       1899
                                              1909
                                                     1919
                                                            1929
                                                                   1939
                                                                          1949
                                                                                 1959
                                                                                        1969
                                                                                               1979
                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                    2009
Figure 4. Combined annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from
the states of Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia, and Ohio.




                                                                                 47
                                                       IL and IN
  200000

  150000

  100000

  50000

      0
           1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                      KS and NE
  200000

  150000

  100000

  50000

      0
           1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                 CO, NM, AZ, and UT
  200000

  150000

  100000

  50000

      0
           1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                            WY
  200000

  150000

  100000

  50000

      0
           1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


Figure 5. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from assorted
groups of states in the central United States.




                                                            48
                                                             CA
  500000
  400000
  300000
  200000
  100000
       0
            1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                             OK
  500000
  400000
  300000
  200000
  100000
       0
            1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                             TX
  1200000

  800000

  400000

       0
            1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                             LA
  1200000

  800000

  400000

       0
            1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




Figure 6. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from 4 leading
producing states. California includes offshore and Louisiana includes all Gulf of Mexico
U.S. production.




                                                             49
                                             AK
  800000

  700000

  600000

  500000

  400000

  300000

  200000

  100000

       0
           1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010


                                         ND and MT
  800000

  700000

  600000

  500000

  400000

  300000

  200000

  100000

       0
           1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Figure 7. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from Alaska
(including offshore), North Dakota, and Montana.




                                             50
  4,000,000

                                                                                           other
  3,500,000
                                                                                           ND-MT
                                                                                           AK
  3,000,000
                                                                                           WY
                                                                                           OK
  2,500,000
                                                                                           LA-GoM
                                                                                           TX
  2,000,000
                                                                                           CO-NM-AZ-UT
                                                                                           KS-NE
  1,500,000
                                                                                           CA-off
                                                                                           IL-IN
  1,000,000
                                                                                           OH
                                                                                           WV
    500,000
                                                                                           PA-NY

          0
              1859
                     1873
                            1887
                                   1901
                                          1915
                                                 1929
                                                        1943
                                                               1957
                                                                      1971
                                                                             1985
                                                                                    1999



Figure 8. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per year) from entire
United States, with contributions from individual regions as indicated.




                                                                       51
                                                     US
  10000
   9000
   8000
   7000
   6000
   5000
   4000
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009

                                                 North Sea
  10000

   8000

   6000

   4000

   2000

      0
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009

                                                  Mexico
  10000

   7500

   5000

   2500

      0
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009


Figure 9. Annual crude oil production, thousand barrels per day, for United States,
combined output of Norway and United Kingdom, and Mexico, 1973-2010. Data source:
Monthly Energy Review, Sept. 2011, Table 11.1b (http://205.254.135.24/totalenergy/
data/monthly/query/mer_data.asp?table=T11.01B).




                                                     52
                                             Saudi Arabia
  25000


  20000


  15000


  10000


   5000


      0
          1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988    1991   1994   1997   2000   2003   2006   2009


                                             Other OPEC
  25000


  20000


  15000


  10000


   5000


      0
          1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988    1991   1994   1997   2000   2003   2006   2009

Figure 10. Annual crude oil production, thousand barrels per day, for Saudi Arabia and
the rest of OPEC. Data source: Monthly Energy Review, Sept. 2011, Table 11.1a
(http://205.254.135.24/totalenergy/data/monthly/query/mer_data.asp?table=T11.01A).




                                                    53
                                                    China
  5000

  4000

  3000

  2000

  1000
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009

                                                   Canada
  5000

  4000

  3000

  2000

  1000
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009

                                             Other Non-OPEC
  25000

  22500

  20000

  17500

  15000

  12500
          1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009




Figure 11. Annual crude oil production, thousand barrels per day. Top two panels:
China and Canada. Bottom panel combines all non-OPEC countries other than those in
Figure 10 or top two panels. Data source: Monthly Energy Review, Sept. 2011, Table
11.1b (http://205.254.135.24/totalenergy/data/monthly/query/
mer_data.asp?table=T11.01B).




                                                      54
  80000
  70000                                                                                                other non-OPEC
  60000                                                                                                Canada
  50000                                                                                                China
                                                                                                       other OPEC
  40000
                                                                                                       Saudi
  30000                                                                                                Mexico
  20000                                                                                                North Sea
  10000                                                                                                U.S.

       0
           1973
                  1976
                         1979
                                1982
                                       1985
                                              1988
                                                     1991
                                                            1994
                                                                   1997
                                                                          2000
                                                                                  2003
                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                2009
Figure 12. Annual crude oil production (in thousands of barrels per day) from entire
world, with contributions from individual regions as indicated. Data sources described in
notes to Figures 9-11.




                                                                                 55
                                       Production after Oct 1956
  10.0

   2.5

   -5.0
                                                                                     MIDDLE_EAST        GLOBAL
  -12.5
               0       1       2           3       4        5       6       7          8           9

                                       Production after Sept 1973
    2
                                                                                           OAPEC        GLOBAL
   -2

   -6

  -10
           0       1       2       3   4       5        6       7   8   9       10         11      12

                                       Production after Oct 1978
    2

   -2

   -6
                                                                                            IRAN        GLOBAL
  -10
           0       1       2       3   4       5        6       7   8   9       10         11      12

                                       Production after Sept 1980
    2
                                                                                       IRAN_IRAQ        GLOBAL
   -2

   -6

  -10
           0       1       2       3   4       5        6       7   8   9       10         11      12

                                       Production after July 1990
    2
                                                                                     IRAQ_KUWAIT        GLOBAL
   -2

   -6

  -10
           0       1       2       3   4       5        6       7   8   9       10         11      12


Figure 13. First panel: Oil production after the Suez Crisis. Dashed line: change in
monthly global crude oil production from October 1956 as a percentage of October 1956
levels. Solid line: change in monthly Middle East oil production from October 1956 as a
percentage of global levels in October 1956. Second panel: Oil production after the 1973
Arab-Israeli War. Dashed line: change in monthly global crude oil production from
September 1973 as a percentage of September 1973 levels. Solid line: change in monthly
oil production of Arab members of OPEC from September 1973 as a percentage of global
levels in September 1973. Horizontal axis: number of months from September 1973.
Third panel: Oil production after the 1978 Iranian revolution. Dashed line: change in
monthly global crude oil production from October 1978 as a percentage of October 1978
levels. Solid line: change in monthly Iranian oil production from October 1978 as a
percentage of global levels in October 1978. Fourth panel: Oil production after the Iran-
Iraq War. Dashed line: change in monthly global crude oil production from September
1980 as a percentage of September 1980 levels. Solid line: change in monthly oil
production of Iran and Iraq from September 1980 as a percentage of global levels in
September 1980. Fifth panel: Oil production after the first Persian Gulf War. Dashed
line: change in monthly global crude oil production from August 1990 as a percentage of
August 1990 levels. Solid line: change in monthly oil production of Iraq and Kuwait from
August 1990 as a percentage of global levels in August 1990. Horizontal axis: number of
months from August 1990. Source: Adapted from Figures 6, 10, 12, 13, and 15 in
Hamilton (forthcoming [b]).



                                                       56
                                     Total consumption
   5
   0
   -5
  -10
  -15
  -20
  -25
           0   1    2   3    4   5      6   7    8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15

                                       Motor vehicles
   5
   0
   -5
  -10
  -15
  -20
  -25
           0   1    2   3    4   5      6   7    8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15

                                     Consumer sentiment
   5
   0
   -5
  -10
  -15
  -20
  -25
           0   1    2   3    4   5      6   7    8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15


Figure 14. Top panel: impulse-response function showing percentage change in total real
consumption spending k months following an energy price increase that would have
reduced spending power by 1%. Second panel: percentage change in real spending on
motor vehicles. Bottom panel: change in consumer sentiment (measured in percentage
points). Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. Source: adapted from Edelstein
and Kilian (2009) and Hamilton (2009b).




                                            57
Figure 15. Dashed line: actual value for real GDP. Green line: dynamic forecast (1- to 5-
quarters ahead) based on coefficients of univariate AR(4) estimated 1949:Q2 to 2001:Q3
and applied to GDP data through 2007:Q3. Red line: dynamic conditional forecast (1- to
5-quarters ahead) based on coefficients reported in equation (3.8) in Hamilton (2003)
using GDP data through 2007:Q3 and conditioning on the ex-post realizations of the net
oil price increase measure ot#+ s for t + s = 2007:Q4 through 2009:Q3. Source: Foote and
Little (2011).




                                           58
  10.0




   7.5




   5.0




   2.5




   0.0
           1960   1965   1970   1975   1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010

Figure 16. Energy expenditures as a fraction of total U.S. consumption spending.
Calculated as 100 times nominal monthly consumption expenditures on energy goods and
services divided by total personal consumption expenditures, 1959:M1 to 2011:M8.
Horizontal line drawn at 6%. Data source: BEA Table 2.3.5U
(http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/nipa_underlying/SelectTable.asp).




                                              59
                                             Data Appendix

       State-level production data (in thousands of barrels per year) were assembled from the

following sources: Derrick's Handbook (1898, p. 805); Minerals Yearbook, U.S. Department of

Interior, various issues (1937, 1940, 1944, and 1948); Basic Petroleum Data Book, American

Petroleum Institute, 1992; and Energy Information Administration online data set

(http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_crd_crpdn_adc_mbbl_a.htm). Numbers for Kansas for 1905 and

1906 include Oklahoma. The Basic Petroleum Data Book appears to allocate some Gulf of Mexico

production to Texas but most to Louisiana. The EIA series (which has been used here for data from

1981 onward) does not allocate Federal offshore Gulf of Mexico to specific states, and has been

attributed entirely to Louisiana in the table below.




                                                       60
                                                                                              CO-NM-AZ-
Year      US total     PA-NY     WV         OH         IL-IN         CA          KS-NE           UT       TX         LA         OK         WY        AK       ND-MT       Other

   1862        3,056     3,056          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1863        2,631     2,631          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1864        2,116     2,116          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1865        2,498     2,498          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1866        3,598     3,598          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1867        3,347     3,347          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1868        3,716     3,716          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1869        4,215     4,215          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1870        5,659     5,659          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1871        5,795     5,795          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1872        6,539     6,539          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1873        9,894     9,894          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1874       10,927    10,927          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1875        8,788     8,788          0          0             0          0             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1876        9,133     8,969        120         32             0         12             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1877       13,350    13,135        172         30             0         13             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1878       15,396    15,163        180         38             0         15             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1879       19,914    19,685        180         29             0         20             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1880       26,286    26,028        179         39             0         40             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1881       27,662    27,377        151         34             0        100             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1882       21,073    20,776        128         40             0        129             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            0

   1883       23,449    23,128        126         47             0        143             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1884       24,218    23,772         90         90             0        262             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            4

   1885       21,859    20,776         91        662             0        325             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1886       28,065    25,798        102    1,783               0        377             0           0          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1887       28,283    22,356        145    5,023               0        678             0          76          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1888       27,612    16,489        119   10,011               0        690             0         298          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1889       35,163    21,487        544   12,472              34        303             1         317          0          0          0         0        0           0            5

   1890       45,824    28,458        493   16,125              65        307             1         369          0          0          0         0        0           0            6

   1891       54,293    33,009    2,406     17,740             138        324             1         666          0          0          0         0        0           0            9

   1892       50,515    28,422    3,810     16,363             699        385             5         824          0          0          0         0        0           0            7

   1893       48,431    20,315    8,446     16,249        2,336           470            18         594          0          0          0         0        0           0            3

   1894       49,344    19,020    8,577     16,792        3,689           706            40         516          0          0          0         2        0           0            2

   1895       52,892    19,144    8,120     19,545        4,386       1,209              44         438          0          0          0         4        0           0            2

   1896       60,960    20,584   10,020     23,941        4,681       1,253           114           361          1          0          0         3        0           0            2

   1897       60,476    19,262   13,090     21,561        4,123       1,903              81         385         66          0          1         4        0           0            0

   1898       55,367    15,948   13,618     18,739        3,731       2,257              72         444        546          0          0         6        0           0            6

   1899       57,071    14,375   13,911     21,142        3,848       2,642              70         390        669          0          0         6        0           0           18

   1900       63,621    14,559   16,196     22,363        4,874       4,325              75         317        836          0          6         6        0           0           64

   1901       69,389    13,832   14,177     21,648        5,757       8,787           179           461    4,394            0         10         5        0           0       139

   1902       88,767    13,184   13,513     21,014        7,481      13,984           332           397   18,084          549         37         6        0           0       186

   1903      100,461    12,518   12,900     20,480        9,186      24,382           932           484   17,956          918        139         9        0           0       557

   1904      117,081    12,239   12,645     18,877      11,339       29,649          4,251          501   22,241      2,959      1,367          12        0           0     1,001

   1905      134,717    11,555   11,578     16,347      11,145       33,428               0         376   28,136      8,910     12,014           8        0           0      1,220

   1906      126,494    11,500   10,121     14,788      12,071       33,099               0         328   12,568      9,077     21,718           7        0           0      1,217

   1907      166,095    11,212    9,095     12,207      29,410       39,748          2,410          332   12,323      5,000     43,524           9        0           0       825

   1908      178,527    10,584    9,523     10,859      36,969       44,855          1,801          380   11,207      5,789     45,799          18        0           0       743




                                                                                61
1909    183,171    10,434   10,745   10,633    33,194    55,472         1,264      311       9,534      3,060    47,859       20    0       0       645

1910    209,557     9,849   11,753    9,916    35,303    73,011         1,128      240       8,899      6,841    52,029      115    0       0       473

1911    220,449     9,201    9,796    8,817    33,012    81,134         1,279      227       9,526     10,721    56,069      187    0       0       480

1912    222,935     8,712   12,129    8,969    29,572    87,269         1,593      206      11,735      9,263    51,427     1,572   0       0       488

1913    248,446     8,865   11,567    8,781    24,850    97,788         2,375      189      15,010     12,499    63,579     2,407   0       0       536

1914    265,763     9,109    9,680    8,536    23,256    99,775         3,104      223      20,068     14,309    73,632     3,560   0       0       511

1915    281,104     8,726    9,265    7,825    19,918    86,592         2,823      208      24,943     18,192    97,915     4,246   0       0       451

1916    300,767     8,467    8,731    7,744    18,483    90,952         8,738      197      27,645     15,248   107,072     6,234   0      45      1,211

1917    335,316     8,613    8,379    7,751    16,537    93,878        36,536      121      32,413     11,392   107,508     8,978   0     100      3,110

1918    355,928     8,217    7,867    7,285    14,244    97,532        45,451      143      38,750     16,043   103,347    12,596   0      69      4,384

1919    378,367     8,988    8,327    7,736    12,932   101,183        33,048      121      79,366     17,188    86,911    13,172   0      90      9,305

1920    442,929     8,344    8,249    7,400    11,719   103,377        39,005      111      96,868     35,714   106,206    16,831   0     340      8,765

1921    472,183     8,406    7,822    7,335    11,201   112,600        36,456      108     106,166     27,103   114,634    19,333   0    1,509    19,510

1922    557,530     8,425    7,021    6,781    10,470   138,468        31,766       97     118,684     35,376   149,571    26,715   0    2,449    21,707

1923    732,407     8,859    6,358    7,085     9,750   262,876        28,250       86     131,023     24,919   160,929    44,785   0    2,782    44,705

1924    713,940     8,926    5,920    6,811     9,016   228,933        28,836      543     134,522     21,124   173,538    39,498   0    2,815    53,458

1925    763,743     9,792    5,763    7,212     8,692   232,492        38,357     2,286    144,648     20,272   176,768    29,173   0    4,091    84,197

1926    770,874    10,917    5,946    7,272     8,568   224,673        41,498     4,434    166,916     23,201   179,195    25,776   0    7,727    64,751

1927    901,129    11,768    6,023    7,593     7,846   231,196        41,069     4,057    217,389     22,818   277,775    21,307   0    5,058    47,230

1928    901,474    12,559    5,661    7,015     7,514   231,811        38,596     3,717    257,320     21,847   249,857    21,461   0    4,015    40,101

1929   1,007,323   15,197    5,574    6,743     7,300   292,534        42,813     4,188    296,876     20,554   255,004    19,314   0    3,980    37,246

1930    898,011    16,450    5,071    6,486     6,730   227,329        41,638    11,845    290,457     23,272   216,486    17,868   0    3,349    31,030

1931    851,081    15,255    4,472    5,327     5,879   188,830        37,018    16,772    332,437     21,804   180,574    14,834   0    2,830    25,049

1932    785,159    15,920    3,876    4,644     5,479   178,128        34,848    13,591    312,478     21,807   153,244    13,418   0    2,457    25,269

1933    905,656    15,805    3,815    4,235     4,981   172,010        41,976    15,035    402,609     25,168   182,251    11,227   0    2,273    24,271

1934    908,065    18,282    4,095    4,234     5,317   174,305        46,482    18,003    381,516     32,869   180,107    12,556   0    3,603    26,696

1935    996,596    20,046    3,902    4,082     5,099   207,832        54,843    22,043    392,666     50,330   185,288    13,755   0    4,603    32,107

1936   1,099,687   21,733    3,847    3,847     5,297   214,773        58,317    28,873    427,411     80,491   206,555    14,582   0    5,868    28,093

1937   1,279,160   24,667    3,845    3,559     8,343   238,521        70,761    40,459    510,318     90,924   228,839    19,166   0    5,805    33,953

1938   1,214,355   22,471    3,684    3,298    25,070   249,749        60,064    37,171    475,850     95,208   174,994    19,022   0    4,946    42,828

1939   1,264,962   22,480    3,580    3,156    96,623   224,354        60,703    39,041    483,528     93,646   159,913    21,454   0    5,960    50,524

1940   1,353,214   22,352    3,444    3,159   152,625   223,881        66,415    40,755    493,209    103,584   156,164    25,711   0    6,728    55,187

1941   1,402,228   21,935    3,433    3,510   139,804   230,263        85,140    41,719    505,572    115,908   154,702    29,878   0    7,526    62,838

1942   1,386,645   23,200    3,574    3,543   113,134   248,326        98,873    33,743    483,097    115,785   140,690    32,812   0    8,074    81,794

1943   1,505,613   20,816    3,349    3,322    87,543   284,188    106,813       41,216    594,343    123,592   123,152    34,253   0    7,916    75,110

1944   1,677,904   18,815    3,070    2,937    82,531   311,793        99,179    42,638    746,699    129,645   124,616    33,356   0    8,647    73,978

1945   1,713,665   17,163    2,879    2,838    79,962   326,482        96,720    42,387    754,710    131,051   139,299    36,219   0    8,420    75,535

1946   1,733,909   17,829    2,929    2,908    82,023   314,713        97,511    48,670    760,215    143,669   134,794    38,977   0    8,825    80,846

1947   1,856,987   17,452    2,617    3,108    72,554   333,132    105,361       56,628    820,210    160,128   141,019    44,772   0    8,742    91,264

1948   2,020,185   17,288    2,692    3,600    71,782   340,074    111,123       65,847    903,498    181,458   154,455    55,032   0    9,382   103,954

1949   1,841,940   15,799    2,839    3,483    74,197   332,942    102,198       71,869    744,834    190,826   151,660    47,890   0    9,118    94,285

1950   1,973,574   16,002    2,808    3,383    72,727   327,607    109,133       71,898    829,874    208,965   164,599    61,631   0    8,109    96,838

1951   2,247,711   15,599    2,757    3,140    71,343   354,561    117,080       81,847   1,010,270   232,281   186,869    68,929   0    8,983    94,052

1952   2,289,836   15,475    2,602    3,350    72,126   359,450    117,467       90,799   1,022,139   243,929   190,435    68,074   0   11,155    92,835

1953   2,357,082   14,449    3,038    3,610    71,849   365,085    120,910      108,650   1,019,164   256,632   202,570    82,618   0   17,103    91,404

1954   2,314,988   12,364    2,902    3,880    78,002   355,865    127,100      122,931    974,275    246,558   185,851    93,533   0   20,220    91,507

1955   2,484,428   11,435    2,320    4,353    92,411   354,812    132,872      137,838   1,053,297   271,010   202,817    99,483   0   26,797    94,983

1956   2,617,283   10,978    2,179    4,785    93,859   350,754    140,408      148,875   1,107,808   299,421   215,862   104,830   0   35,255   102,269

1957   2,616,901   10,856    2,215    5,478    89,745   339,646    143,200      154,108   1,073,867   329,896   214,661   109,584   0   40,431   103,214




                                                                  62
1958   2,448,987   8,235   2,186    6,260   92,139   313,672    140,315      172,074    940,166    313,891   200,699   115,572        0    42,216   101,562

1959   2,574,600   8,140   2,184    5,978   88,281   308,946    142,424      192,116    971,978    362,666   198,090   126,050      187    47,681   119,879

1960   2,574,933   7,822   2,300    5,405   89,395   305,352    137,278      192,516    927,479    400,832   192,913   133,910      559    52,232   126,940

1961   2,621,758   7,301   2,760    5,639   88,318   299,609    136,610      192,503    939,191    424,962   193,081   141,937     6,327   54,558   128,962

1962   2,676,189   6,891   3,470    5,835   90,873   296,590    136,970      182,873    943,328    477,153   202,732   135,847    10,259   56,829   126,539

1963   2,752,723   6,762   3,350    6,039   86,698   300,908    130,953      181,727    977,835    515,057   201,962   144,407    10,740   55,900   130,385

1964   2,786,822   6,987   3,370   15,859   81,451   300,009    125,365      177,257    989,525    549,698   202,524   138,752    11,059   56,378   128,588

1965   2,848,514   6,554   3,530   12,908   75,189   316,428    121,949      178,072   1,000,749   594,853   203,441   138,314    11,128   59,128   126,271

1966   3,027,762   6,072   3,674   10,899   72,278   345,295    117,588      181,889   1,057,706   674,318   224,839   134,470    14,358   62,506   121,870

1967   3,215,742   6,359   3,561    9,924   69,223   359,219    112,573      187,021   1,119,962   774,527   230,749   136,312    29,126   60,274   116,912

1968   3,329,042   5,692   3,312   11,204   65,083   375,496    107,688      187,361   1,133,380   817,426   223,623   144,250    66,204   73,500   114,823

1969   3,371,751   5,704   3,104   10,972   58,565   375,291    100,822      183,249   1,151,775   844,603   224,729   154,945    73,953   66,657   117,382

1970   3,517,450   5,287   3,124    9,864   51,234   372,191        96,304   178,061   1,249,697   906,907   223,574   160,345    83,616   59,877   117,369

1971   3,453,914   4,924   2,969    8,286   45,742   358,484        88,594   170,669   1,222,926   935,243   213,313   148,114    79,494   56,252   118,904

1972   3,455,369   4,459   2,677    9,358   41,004   347,022        82,449   170,103   1,301,686   891,827   207,633   140,011    72,893   54,528   129,719

1973   3,360,903   4,249   2,385    8,796   35,981   336,075        73,467   171,036   1,294,671   831,524   191,204   141,914    72,323   54,855   142,423

1974   3,202,585   4,374   2,665    9,088   32,472   323,003        68,302   176,306   1,262,126   737,324   177,785   139,997    70,603   54,251   144,289

1975   3,056,779   4,139   2,479    9,578   30,699   322,199        65,226   176,088   1,221,929   650,840   163,123   135,943    69,834   53,296   151,406

1976   2,976,180   3,876   2,519    9,994   30,902   326,021        64,896   165,945   1,189,523   606,501   161,426   134,149    63,398   54,539   162,491

1977   3,009,265   3,539   2,518   10,359   30,922   349,609        63,464   160,223   1,137,880   562,905   156,382   136,472   169,201   55,953   169,838

1978   3,178,216   3,739   2,382   11,154   28,051   347,181        62,448   151,948   1,074,050   532,740   150,456   137,385   448,620   55,279   172,783

1979   3,121,310   3,729   2,406   11,953   26,508   352,268        63,063   140,173   1,018,094   489,687   143,642   131,890   511,335   60,871   165,691

1980   3,146,365   3,475   2,336   12,928   27,680   356,923        66,391   130,510    977,436    469,141   150,140   126,362   591,646   69,921   161,476

1981   3,128,624   4,570   3,473   13,551   28,811   384,958        72,481   128,088    932,350    462,097   154,056   130,563   587,337   76,237   150,052

1982   3,156,715   5,116   3,227   14,571   33,273   401,572        77,397   124,344    908,217    475,474   158,621   118,300   618,910   78,192   139,501

1983   3,170,999   5,113   3,628   14,971   34,521   404,688        77,974   133,990    882,911    499,334   158,604   118,303   625,527   79,915   131,520

1984   3,249,696   5,124   3,524   15,271   34,394   412,020        82,181   143,085    883,174    536,868   168,385   124,269   630,401   82,413   128,587

1985   3,274,553   5,922   3,555   14,988   35,433   423,877        82,350   149,743    869,218    527,852   162,739   128,514   666,233   80,625   123,504

1986   3,168,252   4,636   3,145   13,442   32,004   406,665        74,132   144,354    819,595    532,119   149,105   121,337   681,310   72,700   113,708

1987   3,047,378   4,012   2,835   12,153   27,718   395,698        65,975   137,049    760,962    500,544   134,378   115,267   715,955   66,410   108,422

1988   2,979,126   3,396   2,621   11,711   26,141   386,014        64,802   136,718    735,495    464,466   128,874   113,985   738,143   62,681   104,079

1989   2,778,771   3,196   2,243   10,215   23,689   364,250        61,715   127,921    688,169    432,222   117,493   107,715   683,979   57,700    98,264

1990   2,684,679   3,056   2,143   10,008   22,954   350,899        61,317   125,428    678,478    417,386   112,273   103,856   647,309   56,527    93,045

1991   2,707,043   2,958   1,963    9,156   22,082   351,016        62,760   126,377    682,616    438,825   108,094    99,928   656,349   55,470    89,449

1992   2,624,631   2,541   2,068    9,197   22,319   348,040        59,087   122,573    650,623    443,984   101,807    96,810   627,322   51,376    86,884

1993   2,499,044   2,371   2,048    8,282   20,167   343,729        54,493   119,714    619,090    439,791    96,625    87,667   577,495   48,363    79,209

1994   2,431,483   2,817   1,918    8,758   19,640   343,569        50,948   115,185    590,735    440,306    90,973    79,528   568,951   44,103    74,052

1995   2,394,268   2,243   1,948    8,258   18,968   350,686        47,560   112,544    559,646    467,203    87,490    78,884   541,654   45,865    71,319

1996   2,366,021   2,001   1,680    8,305   18,098   346,828        45,330   108,917    543,342    505,795    85,379    73,365   509,999   48,236    68,746

1997   2,354,832   1,597   1,509    8,593   18,545   339,307        43,172   114,850    536,584    546,302    83,364    70,176   472,949   51,358    66,526

1998   2,281,921   2,197   1,471    6,541   15,940   329,860        38,715   113,969    504,662    582,608    77,578    64,782   428,850   52,045    62,703

1999   2,146,726   1,677   1,471    5,970   14,029   312,719        31,709    99,164    449,233    614,072    70,556    61,126   383,199   47,819    53,982

2000   2,130,720   1,710   1,400    6,575   14,304   306,124        37,420   101,374    443,397    628,675    69,976    60,726   355,199   48,147    55,693

2001   2,117,521   1,786   1,226    6,051   12,114   291,766        36,864    99,832    424,297    665,095    68,531    57,433   351,411   47,611    53,504

2002   2,097,121   2,398   1,382    6,004   14,013   287,793        35,500    98,514    411,985    661,287    66,642    54,717   359,335   47,848    49,703

2003   2,073,454   2,569   1,334    5,647   13,561   280,000        36,699   100,382    405,801    659,242    65,356    52,407   355,582   48,726    46,148

2004   1,983,300   2,708   1,339    5,785   12,739   267,260        36,365   101,014    392,867    615,311    62,502    51,619   332,465   55,878    45,448

2005   1,890,105   4,144   1,563    5,652   11,934   256,848        36,236   100,184    387,680    543,259    62,142    51,626   315,420   68,515    44,902

2006   1,862,259   3,945   1,749    5,422   12,054   249,562        37,964   101,173    397,220    547,876    62,841    52,904   270,486   76,173    42,890




                                                               63
2007   1,848,452   4,033   1,574   5,455   11,336   241,378        38,824   101,631   396,894   542,763   60,952   54,130   263,595    79,887   46,000

2008   1,811,819   3,997   1,593   5,715   11,281   238,691        41,976   105,507   398,014   494,708   64,065   52,943   249,874    94,321   49,134

2009   1,956,597   3,880   1,864   5,834   10,903   228,994        41,703   112,443   403,797   638,004   67,018   51,333   235,500   107,428   47,896

2010   1,998,138   3,923   1,992   4,785   10,901   223,501        42,672   120,583   426,700   633,639   69,513   53,133   218,762   138,341   49,693




                                                              64
