NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE OPTIMAL BURDEN OF PROOF
Louis Kaplow
Working Paper 17765
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17765

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

I am grateful to Steven Shavell, Christopher Snyder, Kathryn Spier, the referees, and presentation
participants at the 2011 AEA meetings, Harvard, NYU, and the NBER for comments, to the John M.
Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard University for financial support, and to
Michael Atamas, Sarah Beckerman, and Noam Lerer for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

On the Optimal Burden of Proof
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 17765
January 2012
JEL No. D81,K14,K41,K42
ABSTRACT
The burden of proof is a central feature of adjudication, and analogues exist in many other settings.
It constitutes an important but largely unappreciated policy instrument that interacts with the level
of enforcement effort and magnitude of sanctions in controlling harmful activity. Models are examined
in which the prospect of sanctions affects not only harmful acts but also benign ones, on account of
the prospect of mistaken application of sanctions. Accordingly, determination of the optimal strength
of the burden of proof, as well as optimal enforcement effort and sanctions, involves trading off deterrence
and the chilling of desirable behavior, the latter being absent in previous work. The character of the
optimum differs markedly from prior results and from conventional understandings of proof burdens,
which can be understood as involving Bayesian posterior probabilities. Additionally, there are important
divergences across models in which enforcement involves monitoring (posting officials to be on the
lookout for harmful acts), investigation (inquiry triggered by the costless observation of particular
harmful acts), and auditing (scrutiny of a random selection of acts). A number of extensions are analyzed,
in one instance nullifying key results in prior work.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
meskridge@law.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
All systems of adjudication must determine how high to set the burden of proof: the
strength of evidence required for the imposition of sanctions, award of damages, or provision of
other forms of relief. Proof burdens are set in other contexts as well: internal organizational
decision-making (standards for promotion, employee discipline, or product launches),
contractual requirements (defect rates for rejection of a supplier’s shipment), and medical
treatment.
The familiar tradeoff of type 1 and type 2 errors, such as in medical treatment, focuses on
the costs and benefits of various post-decision outcomes. In many settings, however, including
for the legal system, a (or the) primary purpose and effect of decisions and resulting actions is
the creation of ex ante incentives. The prospect of correct imposition of sanctions deters harmful
activity; mistaken exoneration dilutes it. Moreover, the expectation that sanctions will
sometimes be mistakenly applied to benign acts tends to chill desirable behavior. Consider, for
example, antitrust, where misapplication of sanctions may discourage efficient, pro-competitive
behavior (for example, promotional product pricing may look like predation); securities
regulation, where the prospect of erroneous sanctions may increase the cost of capital (IPO’s
may result in liability even in the absence of any misrepresentation); medical malpractice, where
worries about false positives may discourage cost-effective care (including denial of care to
high-risk patients and reduced physician supply in certain fields); and contract breach generally,
where concern for misassessment of performance may deter efficient contracting or misdirect
behavior governed by contracts.1 In these settings and others, choosing the burden of proof
poses an error tradeoff, but a more complicated one than in standard problems like medical
decision-making because the focus is on ex ante behavior, which is endogenous.
This article extends models of law enforcement by treating the proof burden as a policy
instrument alongside the traditional ones, enforcement effort and the level of sanctions. Because
the results differ in important ways depending on the enforcement technology, three types of
models are analyzed. Monitoring – posting lookouts for harmful acts, such as police patrols or
private security guards – is considered first because its features are elements of the other cases.
Investigation – inquiry triggered by the costless observation of particular harmful acts, such as
with many crimes, accidents, and contract breaches – differs because benign acts can be
mistakenly sanctioned only as a consequence of legal action triggered initially by the
commission of a harmful act. Auditing – scrutiny of a random selection of acts, such as tax
examinations, inspections for regulatory compliance, and intellectual property owners’ surveys
of competitors’ products – is analytically identical to monitoring in terms of behavior but differs
in administrative costs because greater activity (harmful and benign) requires more audits for a
given detection rate.
Among the more important findings applicable to all three models is that the

1

For empirical evidence suggestive of the importance of these phenomena, see, for example, Walker et al.
(2010) on IPO litigation risk; Studdert et al. (2005) on the avoidance of medical procedures and patients posing high
litigation risks; and Kessler, Sage, and Becker (2005) on medical malpractice and physician supply.

-1-

determinants of the optimal evidence threshold depart qualitatively and substantially from
familiar understandings regarding the burden of proof – which involve consideration of the
likelihood that an individual before the tribunal committed a harmful act rather than a benign
one. For example, it is demonstrated that raising the evidence threshold can increase the
frequency with which individuals who commit benign acts are subject to sanctions and that
raising this threshold can result in a lower ex post likelihood that an individual must have
committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions.
Section 2 presents the first model, involving monitoring, which is employed in the
majority of the analysis because it is somewhat more streamlined and, as mentioned, nearly
every effect also appears in the other models. There are two groups of individuals who may
commit acts that yield private benefits. For one group, the act causes external harm; for the
other, the act is socially benign. The government chooses a level of enforcement that determines
the fraction of acts that are scrutinized. As mentioned, the posting of monitors (police patrols)
has this feature. At this first level, enforcement does not distinguish the two types of acts, a
difference that is initially unobservable to the authority. But the process of scrutinizing acts
ultimately gives rise to evidence, which is then assessed to determine whether to impose
sanctions. The evidence is modeled as a signal. The distribution of signals is higher for harmful
acts than for benign ones. The choice of a burden of proof can be thought of as selecting a
cutoff, where sanctions are applied if and only if the signal exceeds the chosen threshold. Any
(nonextreme) rule entails both true and false positives and negatives.
Section 3 analyzes optimal policy, focusing on the level of enforcement effort and the
setting of the evidence threshold. As one would expect, the prospect of chilling desirable
behavior is central to both choices. Greater enforcement effort, in addition to involving the usual
tradeoff of deterrence and enforcement costs, also raises the expected sanction on benign acts, so
optimal enforcement effort is lower on this account. The evidence threshold is set to equate the
marginal effects of deterring harmful acts and chilling benign acts. The benefit of deterring a
harmful act falls at the margin whereas the cost of chilling a benign act rises, although
nonuniform distributions of benefits for each type of act can produce countervailing effects.
Additional attention is devoted to the respects in which greater enforcement effort and a
lower evidence threshold are substitute means of achieving deterrence. The former involves
direct resource costs whereas the latter does not. Accordingly, for there to be an optimal mix, it
must be that a lower evidence threshold has some relative disadvantage. Under standard
assumptions, a lower evidence threshold (compared to greater enforcement effort) causes
relatively more chilling per unit of deterrence enhancement – and, if it did not, one could not be
in the neighborhood of an optimum. The analysis also suggests a new, complementary version
of the so-called Becker (1968) argument favoring maximal sanctions: it is generally optimal to
raise sanctions (if they are not maximal) and simultaneously raise the evidence threshold,
holding deterrence constant; the only effect of this combination is a reduction in chilling costs.
Perhaps surprisingly, therefore, the prospect of mistakes makes it harder rather than easier to
rationalize the widespread practice of employing only moderate sanctions for less harmful acts.
Moreover, this finding overturns key results in prior literature that abstracts from errors and,
accordingly, does not feature the evidence threshold as an instrument.

-2-

Section 3 also relates the present analysis, which focuses on the choice of an evidence
threshold, to conventional notions about the burden of proof, which may be understood in terms
of Bayesian posterior probabilities. Consider, for example, the preponderance of the evidence
standard, often taken to mean that it must be more probable than not that the defendant before
the tribunal committed a harmful act (which may include failing to take due care, breaching a
contract, and so forth). The determinants of the optimal evidence threshold and of the
preponderance standard (or other ex post probability-based standards) are quite different. (They
do have two common factors, but the other seven terms in the two expressions differ.)
Comparative statics can also be counterintuitive. Raising the evidence threshold can result in a
lower ex post likelihood that an individual before the tribunal must have committed a harmful act
in order to be subject to sanctions. Also, raising the evidence threshold can increase the absolute
frequency with which individuals who commit benign acts are mistakenly subject to sanctions.
The preceding points raise the question of how some prior work could have found the
preponderance of the evidence standard to be optimal. To match more closely those models, a
final subsection presents a modified, simpler version of the present model in which there are no
benign acts, so individuals only decide whether or not to commit a harmful act. In this variant,
the main result in previous papers is immediate. Nevertheless, this result is not the
preponderance of the evidence standard but rather a statement about ex ante probabilities
conditional on individuals’ behavior. Moreover, comparison of the single factor that determines
the optimum in this modified model with the first-order condition for the optimal evidence
threshold in the central model here reveals that there is little relationship between the two (the
latter condition including six additional factors). Hence, intuitions gleaned from the sort of
model used in past work provide little guidance regarding the optimal evidence threshold in the
settings examined in this article.
Section 4 presents a second model, for the case in which enforcement is through
investigation rather than monitoring. Specifically, it is supposed that investigations are triggered
by the observation of harmful acts, the sighting of which does not identify the perpetrator. For
example, for murder, auto theft, or groundwater contamination, it is often clear that a violation
occurred, and the authorities engage in investigation to determine who committed the harmful
act. In this setting, the nature of the optimum for both enforcement effort and the evidence
threshold depends on additional factors that were absent in the monitoring model. First,
enforcement effort only needs to be expended when harmful acts occur, so deterrence reduces
enforcement costs; this factor favors greater enforcement effort and a lower evidence threshold
(the latter, by raising deterrence, similarly reduces enforcement costs). As a consequence, there
need not be underdeterrence at the optimum, unlike when enforcement is by monitoring.
Second, because deterrence reduces the frequency of investigations, it also reduces the likelihood
that benign acts are mistakenly subject to sanctions and thus mitigates chilling costs. As well,
chilling costs are in a sense lower to begin with since scrutiny is only triggered when harmful
acts are committed. A number of these considerations are favorable to greater enforcement
effort and a lower evidence threshold. Relatedly, when enforcement is by investigation, the
factors determining the optimal evidence threshold differ in yet additional ways (by comparison
to the model of monitoring) from the preponderance of the evidence standard or other
qualitatively similar rules. Also, as in the model with monitoring, raising the evidence threshold
can increase the absolute frequency with which individuals who commit benign acts are
-3-

mistakenly subject to sanctions, but the circumstances in which this is so differ qualitatively.
Section 5 offers four extensions. Auditing (a third model) is treated briefly because its
differences from the monitoring model are modest. Behavioral effects are the same, so many
results from the monitoring model are applicable. However, enforcement costs are qualitatively
different, which increases the divergence between the determination of the optimal evidence
threshold and that which satisfies conventional burden of proof notions.
Costly sanctions are considered next. Their introduction might seem to favor a
heightened evidence threshold because this reduces the frequency with which sanctions are
imposed on both the harmful and benign acts that are committed. There is, however, the
competing effect that raising the evidence threshold reduces the deterrence of harmful acts and
the chilling of benign acts, both of which increase the pool of individuals potentially subject to
sanctions. Accordingly, the common view that the existence of costly sanctions obviously
justifies a tougher proof requirement in the criminal context is undermined. Incapacitation
benefits of sanctions (notably, imprisonment) as well as any social costs associated with the very
act of mistaken imposition of sanctions are each analyzed as variations in social sanction costs,
with the implication that the effects of these considerations on the optimal evidence threshold are
similarly ambiguous, again contrary to conventional wisdom.
The third extension considers the accuracy of evidence. First explored is how an increase
in accuracy affects the optimal evidence threshold. It is explained that there is serious ambiguity
in posing such a question and, moreover, that there are a number of competing influences, so no
clear answer can be offered. Second, it is explained how one can use the present analysis to
identify the value of increased accuracy. Finally, a fourth extension addresses the relevance of
whether there is a small, highly concentrated group of benign acts that might mistakenly enter
adjudication versus a broad, more disbursed group, each less likely to be swept up in the legal
system but with the same overall frequency of misidentification of benign acts. The former
situation tends to involve greater chilling costs and thus to favor a higher evidence threshold,
although this conclusion need not hold due to nonconstancy of the density functions for
individuals’ benefits from acts.
Prior literature on the burden of proof largely considers different issues. One set of
articles focuses on adjudication itself, such as regarding the resources devoted to the presentation
of evidence or bringing suit (usually with exogenous underlying behavior).2 Some of this work
has emphasized the placement of the burden to go forward – that is, the specification of which
side loses if little or no evidence is presented – rather than the strength of the burden of proof.3
Another set of literature does consider underlying behavior but has largely been confined to
models in which there is only one type of decision: whether or not to commit a harmful act (or,
2

See Bernardo, Talley, and Welch (2000), Demougin and Fluet (2008), Hay and Spier (1997), Miceli
(1990), Posner (1999), and Rubinfeld and Sappington (1987).
3
In legal usage, the single phrase “burden of proof” is sometimes used to refer to the persuasion burden
(how convinced the factfinder must be, such as under the preponderance rule) and also the production burden (which
party has the burden of going forward, i.e., who loses if little or no evidence is presented), although recently the
former reference has become more common. See Garner (1999).

-4-

similarly, whether or not to take due care).4 In such a model, the harm of mistaken imposition of
sanctions is simply to reduce deterrence by making the socially preferable option less attractive.
Often, deterrence is taken to be inadequate, so the problem reduces to choosing the burden of
proof that maximizes deterrence. As already mentioned, these models (which are examined in
section 3.E) are much simpler than the ones considered here, and their qualitatively different
results provide little indication of optimal policy in the present settings.
2. Model I: Monitoring
There are two types of acts that may be committed, a harmful one, H, and a benign one,
B. The harmful type of act imposes an external social cost of h; the benign type of act involves
no externality.5 A mass of individuals normalized to 1 may commit the harmful type of act.
Those who may commit the benign type of act have a mass of γ; an interpretation is that γ
indicates the relative mass of benign acts that may be undertaken in situations in which they
might initially be confused with harmful acts, for other benign acts do not face the risk of
sanctions and thus are unaffected by the enforcement instruments under consideration. (For
many purposes, it would be possible to suppose that the same individuals may commit both
types of acts, and that γ indicates the relative frequency of opportunities to commit the benign
type of act.6) Individuals’ benefits from committing an act are b, with differentiable density and
cumulative distribution functions f i(b) and F i(b), respectively, where i = H, B. Individuals know
what type of act they are able to commit and its benefits to them, but the government initially has
no knowledge of acts’ type and never learns individuals’ benefits from acts.
Throughout this article, the timing of the model is:
1.
The government sets enforcement effort, the sanction, and the evidence threshold.
2.
Individuals learn their type of act and their private benefit.
3.
Individuals decide whether to act.
4.
A portion of those who act are identified and brought before a tribunal.
5.
In adjudication, individuals are sanctioned if and only if the evidence in their case
exceeds the evidence threshold.
In this first version of the model, enforcement is by a government authority that
scrutinizes the fraction π(e) of acts, where e indicates enforcement effort (expenditures) and

4

See Demougin and Fluet (2006, 2008), Kaplow and Shavell (1994), Lando (2002), and Polinsky and
Shavell (2007, pp. 427–29). Png (1986) has an additional behavioral dimension (activity level, in an accident
setting) but does not analyze the burden of proof.
5
It would be straightforward to adjust the analysis to allow it to involve a positive externality or a negative
externality at a different level from that of the H type of act.
6
The primary caveat pertains to setting the optimal sanction: specifically, the notion of setting the sanction
at its maximum may be problematic if individuals might be sanctioned for multiple acts. Another variation would be
to allow individuals to choose one of the two acts or inaction. This variation would significantly complicate the
exposition but have only a modest effect on the qualitative results. Note that, in this setting, deterrence of harmful
acts induces some individuals to switch to benign acts rather than inaction, and chilling of benign acts causes some
individuals to switch to harmful acts rather than inaction.

-5-

πN(e) > 0.7 (Allowing type-specific π’s would not much affect the analysis, so is avoided for
simplicity.8) One might think of enforcement as involving the posting of monitors (such as with
much traffic enforcement or other police patrols) who will identify as suspicious some fraction
of the acts that are committed.
If an individual’s act is scrutinized, thereby leading to adjudication, the probability of
being subject to the sanction s – taken for now to be a monetary penalty that is socially costless
to impose – is pi. The government, unfortunately, is not free to choose pH and pB independently;
if it could, it would set the former to 1 (or sufficiently high to achieve first-best deterrence of
harmful acts) and the latter to 0, thereby sanctioning all before the tribunal (or enough) who
commit harmful acts and none who commit benign acts. Rather, it is supposed that there is some
set of evidence produced when an individual is scrutinized. The government can choose a lower
evidence threshold, which yields a higher pH, but only at the cost of a higher pB. Let us now
specify this relationship.
The evidence in a given case will be represented by the variable x, a signal of the
underlying act.9 For each type of act, the densities and cumulative distribution functions for x
are given by g i(x), assumed to be positive10 and differentiable, and G i(x), respectively, where
G B(x) $ G H(x), with strict inequality except when the G i equal 0 and 1 (a strong form of firstorder stochastic dominance).
Suppose the government sets the evidence threshold at some xT, which is to say that
sanctions are applied if and only if the value of the signal x exceeds xT. Since G i(xT) denotes the
probability that the signal falls below the threshold, it follows that pi(xT) = 1!G i(xT). Our
assumption about the relationship between the two distribution functions implies that pH(xT) >
pB(xT) – except when the G i equal 0 and 1. Regarding the choice of xT, note that it is equivalent
(and sometimes useful for thought and to reduce notation somewhat) to suppose that the
government instead chooses pH. By inverting the function pH(xT), this implies a value of xT, and
hence of pB(xT). Accordingly, we can also define an implicit function for pB that will be denoted

7

We could further assume that πO(e) # 0, which would ordinarily be done to ensure that the second-order
condition for welfare maximization with respect to e holds. As is apparent from the analysis in the appendix,
however, it would still be necessary to confine attention to situations in which the second-order condition holds
because there are other terms (involving the derivatives of the density functions) that may have the wrong sign.
8
If the π’s differed by a constant factor (for example, the hit rate on benign acts may be proportionally lower
than that on harmful acts), then the only effect would be that this constant would appear analogously in each firstorder condition and in the condition for the preponderance rule, without affecting any qualitative statements or
results. With general differences in the π(e) functions, allowed in section 4’s extension for enforcement by
investigation, the only further effects are precisely those presented there: the Becker argument for maximal sanctions
need not hold, as discussed following expression (12), and equation (6) on optimizing both enforcement effort and
the evidence threshold would become identical to equation (17).
9
The optimal method of combining evidence (relevant in practice since multiple signals ordinarily are
present) is given by likelihood ratios, as indicated by the Neyman-Pearson (1933) Lemma.
10
They may equal zero at the lowest and highest possible values of x, if such exist (i.e., if the interval of
possible values of x is closed at either end). The supports may be taken to be the same for signals associated with
harmful and benign acts; for the problem to be interesting, all that is required is that the two distributions overlap.

-6-

PB(pH).11 Because, from the definition of pi(xT), we have dpi(xT)/dxT = !g i(xT), note that we can
also write PBN = dPB/dpH = [dpB(xT)/dxT]/[dpH(xT)/dxT] = g B(xT)/g H(xT), which is positive. As will
be seen, the first-order condition for the optimal evidence threshold xT, (4) or (5), can be written
using only PBN, without explicit reference to the pi(xT), for all that matters is the rate at which pB
changes per unit change in pH. For some purposes, it is natural to assume further that PBO > 0,
i.e., that the implicit function PB(pH) is convex. This feature, which is unnecessary for the results
in this paper, is implied if the density g H(x) satisfies a strict version of the monotone likelihood
ratio property with respect to g B(x).12
Finally, observe that choosing the evidence threshold xT seems akin to choosing a burden
of proof; a higher burden appears to correspond to a higher evidence threshold, and conversely.
However, there is an important conceptual difference in that the threshold xT is defined in terms
of the evidence (the value of the signal) whereas conventional notions of a burden of proof are
defined in terms of Bayesian posterior probabilities. Put another way, the pi(xT) refer to the
probabilities of being sanctioned conditional on having committed an act of type i and then being
scrutinized. These are ex ante probabilities that depend on one’s type of act. By contrast, in
discussions of the burden of proof, it is ordinarily understood that some act is before a tribunal,
and we are inquiring into the probability that it is of the harmful type rather than the benign type.
This ex post probability depends on the particular signal received (a specific value of x in the
foregoing terminology, which is used to update one’s prior) and on the base rates of the activity
(the relative levels constituting one’s prior), the latter of which are endogenous (notably, they
depend on how the proof burden itself is set). We shall return to this matter in section 3.D.13
Individuals are assumed to be risk neutral, so those whose type of act is i commit their act
if and only if b > π(e)pi(xT)s, that is, their benefit exceeds the expected sanction for their type of
act.14 Social welfare, W, is taken to be the aggregate of individuals’ benefits from acting minus

11

An equivalent expression is commonly used in signal detection theory, the graph of PB(pH) corresponding
to what is called the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. See Luce (1963).
12
See Milgrom (1981). If PBO < 0 for some values of pH, then a term in the second-order conditions (see
(A1) and (A6) in the appendix) is positive, but since other terms may also be positive, first-order conditions are only
necessary conditions and, for the social optimum, attention must in any case be confined to cases in which the
corresponding second-order conditions are confirmed to hold. Part of why the assumption that PBO > 0 is natural to
impose is that, otherwise, the optimal evidence rule does not consist of a single threshold xT because one should
apply sanctions for signal values with the highest likelihood ratios first (as stated by the Neyman-Pearson (1933)
Lemma. Note that, when the assumption fails, one could reproduce the optimality of a single cutoff rule by
reordering the values of the signal in accordance with the likelihood ratio, in which case the monotone property
would hold for the transformed signal. On the relationship between the monotone likelihood ratio property and the
optimality of simple cutoff decision rules, see Karlin and Rubin (1956).
13
To foreshadow the analysis, any evidence threshold will in equilibrium generate a resulting,
conventionally defined, burden of proof; that is, at the evidence threshold xT, there is some corresponding ex post
likelihood that the act is of the harmful type. The converse (moving from a stipulated ex post likelihood to an
evidence threshold) is trickier – inversion would be possible if the relationship between the two was monotonic,
continuous, and spanned the relevant range. The key complication is that the application of conventionally
understood proof burdens depends on behavior, which itself depends on the proof burden.
14
Introducing risk aversion would have two main effects. First, raising s would increase the deterrence and
chilling punches of sanctions at an increasing rate. Second, sanctions would then be socially costly, as considered in
the extension in section 5.B (although with risk aversion the social cost per unit of the sanction would be nonlinear

-7-

the harm from the commission of acts of type H and the cost of expenditures on enforcement.


(1) W 

 (b  h) f
H

H



 bf

(b)db  

T

B

 ( e) p ( x ) s

B

(b)db  e.

T

 ( e) p ( x ) s

The first term indicates the benefits and harm attributable to harmful acts, and the second the
benefits from benign acts. In each case, the lower limit of integration is the benefit of the
individual just at the margin, with all individuals having greater benefits committing the act.
3. Analysis of Model I
The government’s problem is to choose e, xT, and s in a manner that maximizes social
welfare (1). It is immediate that the optimal sanction is maximal. Following the idea in Becker
(1968), if the sanction is not maximal, one could raise s and lower e by an amount that keeps the
product π(e)s constant, in which case there would be no effect on either of the first two terms in
expression (1), but welfare would rise on account of e being lower. For most of the analysis, the
sanction s will simply be taken as given. It might be supposed to be at its maximal level, or,
alternatively, it may be fixed for other reasons.
A. Optimal Enforcement Effort
To determine optimal enforcement effort, we can differentiate social welfare (1) with
respect to e. Because π is a function of e, enforcement’s effect on behavior is reflected in raising
the lower limits of integration, and this is the source of deterrence benefits and chilling costs.
The first-order condition (suppressing some arguments of functions) may be expressed as

(2)  p H sf

H

p sh  p s   p
H

H

B

sf

B

p sp
B

B

s  1.

It is convenient to define bi / πpis, the benefits of the individuals just indifferent about whether
to act, in which case expression (2) can be restated as

(3)  p H sf

H

b h  b    p
H

H

B

sf

B

b b
B

B

 1.

The left side represents the marginal gain from raising enforcement effort, which is the product
of the deterrence punch πNpHs f H(bH) (the rise in expected sanction times the density of
individuals just deterred per unit increase in expected sanction) and the net gain from deterring
the marginal harmful act: avoiding the social harm h but losing the private benefit bH from the
act. The right side indicates the marginal cost from raising enforcement effort. The first term is
the cost of chilling desirable behavior, the product of the relative mass γ of the benign act in the
in the sanction). For a discussion of prior literature on how risk aversion influences optimal sanctions, see Polinsky
and Shavell (2007, pp. 413-16).

-8-

population times the chilling punch πNpBs f B(bB) (the rise in expected sanction on the benign act
times the density) times the benefit bB from the marginal benign act that is forgone due to the
higher (mistaken) expected sanction. The final term is just the cost of the added unit of
enforcement effort.
Proposition 1: Given xT, at an interior optimum for the level of enforcement, e*:
a. Raising h raises e*;
b. Raising γ reduces e*;
c. Raising s has an ambiguous effect on e*; and
d. At e*, h > bH (i.e., there is underdeterrence relative to the first-best), and this would
be so even if enforcement were costless.
Propositions 1.a and 1.b are intuitive but the demonstrations are not entirely
straightforward. Raising h naturally favors higher effort because deterrence of harm is more
important. Raising γ favors lower effort because chilling effects are relatively more significant.
Some complexity arises, however, because the pertinent derivatives of the first-order condition
include a number of terms of differing and in some cases indeterminate signs; relatedly, multiple
interior optima for e are possible. Much of the complication is due to the possibility that the
distributions of benefits are not uniform, which also implies that the second-order condition
(expression (A1) in the appendix) need not hold globally. Suppose, for example, that both
densities are single-peaked, with the benefits of benign acts concentrated at a low level and those
of harmful acts at a higher level. Between the peaks, f B would be falling and f H rising, the
former implying that the chilling punch of greater enforcement is falling and the latter that the
deterrence punch of greater enforcement is rising. If these effects from the density functions are
sufficiently large relative to the others, one could have a local minimum in such a region.
Nevertheless, as demonstrated in the appendix, the intuitive results obtain because, given that
effort is at an optimum, the second-order condition implicitly limits the magnitude of effects due
to the nonconstancy of the density functions.15
Regarding proposition 1.c, raising s has multiple influences. First, it raises the bi, both of
which favor lower enforcement effort. For harmful acts, the marginal deterrence gain is falling
with the expected sanction (and thus with e or s considered separately, holding everything else
constant) because the harm h is the same across harmful acts but the forgone benefit from
deterring the marginal individual who otherwise commits the harmful type of act, bH, is rising.
For benign acts, the marginal chilling cost is rising with the expected sanction because the
forgone benefit from chilling the marginal individual who otherwise commits the benign type of
act, bB, is rising. Second, raising s boosts the productivity of greater enforcement effort, which
favors higher enforcement. This second effect, by itself, is not ambiguous at the optimum:
although both marginal deterrence and marginal chilling rise, the welfare effect of the former
necessarily dominates that of the latter because the former must equal the sum of the latter and
the “plus one” that consists of the effort cost itself. Third, as was the case with propositions 1.a
and 1.b, nonconstant density functions create additional effects, each of which in general can
15

Note also that it is possible for there to be a corner solution involving e* = 0 if the marginal return from
enforcement, πN(0), is sufficiently low relative to the magnitude of h.

-9-

have any sign. In the appendix, examples are constructed in which raising s raises e* and in
which it reduces e*.
Proposition 1.d follows from inspection of expression (3). Because the right side is
necessarily positive, so must be the left side at the optimum, which indicates that h > bH, which
is to say that the harmful type of act is underdeterred relative to first-best behavior. This result is
common in models of optimal enforcement due to the positive cost of raising enforcement effort.
Here, there is the additional reason, the chilling cost (the first term on the right side), which
implies that the optimal degree of underdeterrence is greater. Even if additional enforcement
was free (in which case there would be no “plus one” on the right side of 3), one would stop
short of first-best deterrence.
B. Optimal Evidence Threshold
Our main policy variable of interest is the evidence threshold xT. If we take the
derivative of social welfare (1) with respect to xT – keeping in mind that the pi are functions of xT
so that the evidence threshold’s effect is through reducing the lower limits of integration – we
obtain a first-order condition that can be expressed as

(4) sf
(5) f

H

H

p sh  p s  sP
H

H

b h  b   P
H

H

B



f

B

B



b b
B

B

f
B

p sp
B

B

s, or

.

Lowering xT is costless in terms of direct resource costs; its effects on social welfare are
exclusively through behavior. On the left side of (4) or (5) is the social gain: the deterrence
punch, indicated by the height of the density for those just deterred, times the net gain from
deterring the marginal harmful act. (Note that πs was divided out of both sides in moving from
(4) to (5), for convenience of later comparisons.) The right side indicates the social cost: the
chilling punch – the relative mass of population that contemplates committing the benign act
times the rate that pB rises per unit of increase in pH (as a consequence of the reduction in xT),
times the density – all multiplied by the net benefit forgone from chilling the marginal benign
act.
Proposition 2: Given e, at an interior optimum for the evidence threshold, xT*:
a. Raising h reduces xT*;
b. Raising γ raises xT*; and
c. If the distributions F i are uniform, raising s raises xT*.
These proofs are also in the appendix, but the core basic reasoning is articulated here.
Raising h naturally favors a lower level of xT because deterrence is more important. Raising γ
favors a higher xT because chilling is more significant. And, as with proposition 1, these
intuitive results hold despite complications regarding nonconstancy of the density functions.

- 10 -

For proposition 2.c, note first that if πs is higher – whether due to higher enforcement
effort or sanctions – then the optimal evidence threshold xT will tend to be higher because, as
explained with regard to proposition 1.c, the marginal net benefit of deterring harmful acts is
reduced when deterrence is already higher and the marginal cost of chilling benign acts is raised
when the marginal chilled individual’s benefit is higher. This claim is proved in the appendix
with regard to changes in s for constant density functions. Nonuniform distributions of the
benefits from either of the two types of acts complicate this phenomenon (but not so much 2.a
and 2.b because, again, satisfaction of the second-order condition, expression (A6) in the
appendix, guarantees the claimed properties). A higher f H (locally) will favor a lower xT, and a
higher f B (locally) will favor a higher xT. The analysis of how changing the sanction influences
the problem therefore depends on how the densities are changing locally. Specifically, if f H is
rising rapidly, then a slight increase in s notably increases the marginal deterrence punch,
favoring a lower xT; likewise, if f B is falling rapidly, then a slight increase in s notably reduces
the marginal chilling punch, favoring a lower xT. Accordingly, statement of the unambiguous
result in proposition 2.c is limited to the case of a uniform density function.
C. Comparison of Raising Enforcement Effort and Lowering the Evidence Threshold
It is illuminating to compare directly the choice between raising enforcement effort e and
lowering the evidence threshold xT as ways to deter harmful acts. Laxer proof requirements and
greater enforcement effort are substitutes, but imperfect ones that differ along two dimensions.
Compare the first-order conditions (5) and (3). First, as previously noted, reducing xT, which
raises pH, is free of resource costs in the present setting, unlike enforcement effort. Second,
abstracting from the densities, which are analogous in the two conditions, the behavioral punches
are in the proportion pH to pB in (3) for enforcement effort but they are in the proportion 1 to PBN
in (5) for the evidence threshold.
To represent these ideas explicitly, use the first-order condition (3) for optimal
enforcement effort e to substitute into condition (5) for the optimal evidence threshold xT. One
way of doing so yields

  pB 
(6)   P B  H  f
p 


B

b b
B

B



1
.
 p H s

The term in parentheses on the left side depicts the difference in the relative “effective” rise in pB
as one “effectively” increases pH: that for raising pH directly as a consequence of reducing xT
minus that for raising enforcement effort, which does not raise pH or pB per se but does increase
their common multiplier π. This term is then multiplied by the marginal importance of chilling
effects (the leading γ indicating relative importance of the benign type of act, also multiplied by
the density and the forgone benefit from the marginal benign act that is chilled). In other words,
the left side is the relative difference in chilling effects weighted by their importance. (Note that,
in this formulation, the deterrence of harmful acts is implicitly held constant.) On the right side
is the cost disadvantage of raising enforcement effort, normalized in units of deterrence punch
(rise in the expected sanction on harmful acts). When both enforcement effort and the evidence

- 11 -

threshold are optimized, these magnitudes are equated.
Proposition 3: Higher enforcement effort and a lower evidence threshold are substitutes in
achieving a given level of deterrence, and the optimal mix of enforcement effort and evidence
threshold is given by expression (6).
Note further that the right side of (6) is necessarily positive, so it must be that, at the
optimum, PBN > pB/pH.16 This feature indicates that, for a given increase in πpH, there is a
relatively greater rise in πpB when one raises pH directly, by lowering the evidence threshold xT,
than when one raises its ultimate impact by raising π, that is, by increasing enforcement effort.
In this respect, lowering the evidence threshold xT is a less advantageous means of increasing the
deterrence of harmful acts than is raising enforcement effort e. The intuition is that lowering the
evidence threshold assigns liability in cases of lower quality (a lower ratio of ones with harmful
acts to ones with benign acts) than those previously giving rise to sanctions (which had higher
values of x). By contrast, raising enforcement effort brings more cases into the system across the
evidence-quality spectrum, producing liability in cases of the same average quality as before.
This result can also be related to the comment at the outset of section 3 that optimal
sanctions are maximal in this model. Raising sanctions dominates lowering the evidence
threshold because it has the same superior discriminating power as does raising enforcement
effort (but it is costless). Specifically, for a given increase in s, if xT is increased to keep pHs
constant, the requirement that PBN > pB/pH implies that pBs falls. This point can be seen as a new
version of the argument associated with Becker (1968) that favors maximal sanctions –
traditionally, because it is generally optimal to raise sanctions and lower enforcement effort in
achieving a given level of deterrence.17 Here, the savings involve a reduction in chilling effects
rather than in enforcement expenditures. It is interesting that the possibility of mistaken
imposition of sanctions provides an additional reason favoring high sanctions even for acts
causing low harm, which adds to the already serious tension between this prescription of many
models of optimal law enforcement and observed practice.
Indeed, this consideration nullifies two of the main results in important papers by
Mookherjee and Png (1992) and Shavell (1991). In their models, the same monitors observe
multiple kinds of harmful acts whose degrees of harm differ (perhaps littering and mugging).
When the single level of enforcement effort is optimized, the less harmful types of acts might be
fully deterred by a less-than-maximal sanction, in which event the optimal sanction for such acts
is set to achieve first-best deterrence. However, if one introduces benign acts that might be
chilled and takes the evidence threshold to be an enforcement instrument, it instead would be
optimal to raise sanctions to the maximum even for low-harm acts, while simultaneously raising
the evidence threshold for them, in order to reduce chilling costs, as just explained. Chilling

16

If one assumes that PBO > 0, this condition is necessarily satisfied (even if not at the optimum, as long as
the probabilities are not 0).
17
And, just as the traditional Becker argument is known to imply that, as the maximum feasible sanction
goes to infinity, optimal enforcement effort approaches zero, we have here that one can indefinitely raise the
evidence threshold, driving down chilling effects.

- 12 -

costs also make underdeterrence optimal even though first-best deterrence can be achieved
costlessly (recall proposition 1.d).
D. Comparison to Conventional Burden of Proof Notions
The foregoing results should be compared to those under, say, a preponderance of the
evidence standard that is used in civil adjudication in the United States (and which has been the
subject of some previous literature using quite different models, examined in section E).18 Under
a typical burden of proof notion, one asks whether, given the evidence, the likelihood that the
individual before the tribunal committed the harmful act (the Bayesian posterior probability)
exceeds some level, 50% under the preponderance standard. Suppose, then, that the tribunal
observes signal x. Conditional on the individual’s act being of type i (and the individual being
scrutinized, where individuals committing both types of acts are scrutinized with the same
probability π), the likelihood of the signal is given by the density g i(x). The probability that a
given individual before the tribunal committed the harmful rather than the benign type of act also
depends on the base rates of the activities, 1!F i(bi), further multiplied by γ for the benign act.
The bi’s, of course, are not parameters but are determined endogenously by individuals’
decisions about acts, which in turn depend on the enforcement parameters, including the
evidence threshold (burden of proof) itself.
To identify the proper threshold for the signal x if one wishes to implement a
preponderance of the evidence rule, we can ask what value of xT implicitly solves the equation:

 

   g  x 1  F b ,

( 7) g H x T 1  F H b H

B

T

B

B

where the bi’s are determined assuming the use of this xT (and some given π and s), with the
implied values of the pi(xT). In expression (7), the left side indicates the frequency with which
individuals who committed harmful acts (conditional upon being scrutinized and thus appearing
before the tribunal) will be associated with the signal xT, and likewise for the right side for
individuals who committed benign acts. If the frequencies represented by the two sides of
equation (7) are equal, then indeed xT is a value of the signal such that it is equally likely that the
individual before the tribunal committed each type of act. Accordingly, insisting that x exceed xT
satisfies the more-likely-than-not (preponderance) standard (with additional assumptions on the
g i).19 Note that if we desired a different likelihood at the threshold xT, we could multiply by a
further constant to the right side. For example, for a requisite likelihood of 75%, implying that
the threshold signal was three times more likely to have been emitted from an individual who
committed the harmful type of act than one who committed the benign type of act, one would
multiply the right side by 3. Or if proof beyond a reasonable doubt were understood to require,
say, a likelihood of at least 90% or 95%, one would multiply the right side by 9 or 19,

18

For extensive discussion of how the present analysis applies to legal discussions of the burden of proof,
see Kaplow (2012a).
19
A sufficient condition is that PBO > 0, which, recall from section 2, is implied by the density g H(x)
satisfying a strict version of the monotone likelihood ratio property with respect to g B(x). See note 12.

- 13 -

respectively.
To facilitate comparison with the equality determining the optimal evidence threshold, it
is helpful to restate expression (7). Recall from section 2 that PBN = dPB/dpH =
[dpB(xT)/dxT]/[dpH(xT)/dxT] = g B(xT)/g H(xT). Using this fact and rearranging terms yields



 


(8) 1  F H b H  P B 1  F B b B .

 

Now compare expression (5), reproduced here for ease of comparison:

(5) f

H

b h  b   P
H

H

B



f

B

b b
B

B

.

Both have the constant γ on the right side, and both have the term PBN. In all other respects,
however, these expressions differ markedly. The densities on each side of (5) are for the
distribution of benefits evaluated for the marginal individual, but no corresponding terms appear
in (8). By contrast, each side of (8) is weighted by the base rate of the activity, indicated by one
minus the value of the cumulative distribution function; no such terms appear in (5). This
particular difference reflects the Bayesian, information-inference character of the conventional
burden of proof notion, in contrast to the optimizing, behavioral orientation of the first-order
condition, where it is the density functions for benefits that matter because they determine the
marginal behavioral effects. Additionally, the level of harm and the benefits of the two types of
marginal individuals appear directly in (5) but not in (8). In short, setting an optimal evidence
threshold xT and finding the cutoff that corresponds to any given conventional burden of proof
notion are very different enterprises.
Proposition 4:
a. The optimal evidence threshold, given implicitly by (5), generally differs from the
preponderance of the evidence rule, given implicitly by (8) (or any similar rule denominated in
terms of an ex post likelihood that an individual before the tribunal must have committed the
harmful type of act).
b. At the optimal evidence threshold, the minimum ex post likelihood that an individual
must have committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions can take on any
(admissible) value.
c. Raising the evidence threshold xT may increase the frequency with which individuals
who commit benign acts are mistakenly subject to sanctions.
d. Raising the evidence threshold xT may result in a lower ex post likelihood that an
individual must have committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions.
Proposition 4.a having been established, turn to 4.b, stating that when the evidence
threshold is set optimally, the minimum ex post likelihood that an individual must have
committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions can take on any admissible
value (i.e., between zero and one). To confirm this conclusion, note that condition (5) for the
optimal burden of proof does not depend on the cumulative distribution functions F i whereas

- 14 -

condition (8) depends on these functions and on little else. Hence, for a given solution to
condition (5), one could make inframarginal adjustments to the distributions of benefits for the
two types of acts to produce different values for the minimum ex post likelihood.20 Perhaps
more intuitively, observe that condition (5) implies that, as h goes to zero, the optimal evidence
threshold will approach infinity (when all acts produce positive net social benefits, or at worst
negligible net social harm, it should be essentially impossible for evidence to be strong enough
to apply sanctions). Likewise, as h approaches infinity, the optimal evidence threshold will
approach negative infinity (or the lower bound of the support).21
Proposition 4.c states that raising the evidence threshold xT can increase on the frequency
of mistaken applications of sanctions. Following traditional thinking about proof burdens, one
might suppose that they would fall, but this need not be so. On one hand, raising xT does make it
less likely that unchilled individuals will be sanctioned for the benign acts that they commit. On
the other hand, raising xT reduces the chilling effect, so more individuals commit benign acts and
thus may be subject to sanctions. Specifically, it can be shown that, if and only if
bBf B(bB) > 1!F B(bB), the latter effect is greater and thus a higher evidence threshold raises the
number of false positives.
Before demonstrating proposition 4.d, consider first whether, for any stipulated requisite
ex post likelihood, there exists an xT that yields that likelihood. As one varies the value of xT, a
range of ex post likelihoods will be traced; since the model’s assumptions guarantee that all
behavior changes continuously, any ex post likelihood will be possible, subject to the minimum
and maximum values that result from this exercise. The full range of ex post likelihoods,
however, cannot necessarily be produced for a given set of parameters. Most obviously, for a
requisite ex post likelihood of 100%, there would have to be no benign acts committed. Note
further that the relationship between xT and the requisite ex post likelihood need not be
monotonic (given our lack of tight restrictions on the shape of the f i), which implies that, for a
given likelihood, there may exist more than one choice of xT that would generate it. To illustrate
this point, suppose that the distribution of benign acts was concentrated at a very low level, but
that for harmful acts was not. As xT is reduced, which increases pB, eventually most benign acts
will be chilled, so the ex post likelihood will approach 100%. From there, demanding stronger
evidence, that is, raising the threshold xT, would in such a case (for at least some range) reduce
the ex post likelihood. This establishes proposition 4.d.
E. Modification: Model with No Benign Acts
As mentioned in the introduction, prior literature (cited in note 4) offers a prescription for
the optimal evidence threshold that differs markedly from that derived here. Moreover, some of
this work purports to find that the preponderance rule is optimal. To explain these differences,
consider a simpler model in which there are no benign acts – only harmful acts and a failure to

20

One way to do this is to consider a case in which the two distributions are uniform; the endpoints of each
of the intervals can then be shifted (while keeping the pertinent bi’s in the intervals) to produce any desired result.
21
As explained just below with regard to proposition 4.d, spanning the full range of xT need not be sufficient
in a given case to guarantee that all admissible ex post likelihoods are spanned.

- 15 -

act. Suppose further, as in these other papers, that scrutiny covers inaction. Accordingly, the
probability of mistaken sanctions, pB, is now taken to apply to inaction (but for convenience the
same notation is retained).22
Specifically, all individuals are scrutinized with probability π(e). Those who commit the
harmful act, as before, are (conditional on being scrutinized) subject to the sanction s with
probability pH whereas those who do not commit the act (but are scrutinized) now face the
sanction with probability pB. Accordingly, an individual will commit the act if and only if
b!πpHs > !πpBs, which is equivalent to the condition b > π(pH!pB)s. Because individuals who
do not commit the harmful act might be sanctioned in any event, deterrence is reduced. (There is
no other cost to mistaken sanctions; the only benign behavior that is chilled is inaction.) It is
convenient to represent pH!pB by Δp, since only the difference in the two probabilities matters.
Social welfare in this modified problem, denoted by a “~”, is

~
( 9) W 



 b  h f

H

(b)db  e.

T

 ( e ) p ( x ) s

The optimal xT is determined implicitly by



(10) s 1  P B  f



H

b h  b   0.
H

H

Obviously, the optimum is characterized by PBN = 1, which is to say that Δp, the gap between the
pi, is maximized (assuming that π and s are such that there is underdeterrence, which is optimal
since raising π is costly; recall proposition 1.d). As mentioned in the introduction, this result is
essentially equivalent to the core finding on optimal proof burdens in prior models that in a
relevant sense have only one act.23

22

See also Kaplow (2011).
In some, the choice variable is a dichotomous level of care – engagement in the pertinent activity being
taken as given – where it is always desirable to take greater care and underdeterrence is present, making it optimal to
maximize the difference between the likelihood of the sanction when taking low care versus high care. A related
feature of these sorts of models is that the costs of false positives and of false negatives are the same: reducing pH
hurts deterrence by the same degree as does raising pB by the same amount. Thus, the practice in some work of
arbitrarily assigning the same costs to each type of error is unproblematic in such a model, although in the model
explored in the rest of this article, the costs of the errors are not symmetric. Moreover, it is sometimes remarked that
it is problematic to assign a given cost to a type of error since the social cost of the error is nonconstant. That is true
even in the model in this subsection: the cost of either type of error is reduced deterrence, which has a net social cost
of h!bH for the marginal act. As one changes the evidence threshold (or other control variables), this net marginal
cost is changing. But that change is also irrelevant because, throughout, it remains symmetric (so stipulating equal
losses for each type of error yields the correct answer for the optimum even if the assigned levels of the losses are
incorrect – for setting the burden of proof, but not for setting, say, the optimal level of enforcement effort). By
contrast, in the main model used in the rest of section 3, the error costs are not merely nonconstant but most typically
change in opposite directions: as one raises enforcement effort or reduces the evidence threshold, the benefit of
23

- 16 -

We can now compare this result with the first-order condition (5). Although (5) has PBN
on the right side, it also has six other components. Therefore, the optimal evidence threshold in
prior literature indeed differs radically from that derived in this article’s model, as a consequence
of introducing the possibility of chilling benign acts.
Finally, consider implications regarding the preponderance of the evidence rule. The
analogue to expression (8) for the present case is


(11) 1  F H b H  P B F H b H .

 

 

Some literature has stated that the preponderance rule implies the maximization of Δp, which we
just saw entails choosing xT such that PBN = 1. However, this result is not implied by expression
(11), which instead equates PBN with the ratio of the base rates. For example, for acts that few
people commit, this ratio would be near zero, implying an extremely high evidence threshold
(assuming that PBO > 0), that is, PBN much less than 1. What is really contemplated, if deterrence
is to be maximized, is that base rates be ignored. Indeed, sometimes reference is made to
application of a modified preponderance rule under which equal base rates (or flat or unbiased
priors) are stipulated.24 In that case, expression (11) would be equivalent to PBN = 1.
Nevertheless, the preponderance rule is an ex post Bayesian concept, one that fundamentally
conflicts with ignoring ex post likelihoods and considering instead deterrence maximization,
which here depends only on ex ante probabilities, the pi (to be precise, the ratio of their
derivatives). This semantic point is reinforced by considering the main model and the analysis
of the preponderance rule in section D. If one examines expression (8) and assumes equal base
rates, one again produces the conclusion that PBN = 1, which, as mentioned, bears little
resemblance to the optimal rule given by expression (5).
4. Model II: Investigation
A. Model
The model presented in section 2 supposes that the method of enforcement is akin to the
posting of monitors that enable the authority to scrutinize the fraction π(e) of all acts (of both
types, since initially it cannot tell the difference). Now suppose instead that enforcement
involves undertaking investigation when a harmful act is committed, the assumption being that
whether a harmful act occurred can be readily observed (for example, murder, automobile theft,
or ground water contamination) but not who committed the harmful act. Let πH(e) denote the
fraction of harmful acts in which the correct individual is scrutinized, i.e., the person who
actually committed the harmful act. Further suppose that, for each harmful act, the likelihood
that an individual who committed the benign type of act is subject to scrutiny is

deterring an additional harmful act is falling whereas the cost of chilling an additional benign act is rising (with the
total marginal social consequence also depending on the magnitude of the pertinent density function, each of which
may be rising or falling).
24
See, for example, Demougin and Fluet (2006, pp. 970–71).

- 17 -

πB(e)γ(1!FB(bB)). The rationale for the additional factors, elaborated further just below, is that
an investigation is more likely to lead to the apprehension of an individual who committed a
benign act when there are more such individuals. It is further assumed that πiN > 0, πiO < 0 for
i = H, B.25 As before, conditional on scrutiny, the probability of being subject to the sanction s is
pH if the individual before the tribunal actually committed the harmful act and pB if the individual
before the tribunal committed a benign act, with the magnitude of each determined by the
evidence threshold xT (and so forth). Finally, the timing is also as in model I: the government
sets e, s, and xT; next, individuals learn their type of act and their private benefits, after which
they decide whether to act; then, a portion are scrutinized and, in adjudication, are sanctioned if
and only if x > xT.
Once again, the expected sanction for those who commit the harmful type of act is πHpHs,
which likewise indicates the benefit level bH of the marginal individual. For the benign type of
act, the analysis is more involved. Investigations are only potentially triggered with probability
1!FH(bH). (This is also true for those committing harmful acts, but when an individual commits
a harmful act, that person knows that an investigation may be triggered, leading to scrutiny of the
actor with probability πH(e).) Conditional upon an investigation, the probability that some
individual who committed a benign act is scrutinized is, as mentioned, πB(e)γ(1!FB(bB)).
Accordingly, the ex ante frequency with which individuals who commit benign acts are subject
to sanctions is (1!FH(bH))πB(e)γ(1!FB(bB))pB. Now, since γ(1!FB(bB)) individuals commit
benign acts, the ex ante probability that any given individual who commits a benign act is
sanctioned is (1!FH(bH))πB(e)γ(1!FB(bB))pB / γ(1!FB(bB)) = (1!FH(bH))πB(e)pB, which will
sometimes be referred to as ρB.26 Thus, the expected sanction for those who commit the benign
act is (1!FH(bH))πB(e)pBs, or ρBs, either of which likewise indicates the benefit level bB of the
marginal individual.
At this point, we can state the social welfare function for this modified problem.

25

It may also be natural to suppose that πH + γπB < 1.
The assumption that the likelihood an individual committing the benign act is scrutinized is
πB(e)γ(1!FB(bB)) is chosen in part for convenience, which is now apparent. It does seem natural to allow this
probability to be rising (even if not linearly) in γ(1!FB(bB)). A more general approach, which also incorporates the
later need to divide the expression by γ(1!FB(bB)), would employ the function πB(e,γ(1!FB(bB))). If this was done
instead, the only effect on the analysis would be that expressions (14) and (16) for the derivatives of ρB with respect
to e and pH, respectively, would each have an additional term (the same term) dividing them, indicating that the
magnitude of the derivative would be dampened (enlarged) if the derivative of this modified πB with respect to its
second argument was positive (negative), basically allowing for a feedback effect of marginal changes in the chilling
effect on the ex ante likelihood that individuals committing the benign act are scrutinized. Accordingly, little of
analytical consequence is sacrificed by employing the particular functional form adopted in the text.
26

- 18 -



 b  h f

(12) W 
H

H

H

(b)db

T

 ( e) p ( x ) s





1 F 
H

H

H

 bf
T



B



B

B





 1  F H  H (e) p H ( x T ) s e.

(b)db
T

( e) p ( x ) s  ( e) p ( x ) s

This expression differs in two ways from expression (1) for social welfare in the original
(monitoring) version of the model. First, the lower limit of integration for the second term
reflects the immediately preceding discussion concerning the likelihood that individuals who
commit the benign act will be subject to sanctions; in particular, this probability includes the
factor 1!FH(bH) because investigations are only triggered when harmful acts are committed.
Second, the enforcement effort cost e has a similar weighting.
Before proceeding, note that the standard argument associated with Becker (1968) that
demonstrates the necessary optimality of maximal sanctions need not hold in this extension. As
one raises s and lowers e so as to keep the deterrence of harmful acts constant, it is not
necessarily true that the chilling of benign acts is also kept constant (and it may rise) because it
is not assumed that πHN/πH = πBN/πB. The new variant of the argument for maximal sanctions
introduced in section 3.C likewise does not suffice to guarantee the optimality of maximal
sanctions for similar reasons, unless further assumptions are introduced.27 In any case, for the
remainder of this section, the sanction s will be taken to be fixed. The government’s problem
will be to choose e and xT to maximize social welfare (12).
B. Optimal Enforcement Effort
The first-order condition for enforcement effort e may be expressed (by analogy to
expression (3) for the original model) as

(13) 

H



H

p sf

H

d B
e 
sf
de

b h  b  
H

H

B

b b  1  F b ,
B

B

H

H

where

27

If one raises a nonmaximal sanction s and raises the evidence threshold xT so as to keep deterrence
constant (specifically, pHs is kept constant, and πH is unaffected), the value of the first integral and of the third term
do not change; the resulting reduction in pB, however, may not be great enough to offset the effect of the increase in
s on pBs, so chilling can rise. In model I, condition (6) sufficed to guarantee that PBN > pB/pH at the optimum and thus
that pBs would fall. However, the analogue to expression (6) for the investigation model, expression (17) below,
differs. As stated in the text, the traditional Becker argument can fail when πHN/πH > πBN/πB. In that situation, πB/πH
> πBN/πBN, so the term in large parentheses in (17) being positive does not guarantee that PBN > pB/pH.

- 19 -


d B
(14)
  B pB 1 F H bH
de



   

B


p B  H p H sf

H

b .
H

These expressions differ from expression (3) in a number of ways. On the left side of expression
(13), there is the additional “plus e” term in brackets, which indicates that there is a greater
marginal benefit from deterring harmful acts, namely, that fewer investigations are undertaken,
which saves enforcement expenditures. Second, on the right side, instead of a “plus 1” term, we
have 1!FH(bH), indicating that the additional enforcement effort is weighted by the fraction of
undeterred harmful acts, since only those trigger investigations.
Inspection of expression (14) reveals two additional differences. First, the effect of
increased effort on chilling, reflected in the term leading with πBN, is likewise weighted by
1!FH(bH), reflecting that chilling is muted since only acts causing harm trigger investigations
(that might in turn go awry by ultimately resulting in sanctions on benign acts). Moreover, the
chilling effect that does exist is reduced, as reflected in the second term, on account of greater
deterrence of harmful acts. That is, increased effort, by deterring harmful acts, reduces
investigations at the margin, which further reduces chilling costs. (Because of its genesis, it is
natural to think of the second term in expression (14) as associated with the left side of (13)
rather than the right side, a point reinforced by comparing the terms explicitly.)
In light of these differences, it seems natural to view enforcement effort as more valuable
at the margin when enforcement is by investigation. However, the two models are, at heart, not
comparable, because they reflect different technologies applicable in different circumstances.
For example, nothing has been said about the relationship between π(e) in our original model and
the πi(e)’s in the present model. Nevertheless, these qualitative differences do suggest that the
different enforcement methods have different relative strengths and weaknesses, many of which
pertain to chilling effects in particular.
Finally, observe that, unlike in our original setup and in many standard law enforcement
models, it need not be true that there is underdeterrence (relative to first-best behavior) at the
optimum. Even if h < bH, there remain the other two marginal benefits of greater deterrence:
reduced enforcement expenditures and reduced chilling, both on account of there being fewer
harmful acts to investigate.
C. Optimal Evidence Threshold
By analogy to expressions (4) and (5), the first-order condition for xT is

(15)  H sf

H

 
bH

 

h  bH  e  

d B
sf
dp H

B

where

- 20 -

b b
B

B

,

d B
B  B

P 1 F H bH
(16)

H

dp




   p

B

 H sf

H

b .
H

The differences between this first-order condition and expression (5) largely parallel those given
for the optimal level of enforcement effort. In expression (15), we have the additional “plus e”
on the left side, indicating the additional advantage from deterrence of reducing enforcement
expenditures. Through expression (16), we have two additional effects that pertain to chilling.
First, the direct chilling effect, reflected by PBN as in the original model (where the ratio of
effects on harmful versus benign acts again depends on how the rate of mistaken sanctioning
rises with the rate of correct sanctions as the evidence threshold is relaxed), is now weighted by
1!FH(bH) because the mistaken imposition of sanctions can only happen when an investigation is
triggered in the first instance. Relatedly, the second term in (16) indicates the marginal
reduction in chilling effects on account of enhanced deterrence from the increase in pH that
results from a reduction in xT. As with the interpretation of the first-order condition for optimal
enforcement effort, we cannot really say that, because we have three more favorable factors, a
lower xT is optimal when enforcement is by investigation. However, we again see that the nature
of the optimization problem differs qualitatively and in important respects that relate directly to
the concern with the chilling of benign acts.
One can also construct the analogue to expression (6), which compares raising
enforcement effort and lowering the evidence threshold in achieving a given level of deterrence,
by combining the first-order condition for e, expressions (13) and (14), and that for xT,
expressions (15) and (16), which yields


  
B
pB   B 

B   
(17)   P  H   H
f
   p   H   



B

b b
B

B



1
.
H H
 p s

Note that the fractions πB/πH and πBN/πHN were both equal to one in model I.
Additionally, the first-order condition for xT may usefully be compared to the analogue to
expression (8) for the preponderance of evidence rule:

 B B
(18) 1   H P 1  F B b B  .






This expression differs from expression (8) for the monitoring technology in two ways. Most
apparent, the term 1!FH(bH) no longer appears on the left side because, with the investigation
technology, it is known that a harmful act was committed. (Put another way, although the
aggregate flow of individuals who commit harmful acts and end up before the tribunal has the
factor 1!FH(bH), this factor also appears in the aggregate flow of individuals who commit benign
acts and end up before the tribunal, so the effects cancel.) Second, the fraction πB/πH on the right

- 21 -

side here simply equalled one under the assumptions for the monitoring technology. (The origin
of this fraction is that the base rate for those committing the harmful act – on the left side to the
analogue to expression (7), which is not produced here – has the factor πH , and the right side has
πB .) The differences between the preponderance of the evidence rule (18) and the first-order
condition (15 and 16) are even more striking with the investigation technology. For example,
the preponderance rule, as before, depends on the distribution function for benign acts whereas
the first-order condition again does not; however, the preponderance rule here does not depend
on the distribution function for harmful acts whereas the first-order condition here does, both
reversed from the prior case. Let us now state:
Proposition 5: When enforcement is by investigation:
a. The optimal evidence threshold, given implicitly by (15) and (16), generally differs
from the preponderance of the evidence rule, given by (18) (or any similar rule denominated in
terms of an ex post likelihood that an individual before the tribunal must have committed the
harmful type of act).
b. Raising the evidence threshold xT may increase the frequency with which individuals
who commit benign acts are mistakenly subject to sanctions.
For proposition 5.b, consider for this model the effect of raising the evidence threshold xT
on the frequency of mistaken applications of sanctions. For the monitoring model, the result was
indeterminate (recall proposition 4.c) because benign acts that are committed face a lower
frequency of sanctions but the number of benign acts that are committed increases. In the
present model, this net effect is multiplied by another factor, itself of indeterminate sign, which
just equals dρB/dpH.28 The intuition is that, in the monitoring model, raising xT unambiguously
reduces bB, the benefit level of the marginal chilled individual; here, whether that happens or the
opposite depends on how ρB changes, which depends not only on the sign of PBN as before (which
is unambiguously positive), but also on additional terms. Specifically, examining expression
(16), we can see two competing effects: on one hand, raising xT, which reduces pH and also pB,
will reduce the frequency with which individuals who commit the benign act are sanctioned; on
the other hand, raising xT, which reduces pH, will reduce the deterrence of harmful acts, thereby
resulting in more investigations and thus more opportunities for innocent individuals to be
mistakenly subject to sanctions. Combining the above, we have the product of two terms of
indeterminate sign – the composite term from the monitoring case (summing the competing
inframarginal and marginal effects from a change in the expected sanction on those committing
benign acts) and dρB/dpH – which is itself indeterminate in light of the fact that each depends on
largely separate factors. (The former, recall, has its sign indicated by whether
bBf B(bB) > 1!F B(bB), which can be contrasted with expression (16).) One might suppose that a
common case will be one in which the component common with the monitoring model will be

28

The change in the expected number of mistaken applications of sanctions as one raises pH, which has a
sign opposite to that of raising xT, is given by



d
dp

B
H

B  B 

 B B
  1  F  b    f  b  b .



In the monitoring model, in place of dρB/dpH, one has πPBN.

- 22 -

such that the dominant effect involves the existing pool of unchilled individuals (perhaps most
individuals commit their benign acts), with the change in the size of the pool being relatively
unimportant. For that case, in model I with monitoring, raising xT would indeed reduce the
frequency of false positives. However, in model II with investigation, it seems plausible that,
especially when the evidence threshold is fairly high, deterrence effects regarding harmful acts
would dominate so that tighter proof requirements would result in more benign acts being
mistakenly subject to sanctions.
5. Extensions
A. Auditing (Model III)
This subsection briefly describes a third model: enforcement by auditing. Regarding
behavior, the analysis is like that in model I. Regarding enforcement costs, there are similarities
to model II: there, the pool of acts triggering costly scrutiny consists of harmful acts, which
likewise trigger costly audits here. The difference here is that benign acts also lead to
enforcement costs being incurred because they too are subject to audits.
To be explicit, modify model I as follows. The probability of scrutiny (here, an audit)
will continue to be denoted by π, so as before we have bi / πpis for i = H, B. The enforcement
variable e will now be interpreted as the expenditure required per audit. (It is natural to consider
the case in which πN is constant, corresponding to costs per audit being invariant to the level of
audits, but we will not restrict attention to that case for the sake of generality and to facilitate
comparability across cases.) Social welfare for the auditing model is as in expression (1), except
that e in the last term is weighted by the number of audits (the audit probability π times the size
of the pool subject to audit, which is the total number of individuals who commit either type of
act). See expression (A10) in the appendix.
Note that, as with the monitoring model (but unlike with the investigation model), the
standard Becker (1968) argument applies. Note further that the new version of the Becker
argument introduced in section 3.C does not hold in this case: even though raising a nonmaximal
sanction s while raising the evidence threshold xT so as to keep deterrence constant will, as
before, reduce the chilling effect, which in and of itself is desirable, reduced chilling also means
that more individuals commit benign acts, which increases the size of the audit pool, thereby
raising enforcement costs (even though e and thus π are held constant).
The first-order conditions corresponding to expressions (3), (5), and (6) for this model
also appear in the appendix (A11–A13). There are two sets of modifications. Regarding
marginal effects of the enforcement instruments on behavior, deterrence is now more valuable
(making it possible that the optimum involves overdeterrence relative to first-best behavior) and
chilling less costly, in both cases because fewer acts lead to fewer audits, which reduces
enforcement expenditures. (Indeed, chilling is net desirable when bB < πe, that is, when the
benefit of the marginal benign act is less than the expected audit cost.) This pair of effects
makes both greater enforcement effort and a lower evidence threshold more attractive.
Inframarginally, greater enforcement expenditures (and thus a higher audit rate) raise costs for

- 23 -

those who commit either type of act, which makes raising enforcement less attractive. One
should, however, keep in mind the caveat presented in section 4’s analysis of the investigation
model: that one cannot formally compare results across models because different technologies
and settings are envisioned. Finally, observe that because, as noted at the outset, behavioral
effects themselves are the same as in model I with monitoring, raising the evidence threshold xT
in this auditing model can increase the frequency of mistakenly sanctioning benign acts. In light
of the foregoing analysis – supplemented by that in section 3 on monitoring, where behavior is
determined identically – we can state (by analogy to proposition 4) that:
Proposition 6: When enforcement is by auditing:
a. The optimal evidence threshold, given implicitly by (A12), generally differs from the
preponderance of the evidence rule, given implicitly by (8) (or any similar rule denominated in
terms of an ex post likelihood that an individual before the tribunal must have committed the
harmful type of act).
b. At the optimal evidence threshold, the minimum ex post likelihood that an individual
must have committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions can take on any
(admissible) value.
c. Raising the evidence threshold xT may increase the frequency with which individuals
who commit benign acts are mistakenly subject to sanctions.
d. Raising the evidence threshold xT may result in a lower ex post likelihood that an
individual must have committed the harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions.
Before concluding this subsection, it is worth observing that the additional features of
this auditing model are also pertinent in realistic settings with monitoring. For example, when
police patrols identify possible perpetrators, there may need to be follow-up investigation or at
least some sort of adjudication in order to generate and assess evidence, which obviously entails
costs, such as are included here. Specifically, the costs are triggered in all cases where the
monitor ultimately picks out an act, which is likewise true with regard to the decision to conduct
an audit of some act. Thus, monitoring is also likely to be more costly when more acts (of both
types) are committed, giving rise to the additional effects here attributed to a model with
auditing.
B. Socially Costly Sanctions
Suppose that sanctions, instead of being costless transfers, entail direct social costs.29
Notably, imprisonment is socially costly both because individuals’ utility loss is not offset by a
corresponding gain and because the operation of prisons consumes resources. In particular,
assume that each unit of the sanction s that is imposed entails a social cost of σ. The resulting
expression for social welfare (in the monitoring model) is:

29

For prior analyses of socially costly sanctions (in models without errors), see Polinsky and Shavell (1984)
and Kaplow (1990); and for discussion with error but in a single-decision framework like that in section 3.E, see
Kaplow (1994). On risk aversion, see note 12.

- 24 -




(19) W 

 b  h   (e) p

H



( x T ) s f H (b)db

 ( e) p H ( xT ) s



 b   (e) p



B

B



( x T ) s f B (b)db  e.

T

 ( e) p ( x ) s

Compared to our original expression (1), each integrand now subtracts a term π(e)pi(xT)sσ, which
is the expected sanction for the type of act multiplied by the social cost per unit of sanction
imposed. This modification obviously makes the commission of both the harmful and the benign
type of act less socially desirable.30
The first-order conditions corresponding to expressions (3), (5), and (6) for, respectively,
the optimal choices of e and xT and the combination indicating the relative desirability of
enforcement effort versus evidence threshold adjustment are as follows:

(20)  p H sf

H

b h  1   b    p
H

b 1   b  1
  s  p 1  F b   p 1  F b .

H

B

sf

B

B

B

H

(21) f

H

b h  1   b   P
H

H





B

f

b 1   b
B

H

B

B

B

b 1   b



  1  F b   P 1  F b .


B

B

B

H

 B pB 
(22)   P  H  f
p 


H

B



B

H

B

B

    p1

  1 F B bB

H

B

s

.

Proposition 7: In the monitoring model, introducing or raising a social cost of sanctions has
ambiguous effects on optimal enforcement effort, the optimal evidence threshold, and the
relative desirability of increasing enforcement effort versus reducing the evidence threshold in
achieving a given level of deterrence.

30

Also of interest is that the traditional Becker (1968) argument for maximal sanctions holds because, since
the product πs is held constant, sanction costs are also held constant. By contrast, the new variation presented in
section 3.C need not hold because raising a nonmaximal sanction and increasing the evidence threshold in a way that
keeps deterrence constant continues to have the benefit of reducing chilling costs but this reduction means that more
benign acts are committed and thus greater sanction costs will be incurred. Put more formally, expression (22) does
not (as with expression (6)) guarantee that PBN > pB/pH.

- 25 -

To see why these ambiguous results follow, observe that, in each of these three
optimality conditions, we have two new sets of effects. All conditions have an added term that
includes the factors σ and 1!F i(bi). These indicate that both greater enforcement effort e and a
lower evidence threshold xT raise the expected sanction on individuals who continue to commit
both the harmful and the benign types of acts, which is now socially costly in itself. From the
final terms on the right sides of expressions (20) and (21), this effect favors a lower e and a
higher xT, as one might have expected.
However, there is a second sort of effect regarding the marginal consequences of
deterrence and chilling, indicated by the 1!σ before bH on the left sides of (20) and (21) and
before bB on the right sides. As expected sanctions rise, more individuals with both types of acts
are discouraged from acting, producing now a marginal social gain per individual who no longer
acts equal to the expected sanction (which just equals the benefit of the respective marginal
individual) times the social cost per unit of sanction σ. This effect favors a higher e and a lower
xT, which may be contrary to what one would have anticipated (compare, for example, Lando
2002, p. 606). Even the chilling of desirable acts now has a benefit: that fewer individuals are
subject to the socially costly sanction.
Because the first effect, changing the level of sanctions imposed on individuals who
nevertheless act, is inframarginal, depending on the cumulative distribution functions, F i, and
the second effect just described is marginal, depending on the densities, f i, among other factors,
costly sanctions have an ambiguous effect on optimal enforcement effort and the evidence
threshold. To confirm that either set of competing effects could be larger, observe that, at σ = 0,
the terms with the F i vanish. Then, as we raise σ slightly from 0, the magnitude of the
inframarginal effects can be small or large in a way that depends on parts of the distribution that
do not affect the original optimum.31
Expression (22) indicates that, for the same reasons, the effect on the relative desirability
of using enforcement effort versus a lower evidence threshold to achieve a given level of
deterrence is ambiguous. On one hand, lower evidence thresholds (which are free)
disproportionately target benign acts relative to greater enforcement effort (which is costly), and
this now has a further disadvantage of increasing sanction costs on individuals who are not
chilled. On the other hand, there is a new advantage in that the net social marginal cost of
chilling benign acts is reduced on account of the resulting saving in sanction costs.
The foregoing analysis, particularly of expression (21) for the optimal evidence
threshold, thus upsets conventional wisdom that costly sanctions in the criminal context provide
a clear justification for the higher burden of proof employed there. One can also slightly modify
the foregoing extension to capture additional considerations. For example, another ex post
consequence of imprisonment and certain other sanctions (e.g., suspensions of permission to
engage in activities, such as through license revocation) is to reduce the incidence of harmful
acts by making individuals who might otherwise commit them unable to do so for a period of
31

Furthermore, in each expression, (20) and (21), each marginal term, bif i(bi), has precisely the same weight
as its corresponding inframarginal term, 1!F i(bi).

- 26 -

time. Consider the case in which the reduction in social harm is proportional to the magnitude of
the sanction, in which event the σ in the first integrand of expression (19) for social welfare
would be replaced with a lower value, σ!. (If the incapacitation gain were sufficiently great, σ!
would be negative.) The value of σ remains unaltered in the second term because incapacitation
of individuals who commit benign acts is assumed not to reduce the commission of harmful acts.
The result of this change would be to accordingly reduce the magnitudes of σ to σ! on the left
sides of expressions (20) and (21), and this lower σ! would multiply the first term in square
brackets on the right sides (with σ continuing to weight the second term). We can immediately
see that, as the consequence of these two sets of changes, the effects of an incapacitation benefit
on optimal enforcement effort and on the optimal evidence threshold are ambiguous. Just as
raising the social cost of sanctions has an ambiguous effect on how these instruments should be
set, so does reducing this social cost, even to a negative value (a net social benefit) for just those
committing harmful acts.
Finally, although the analysis throughout this article has taken a standard welfarist
approach under which social welfare is determined by the benefits and harms of acts,
enforcement costs, and now the costs of imposing sanctions, the present extension allows one as
well to characterize optimal policy if society cares per se about the correct and incorrect
imposition of sanctions, as is commonly suggested (especially by noneconomists). Specifically,
suppose that social welfare is higher by some amount per unit of correctly imposed sanction and
lower by some other amount per unit of mistakenly imposed sanction (without regard to
behavioral effects, resource costs, and so forth). By simply altering the magnitudes of σ!and σ to
reflect these considerations, the reinterpreted versions of expressions (20) through (22) would
apply; in particular, the modified expression (21) would indicate the optimal evidence threshold.
Yet again, the effects on optimal policy are ambiguous, contrary to the conventional view that,
for example, associating a greater cost with mistakenly sanctioning the innocent favors a higher
evidence threshold. Finally, if one cared only about such ex post effects, one could set σ! to a
negative value equaling the social gain per unit of correctly imposed sanction, σ to the positive
value for the social cost per unit of mistakenly imposed sanctions (regarding the signs, recall that
the σ’s were originally presented as costs, not benefits), and remove the other terms relating to
behavior and enforcement costs. It is not suggested that this is a plausible social objective, and
the results have some peculiar implications,32 but this discussion indicates how the present
framework readily allows one to analyze a variety of objective functions.
32

For example, under the posited ex post objective function, deterrence of harmful acts turns out to be
detrimental because society obtains its benefit from the correct imposition of sanctions less often, and chilling
desirable acts is beneficial because society less often suffers the welfare loss from incorrectly sanctioning benign
acts. For criticism of nonwelfarist approaches, including that they can violate the Pareto principle, see Kaplow and
Shavell (2001, 2002). Some have suggested to me an objective function that only cares about the relative effects in
cases that actually come before the tribunal. Again, deterrence could be undesirable and chilling desirable because
both “worsen” the priors in that a lower fraction of cases before the tribunal involve true positives. Moreover, the
optimal overall enforcement scheme would involve virtually no prosecutions (and hence essentially no deterrence),
bringing only the occasional case in which one was truly certain that the individual committed a harmful act. Also,
welfare would improve by rounding up many innocent individuals and subsequently acquitting them, because the
outcomes ratio would improve. Accordingly, even by reference to objective functions that focus on ex post
treatment, it is not that easy to attempt to rationalize the existing legal system, including an ex post Bayesian burden
of proof concept.

- 27 -

C. Accuracy33
The accuracy of the decision-making process depends on the quality of the signal x,
which in turn is indicated by the densities g i(x) or, equivalently, the distribution functions G i(x).
There are two preliminary difficulties in analyzing the effects of the degree of accuracy on the
optimal level of enforcement effort and the optimal evidence threshold. First, in comparing two
signals, it may not be that one is unambiguously more or less accurate than another because the
relative error rates may depend on the choice of the evidence threshold. Second, it is somewhat
unclear what it means to hold the evidence threshold constant when comparing two tests. For
example, one could hold xT fixed, but such would be incoherent if the two signals are distributed
on different, non-overlapping intervals; more generally, the meaning of a given xT will differ
across tests.
Accordingly, for concreteness let us consider a simple, special case where the
comparison is likely to be as clear as one might hope, in order to see what
can be learned.
T i
Specifically, let the distribution functions be such that pi(xT) = (1  x ) , for x 0 [0,1], where
αB > αH > 1. It is convenient to rewrite this as pB = (pH)α, where α = αB/αH. As discussed
previously, the choice of xT can be understood equivalently as a choice of pH. This particular
functional form relating pB to pH is convex (see section 2 for further discussion). With this
formulation, an increase in α represents an unambiguous increase in accuracy (except at 0 and
1): for any given pH, pB falls. Analysis will be confined to choices where, at least initially, the
evidence threshold xT under the higher α is set such that pH is higher and pB is lower.
Further restricting attention to the case of uniform distributions of benefits (constant
densities), reconsider the first-order conditions (3) and (5). When pH is higher and pB is lower,
the marginal gain from deterrence falls (since bH is higher) and the marginal cost from chilling
also falls (since bB is lower), which have opposing effects on both the optimal level of
enforcement and the optimal evidence threshold. Regarding enforcement effort, there is an
additional set of effects: when pH is higher, the deterrence punch is greater (a given increase in e
has a larger effect in raising the expected sanction on harmful acts), and when pB is lower, the
chilling punch is less (a greater increase in e has a smaller effect in raising the expected sanction
on benign acts), both of which favor greater enforcement effort. Regarding the optimal evidence
threshold, one might also wonder about the effect of increased accuracy on PBN. This will
depend on how pH and pB are chosen under the more accurate test, although the initial values and
other parameters have implications for its magnitude (when it is chosen optimally). It might
seem natural to focus on the special case in which PBN remains the same (although this may be
inconsistent with supposing that pH is higher and pB is lower).34
33

Prior treatments of accuracy and law enforcement (in a model like that in section 3.E) include Kaplow and
Shavell (1994) and Kaplow (1994).
34
Regarding condition (5) for the optimal evidence threshold, consider first the case where the initially
optimal threshold is high, implying a low pH. With greater accuracy, pB will rise slowly, so chilling costs will be
small, and one will not reach a given level of PBN until pH is higher, indicating the optimality of a lower evidence
threshold (subject to the usual qualifications depending on the f i’s). However, if the optimum is initially far enough
to the right (a low evidence threshold), a more accurate signal could have the opposite effect, favoring a lower pH,

- 28 -

It is also instructive to revisit the comparative first-order condition (6) that indicates the
relative virtues of lowering the evidence threshold compared to raising enforcement effort in
achieving a given level of deterrence. Again, even assuming a constant density function, we
have competing effects. The reduction in pB implies, as mentioned, a lower bB, a reduced
marginal social loss from chilling the marginal individual, which reduces the relative
disadvantage of lowering the evidence threshold (which, recall, involves relatively more increase
in the marginal chilling punch in achieving a given level of deterrence than does raising
enforcement effort.) Other factors, by contrast, make the use of enforcement effort relatively
more favorable. The reduction in pB and increase in pH both reduce the fraction pB/pH: on
account of higher accuracy, increased enforcement effort now has less chilling punch and more
deterrence punch than before, as noted; i.e., enforcement effort’s relative benefit in terms of the
chilling–deterrence tradeoff is enhanced. The pH in the denominator on the right side indicates
that greater accuracy makes it less expensive to achieve a given level of deterrence augmentation
through increased enforcement effort; i.e., enforcement effort’s resource cost disadvantage is
reduced. And, again, we have PBN, about which little in general may be said. Considering as
well that we are limiting analysis to the case of a constant density function and a particular
formulation of the signal and how it changes with increased accuracy, what can be concluded
about the effect of accuracy on the optimal setting of other enforcement instruments is limited.
Finally, it is interesting to inquire into the value of accuracy in the present context and
how optimal accuracy is determined. In our special case in which pB = (pH)α, and supposing that
all other instruments are set optimally, the marginal value of accuracy can be determined by
taking the derivative of social welfare in expression (1) with respect to α, while holding pH fixed.
(By the envelope theorem, we can ignore as second-order further influences on welfare due to
the optimal adjustment of pH, which was a focus of the preceding discussion.) This marginal
value, which involves reduced chilling costs, can be expressed as ![pB ln pH]πsγf B(bB)bB, which
is fairly similar to the right side of expression (4). The terms after the brackets are the product of
an expected sanction effect, πs, the (population-mass-weighted) density for the benign act,
γf B(bB), and the benefit of the marginal act no longer chilled, bB. The term in brackets is the
derivative of pB with respect to α for the posited functional form, which is negative because
[ln pH] is negative (in light of the fact that pH < 1). Not surprisingly, the value of enhanced
accuracy is greater the larger is the drop in pB and the greater is the marginal chilling cost.
Regarding the cost of accuracy, suppose that the enforcement expenditure term e in expression
(1) is replaced by ec(α), where cN(α) > 0. At the optimal level of accuracy, then, the foregoing
expression for the marginal value of accuracy would be equated to ecN.
D. Relative Concentration of Chilling Effects
Model I assumes that harmful acts and benign acts are scrutinized at a common rate π,
with γ indicating the mass of opportunities to commit benign acts (with that for harmful acts
normalized to one). Consider now the possibility that, relative to this benchmark, the chilling
potential of law enforcement is more concentrated (or dispersed) by introducing a factor λ that
multiplies π for benign acts and also divides γ: λ greater (less) than one indicates more highly
that is, a higher evidence threshold.

- 29 -

concentrated (dispersed) chilling effects. (If λ = 2, only half as many individuals have
opportunities to commit benign acts that may become subject to scrutiny, but such acts are
scrutinized with twice the frequency.) The expression for social welfare becomes


(23) W 



  B
 (b  h) f (b)db    bf (b)db  e.
p s
 p s
H

H

B

In the analogues to the first-order conditions (3) and (5) for the optimal level of
enforcement effort e and the optimal evidence threshold xT, as well as condition (6) indicating
the optimal relative use of the two instruments to achieve a given level of deterrence, the λ’s
from the second term of expression (28) cancel (we have 1/λ times as many potential benign acts
and λ times as many are subject to sanctions, ceteris paribus), so all the expressions are the same
as before. Nevertheless, the results differ because we now have bB = λπpBs. A higher λ (more
concentrated chilling effects) means that the social cost of chilling the marginal act is higher:
those individuals whose benign acts are potentially subject to mistaken sanctions face a higher
expected sanction, so the marginal type has higher benefits, raising the marginal social cost. (By
analogy, it is familiar that applying a tax to half as many people but at twice the rate causes more
marginal and total distortion; the prospect of being fined in this model is tantamount to being
subject to a probabilistic tax on the activity.) Just as with propositions 1b and 2b giving
comparative statics for raising γ (indicating a relatively greater importance of chilling effects), so
a higher λ on this account tends to make optimal a lower level of enforcement effort and a higher
evidence threshold, and also a greater relative reliance on enforcement effort than on a lower
evidence threshold to achieve a given level of deterrence.
This characterization is incomplete, however, because in each of our three optimality
conditions, the term bB is multiplied by f B(bB): there is a reinforcing or countervailing effect
depending on whether f BN(bB) is positive or negative. The originally stated sign of the net effect
continues to govern (for a marginal change in λ) if and only if f B/bB > !f BN(bB) (which obviously
holds when f BN(bB) $ 0).
6. Conclusion
Setting the evidence threshold or burden of proof is an important and often overlooked
policy instrument, along with the traditionally studied tools of enforcement effort and sanctions.
Incorporating it into a framework that allows for errors not only to reduce deterrence but also to
chill desirable behavior casts additional and sometimes quite different light on previously
examined questions and presents new and challenging ones. Further interest is added by the fact
that there are important, qualitative differences across the enforcement technologies of
monitoring, investigation, and auditing. Among the distinctions are that, when enforcement is
by investigation, optimal sanctions need not be maximal, there need not be underdeterrence at
the optimal level of enforcement, and raising the evidence threshold may raise the frequency
with which individuals who commit benign acts are mistakenly sanctioned but possibly under
opposite circumstances compared to when enforcement is by monitoring or auditing.

- 30 -

Characterizations are offered for the optimal level of enforcement effort and for the
optimal evidence threshold in all three models. It is explained how these two instruments are
substitutes in achieving the deterrence of harmful acts. The key differences are that raising effort
involves resource costs, unlike lowering the evidence threshold, but the latter tends to be
relatively less discriminating regarding benign acts and thus entails greater chilling costs (at least
in the neighborhood of the optimum). Briefer attention is devoted to the often simpler question
of optimal sanctions, including formulation of a new sort of Becker (1968) argument – favoring
raising sanctions while raising the evidence threshold, which can keep deterrence and
enforcement costs fixed while reducing chilling effects. This new argument for maximal
sanctions holds in some cases in which the traditional one does not, thereby upending important
results in prior literature.
Attention is also devoted to the relationship between the setting of an evidence threshold
– a minimal level of evidence (value of a signal) required to impose sanctions, the direct policy
lever analyzed throughout – and conventional understandings about the burden of proof. The
latter, embodied for example in the preponderance of the evidence rule that requires it to be more
likely than not that the individual before the tribunal committed the harmful act, is an ex post
Bayesian notion that has very little connection to the first-order condition that characterizes the
optimal evidence threshold in any of the three models. One implication is that, at the optimal
evidence threshold, the requisite ex post likelihood that an individual must have committed the
harmful type of act in order to be subject to sanctions can take on any value. Also, raising the
evidence threshold may increase the frequency with which individuals who commit benign acts
are mistakenly sanctioned and may reduce the ex post likelihood that an individual before a
tribunal must have committed the harmful type of act in order to be sanctioned. Prior work, by
focusing on a much simpler case (with only one type of act and thus no possibility of chilling
effects), has tended to obscure the magnitude of the gulf between the different approaches to the
burden of proof.
An extension considers costly sanctions and finds that the effects are ambiguous; for
example, raising the evidence threshold, which may seem attractive because, conditional on
behavior, fewer individuals who have committed both harmful and benign acts are sanctioned,
has the offsetting effect that more of both types of acts are committed ex ante, thereby expanding
the pool who might receive the costly sanctions. Incapacitation is introduced; in the case
considered, it is tantamount to reducing (possibly to a negative level) the social cost of sanctions
as applied to actually harmful acts. Social benefits or costs associated with the correct or
incorrect imposition of sanctions, viewed as ends in themselves, are analyzed similarly.
Enhanced accuracy has ambiguous effects on the optimal setting of enforcement instruments.
And, when chilling effects are more concentrated, their social consequences tend to be worse
(but not necessarily so), in which case less enforcement effort and a higher evidence threshold
are optimal and relatively greater reliance on the former instrument is desirable.
Even though three different enforcement technologies are analyzed, much remains to be

- 31 -

done to provide a comprehensive view of evidence thresholds (or proof burdens).35 One of the
most significant unexamined dimensions concerns enforcers’ behavior in gathering evidence and
bringing cases, regarding both public officials, such as government prosecutors or those in
administrative agencies, and private litigants. Incorporating this feature – aspects of which have
been examined in basic settings, often with exogenous behavior and stipulated, constant social
costs to errors (see the references in note 2; Prendergast (2007) on optimal biases of government
officials; and Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011), who more generally investigate persuasion) –
renders endogenous both enforcement levels and costs, making the burden of proof an even more
momentous and more difficult to analyze enforcement instrument. For informal discussion,
including greater attention to the application to civil litigation, see Kaplow (2012a). Another
possibility is that the legal system might impose one sort of proof burden at an initial stage but a
different one after further examination.36 Such a distinction is involved in prosecutors’ or
agencies’ screening processes and in many systems of adjudication that eliminate cases at early
stages if what can be established at that point fails to meet some minimum standard.
The present inquiry, although preliminary in significant respects, helps illuminate these
and other questions. It provides characterizations of the optimal use of different enforcement
instruments, including the burden of proof, and shows how they interact – how best to achieve a
target level of deterrence through adjusting multiple instruments. It demonstrates the large
difference in the analysis when errors may chill desirable behavior, a phenomenon absent in past
work. It exposes how results change qualitatively when enforcement is by investigation or by
auditing rather than by monitoring. And it presents the stark differences between determinants
of an optimal evidence threshold and of conventional notions of the burden of proof, most of
which do not arise in simpler models.

35

For further extensions and for relation of the analysis to legal perspectives on the burden of proof, see
Kaplow (2012a, 2012b).
36
This extension is the subject of work in progress, tentatively entitled “Optimal Multistage Adjudication.”

- 32 -

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. To begin, it is helpful to state the second-order condition for an
interior optimum for enforcement effort.

d 2W
2 H2 2
( A1)



p s f

de 2

H


   p H sf


H

2

   2 p H s2 f

H


H
 hb







2
2


    p B sf B b B    2 p B s 2 f B b B    2 p B s 2 f B   0,


where the arguments of the f i (each evaluated for the pertinent marginal benefit level bi) are
suppressed for convenience.
To prove part a, we take the derivative of the first-order condition (2) or (3) with respect
to h and solve for de/dh, yielding the following:37

 p H sf H
de
( A2)

 0.
dh  d 2W 2
de
Moreover, the numerator, reflecting the rise in deterrence of harmful acts, accords with the
intuition given for why raising h raises e*.
To prove part b, we examine de/dγ:

( A3)

de  p B sf B b B

 0.
d
d 2W 2
de

Again, the result accords with the stated intuition, as the numerator indicates the marginal loss
from deterring the marginal benign act.

37

Although it is not in general sufficient to determine comparative statics by differentiating the first-order
condition in problems in which the second-order condition does not hold globally (which is true here), examination
of the first-order condition (2) or (3), moving all the terms to the left side (which gives the expression for dW/de)
makes apparent that there is no concern. Specifically, for part a, it is obvious that raising h raises the value of dW/de
throughout, so if there were two local optima that were each a global optimum, it is clear that raising h would make
that associated with a higher e the unique global optimum. Likewise, for part b, raising γ has the opposite effect.
Analogous reasoning is applicable with regard to all parts of proposition 2.

- 33 -

Establishing part c is more complicated. Solving for de/ds yields:

 
H
H
H2
H
H
H2




p
f

p
sf
h
b
p
sf








de  
( A4)

ds  
B
B B
B2
B B
B2
B
    p f b   p sf b   p sf 






H








d 2W

de 2

.

It is easy to assert that expression (A4) cannot unambiguously be signed, but it requires further
effort to confirm that this is so. It suffices to construct examples consistent with the model’s
assumptions that yield opposite signs for the expression.
We will confine attention to the numerator and consider the case where both of the
densities f i are constant on the unit interval and γ = 1. Furthermore, we can use the first-order
condition (3) to substitute for the leading terms in each row of the numerator. When all this is
done, the numerator simplifies to





2
2
1
( A5)    s p H  p B .
s

It appears that a low value of s renders expression (A5) negative and a high value makes it
positive. However, since the values of π and πN are determined by the optimal choice of e, which
in turn depends on s, some further analysis is required.
Suppose that s initially equals 0.5. We also know that π cannot exceed one and that the pi
cannot exceed one (nor can their squares). Hence, to obtain a negative value for expression (A5)
and thus a positive value for (A4), it is sufficient that πN < 2. But we can choose a π(e) function
and an h that is high enough to assure this at the optimal level of e.
For the other possibility, first observe that, for any burden of proof, the value of the term
in parentheses will equal some constant. Thus, we can guarantee that expression (A5) is positive
and hence (A4) negative if ππN is sufficiently large (at some given initial value of s). Suppose
that the function π is such that it obtains a value of 0.5 essentially for free (we can choose the
function such that the level of e such that π(e) = 0.5 is arbitrarily small), which places a floor on
the value of π. We are left with demonstrating that it is possible that πN is sufficiently large given
each of these other factors that can be treated as constants (or floors). Again, this can be
accomplished with an appropriate function π(e) and value of h. Specifically, choose h high
enough that it is beneficial to raise π to at least 0.5, but not so high to drive πN below the desired
value. (Note that we have essentially chosen a π function such that πN is arbitrarily large until
π = 0.5 and then drops sufficiently rapidly since we know π cannot exceed 1. If h was chosen so
that, at π = 0.5, one was indifferent to a free increase in π, one would increase π no further and
thus the optimal πN can be made as high as we like.)
Proof of Proposition 2. As discussed in section 2, it is equivalent to view the problem of

- 34 -

choosing the optimal xT as instead one of choosing the optimal pH. The latter course will be
adopted here because it is somewhat less cumbersome notationally. Obviously, all comparative
statics in terms of pH will, because dpi(xT)/dxT = !g i(xT), have the opposite sign of those for xT,
the subject of the proposition .
Accordingly, begin with the second-order condition for an interior optimum for pH.
(Throughout, the version of the first-order condition in expression (5), which cancels πs from
each side, is employed.)

( A6)

d 2W
dp

H2

 sf

H

 sf

H



h  b 
H

2
2
 B B B

B
B B
B
   P f b  P sf b  P sf B   0.



To prove part a, we take the derivative of the first-order condition (4) or (5) with respect
to h and solve for dpH/dh.38

dp H
s
( A7)

 0.
2
dh
 d W H2
dp
As explained, raising h makes the marginal deterrence benefit greater to that extent, producing a
higher pH* and thus a lower xT*.
For part b, we examine dpH/dγ:


dp H
P B f Bb B
( A8)
 2
 0.
d
d W
2
dp H
Because there are more benign acts, the marginal chilling cost of a higher pH is greater, so pH* is
lower and thus xT* is higher.
For part c, we can solve for dpH/ds:

38

Regarding possible multiple optima, see note 36.

- 35 -

H

( A9)

dp

ds

p H f

H

 p H f

H



h  b     p
H

d 2W

B

 
 
P B f B b B  p B P B f B 


.

ds 2

If the densities f i are constant (uniform distributions), the middle terms in the numerator, which
otherwise could have either sign, equal zero. The first and last terms are positive and the
denominator is negative, so under the stated assumption, dpH/ds < 0. The first term indicates the
increase in the marginal forgone benefit from harmful acts times the deterrence punch (recall that
πs has been cancelled from each side of the first-order condition before performing this
derivation). Likewise, the final term is the increase in the forgone benefit from benign acts times
the chilling punch. Since both forgone benefits are larger when s is higher, pH* is lower and thus
xT* is higher.39
Auditing (Model III). The social welfare function is:


( A10) W 

 b  h f
H

H

T

 bf
B

 ( e) p ( x ) s



(b)db  



B

(b)db

T

 ( e) p ( x ) s



 





  (e) 1  F H  (e) p H ( x T ) s   1  F B  (e) p B ( x T ) s e.
As suggested in the text, the first two terms are the same as those in expression (1) for the
monitoring model, whereas the last weights e by the number of audits, which in turn equals the
audit probability π times the size of the pool subject to audit, that is, the total number of
individuals who commit either type of act.
The first-order conditions corresponding to expressions (3), (5), and (6) for this model
are as follows:

39

Further exploration of (A9) can take advantage of the fact that the numerator is similar to the second-order
condition (A6), particularly when the latter is multiplied by !pH/s. The differences are that (A6) has an additional
term (the middle one, with PBO), and the last two terms of (A6) (after the modification) have pHPBN whereas (A9) has
pB – the former exceeding the latter at an optimum, as discussed in section 3.C. Because modified expression (A6)’s
additional term is positive and the total of the modified expression is positive (we did multiply through by negative
one), it is natural to consider a case where, at the optimum, the second-order condition is barely satisfied, suggesting
that the numerator of (A9) might therefore be negative, with the result that we would have dpH/ds > 0. However, this
possibility is not so easy to establish because the relative magnitude of that term in (A6) is affected (among other
things) by the magnitude of PBO, the value of which, at the optimum, depends on the level of pH, which is also
related to the difference between pHPBN and pB. Accordingly, for the present it is left as a conjecture that this other
case can arise.

- 36 -

( A11)  p H sf

H

b h  b
H

H



 e   p B sf

B

b

B



    e 1  F H

( A12) f

H

b h  b
H

H

 B p B 
( A13)   P  H  f
p 



 e  P B f



B

b b
B

B

B

b b



B

 e 

B


b    1  F b .

 e

H

B

B



 e .

   e1  F H b H    1  F B b B 

- 37 -

 p H s

.

References
Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
Economy 76:169-217.
Bernardo, Antonio E., Eric Talley, and Ivo Welch. 2000. “A Theory of Legal Presumptions,”
Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 16: 1–49.
Demougin, Dominique, and Claude Fluet. 2006. “Preponderance of Evidence,” European
Economic Review 50: 963–76.
__________ and __________. 2008. “Rules of Proof, Courts, and Incentives,” Rand Journal of
Economics 39: 20–40.
Garner, Bryan A., ed. 1999. Black’s Law Dictionary, 7th ed., St. Paul: West Group.
Hay, Bruce L., and Kathryn E. Spier. 1997. “Burdens of Proof in Civil Litigation: An Economic
Perspective,” Journal of Legal Studies 26: 413–31
Kamenica, Emir, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2011. “Bayesian Persuasion,” American Economic
Review 101: 2590–615.
Kaplow, Louis. 1990. “A Note on the Optimal Use of Nonmonetary Sanctions,” Journal of
Public Economics 42: 245–47.
__________. 1994. “The Value of Accuracy in Adjudication,” Journal of Legal Studies 23:
307–401.
__________. 2011. “Optimal Proof Burdens, Deterrence, and the Chilling of Desirable
Behavior,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 101(3): 277–80.
__________. 2012a. “Burden of Proof,” Yale Law Journal 121: 738–859.
__________. 2012b. “On the Optimal Burden of Proof,” NBER Working Paper No. ____.
__________, and Steven Shavell. 1994. “Accuracy in the Determination of Liability,” Journal of
Law and Economics 37: 1–15.
__________ and __________. 2001. “Any Non-Welfarist Method of Policy Assessment
Violates the Pareto Principle,” Journal of Political Economy 109: 281–286.
__________ and __________. 2002. Fairness versus Welfare, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Karlin, Samuel, and Herman Rubin. 1956. “The Theory of Decision Procedures for
Distributions with Monotone Likelihood Ratio,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics 27:
272–99.
Kessler, Daniel P., William M. Sage, and David J. Becker. 2005. “Impact of Malpractice
Reforms on the Supply of Physician Services,” Journal of the American Medical Association
293: 2618–25.
Lando, Henrik. 2002. “When is the Preponderance of Evidence Standard Optimal,” Geneva
Papers on Risk and Insurance – Issues and Practice 27: 602–08.
Luce, R. Duncan. 1963. “Detection and Recognition,” in R. Duncan Luce, Robert R. Bush, and
Eugene Galanter, Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, vol. 1: 103–89, New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Miceli, Thomas J. 1990. “Optimal Prosecution of Defendants Whose Guilt Is Uncertain,”
Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 6: 189–201.
Milgrom, Paul R. 1981. “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and
Applications,” Bell Journal of Economics 12: 380–91.

- 38 -

Mookherjee, Dilip, and Ivan P.L. Png. 1992. “Monitoring Vis-à-Vis Investigation in
Enforcement of Law,” American Economic Review 82: 556–65.
Neyman, Jerzy, and Egon Pearson. 1933. “On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of
Statistical Hypotheses,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A,
Containing Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character 231: 289–337.
Png, Ivan P.L. 1986. “Optimal Subsidies and Damages in the Presence of Judicial Error,”
International Review of Law and Economics 6: 101–05.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. 1984. “The Optimal Use of Fines and
Imprisonment,” Journal of Public Economics 24: 89–99.
__________ and __________. 2007. “The Theory of Public Enforcement of Law,” in A.
Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Handbook of Law and Economics, vol. 1: 403–54,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Posner, Richard A. 1999. “An Economic Approach to the Laws of Evidence,” Stanford Law
Review 51: 1477–546.
Prendergast, Canice. 2007. “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats,” American Economic
Review 97: 180–96.
Rubinfeld, Daniel L., and David E.M. Sappington. 1987. “Efficient Rewards and Standards of
Proof in Judicial Proceedings,” Rand Journal of Economics 18: 308–15.
Sanchirico, Chris William. 2008. “A Primary-Activity Approach to Proof Burdens,” Journal of
Legal Studies 37: 273–313.
Shavell, Steven. 1991. “Specific Versus General Enforcement of Law,” Journal of Political
Economy 99:1088–108.
Studdert, David M., et al. 2005. “Defensive Medicine Among High-Risk Specialist Physicians
in a Volatile Malpractice Environment,” Journal of the American Medical Association 293:
2609–17.
Walker, Thomas J., Harry J. Turtle, Kuntara Pukthuanthong-Le, and Dolruedee Thiengtham.
2010. “Legal Opportunism, Litigation Risk, and IPO Underpricing” (unpublished
manuscript).

- 39 -

