                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW FIRMS USE DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL CORPORATE BOND MARKETS

                                         Juan Carlos Gozzi
                                            Ross Levine
                                    Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
                                        Sergio L. Schmukler

                                        Working Paper 17763
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17763


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We are grateful to Francisco Ceballos for excellent research assistance. We thank the World Bank
Knowledge for Change Program and Development Economics Vice-presidency for financial support.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, the World Bank, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Sergio L. Schmukler.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Firms Use Domestic and International Corporate Bond Markets
Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 17763
January 2012
JEL No. F36,G12,G15,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides the first comprehensive documentation of the main features of corporate bond issues
in domestic and international markets and analyzes how firms use these markets after they internationalize.
We find that debt issues in domestic and international bond markets have different characteristics,
not explained by differences across firms or their country of origin. International issues tend to be larger,
of shorter maturity, denominated in foreign currency, and include a higher fraction of fixed rate contracts.
Moreover, a large proportion of firms remain active in domestic bond markets after accessing international
markets, and many of these firms use both markets for different types of issues. This evidence suggests that
domestic and international bond markets provide different financial services and are not substitutes, but
but rather complements.


Juan Carlos Gozzi                                              Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
International Finance Division                                 The World Bank
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System               mmartinezperia@worldbank.org
Washington, DC
Juan.C.GozziValdez@frb.gov                                     Sergio L. Schmukler
                                                               The World Bank
Ross Levine                                                    MSN MC3-301
Department of Economics                                        1818 H Street, N.W.
Brown University                                               Washington, DC 20433
64 Waterman Street                                             Sschmukler@worldbank.org
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu
1. Introduction

Financial globalization has transformed corporate finance since the early 1990s. Firms from

both developed and developing countries increasingly raise capital through debt and equity

issues outside their domestic markets and list their securities in major financial centers. For

example, the total amount raised by firms through security issues in foreign markets grew

more than four-fold between 1991 and 2008, reaching about one trillion U.S. dollars at the end

of the period and accounting for almost 40 percent of the total amount raised in world capital

markets.

         The internationalization of capital markets has led to a large literature on why firms

issue securities in foreign markets. Most of this research focuses on equity markets, particularly

on the decision by firms to list their shares in foreign stock exchanges. According to one strand

of this literature, firms internationalize to circumvent regulations, poor accounting systems,

taxes, and illiquid domestic markets that might discourage foreign investors from purchasing

their shares in local markets. Other research examines whether listing in a foreign stock

exchange allows firms to bond to a better corporate governance framework or to exploit

temporarily high prices for their securities during ‗‗hot‘‘ markets.1

         Research on the internationalization of equity markets, however, offers only a partial

perspective on financial globalization because it largely overlooks bond markets. This is a

significant drawback since bond markets constitute a larger and more internationalized source

of capital for firms than equity markets. Over the period from 1991 to 2008, bond issues



1 For theoretical arguments that focus on barriers to foreign investor participation in local market as drivers of the
decision to list shares abroad see, for example, Black (1974), Solnik (1974), Stapleton and Subrahmanyam (1977),
Errunza and Losq (1985), Alexander et al. (1987), and Domowitz et al. (1998). Stulz (1999) and Coffee (2002)
argue that listing in foreign exchanges may allow firms to improve investor protection, while Errunza and Miller
(2000) and Henderson et al. (2006) highlight the role of market timing in the decision to issue shares abroad. For
empirical analyses of the motivations for cross-listings in foreign stock exchanges see, among many others,
Pagano et al. (2002), Benos and Weisbach (2004), Doidge et al. (2004), and Gozzi et al. (2008).

                                                          1
accounted for almost 80 percent of all capital raised by firms in capital markets around the

world and for more than 90 percent of all capital raised in markets outside their home country.2

        In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive documentation of the main

characteristics of corporate bond issues in domestic and international capital markets and

analyze how firms use these markets after they internationalize. While Henderson et al. (2006)

and Gozzi et al. (2010) examine capital raisings around the world, we (1) document differences

in bond characteristics, such as issue size, maturity, interest rate type, and currency, between

issues in domestic and international markets and (2) assess how firms use domestic and

international bond markets after they first internationalize.3 Thus, we evaluate two broad

questions: Do firms use domestic and international bond markets to issue different types of

bond contracts? And, do domestic and international bond markets act as complements or

substitutes? That is, do firms use both markets after internationalization, or do they opt out of

domestic markets once they are able to issue bonds in international markets? Rather than

testing or proposing specific theories, this paper documents new patterns on the use of

domestic and international bond markets, relates these patterns to current theories, and offers

new challenges to those seeking to understand international corporate finance.

        To conduct our study, we construct and analyze a unique dataset that includes

information on major characteristics of 116,338 corporate bond issues in domestic and

international markets conducted by 13,920 firms from 99 countries. Our study covers the



2 The value of debt issues is not directly comparable to that of equity issues because equity issues have no
maturity, while debt issues must be repaid. Part of the proceeds from debt issues is typically used to repay
maturing debt and therefore only a fraction of debt issues can be considered new financing. Henderson et al. (2006)
try to adjust the data on debt issues to take this fact into account and conclude that, even with these adjustments,
debt issues constitute a much larger source of new capital than equity issues at the aggregate level.
3 Earlier empirical work on international bond markets compares yields in the Eurodollar and U.S. markets for

U.S. firms (Finnerty et al., 1980; Kidwell et al., 1985; Mahajan and Fraser, 1986) and analyzes stock price reactions
to foreign bond issues in the Eurobond and U.S. markets (Kim and Stulz, 1988; Miller and Puthenpurackal, 2002).
Miller and Puthenpurackal (2005) and Petrasek (2010) study the effects of global bonds (i.e., bonds that are issued
and traded simultaneously in multiple markets) on bond yields and liquidity.

                                                         2
period from 1991 to 2008, though all the results hold when we restrict the sample to the period

from 1991 to 2006 to avoid any undue influence from the global financial crisis.

       We examine four main non-price characteristics of debt issues—issue size, maturity,

currency denomination, and type of rate (i.e., fixed vs. floating)—that have received

considerable attention in the corporate finance literature. Several theories emphasize the roles

of agency costs, asymmetric information, signaling, and liquidity risk in shaping the maturity

structure of corporate debt (Myers, 1977; Flannery, 1986; Diamond, 1991, 1993). Empirical

research, focusing mostly on U.S. firms, presents evidence broadly consistent with these

theoretical arguments (Mitchell, 1993; Barclay and Smith, 1995; Guedes and Opler, 1996;

Berger et al., 2005). The literature on the choice of the currency denomination of debt argues

that firms issue debt in foreign currencies to hedge their foreign currency cash-flows (Graham

and Harvey, 2001; Allayannis et al., 2003) and to exploit temporary differences in interest rates

across currencies (McBrady and Schill, 2007; Habib and Joy, 2010). A similar set of arguments

applies to the choice of the type of rate. Firms may choose the interest rate risk exposure of

their debt to match that of their assets and hedge (Smith and Stulz, 1985; Froot et al., 1993) or

may try to time the market, issuing floating rate debt when the yield curve is steeper

(Faulkender, 2005).

       Our paper has two major, interrelated findings. First, debt issues in domestic and

international bond markets have different characteristics. In particular, international bond

issues are larger, of shorter maturity, tend to be denominated in foreign currency, and entail

more fixed interest rate contracts. These differences are not driven by differences between

those firms that raise debt abroad and those that issue securities at home. Indeed, we find that

the differences between bond issues at home and abroad remain after controlling for time-

varying country-specific factors and firm-level fixed effects, and also when analyzing only those


                                               3
firms that issue bonds both in domestic and international capital markets. In other words,

issues conducted abroad by a given firm are different from those conducted in the domestic

market by the same firm, suggesting that domestic and international markets may specialize in

bonds with different traits. These findings hold for firms from both developed and developing

countries.

       Second, while there is great heterogeneity, a large fraction of firms remain active in

domestic markets after accessing international markets for the first time, and actually increase

their debt issuance activity at home. If international markets offered access to capital on overall

better conditions than domestic markets, then firms would opt out of domestic markets once

they met the criteria to access international markets. Instead, we find that a large proportion of

firms continue issuing debt at home after issuing abroad and that many of these firms use both

domestic and international bond markets, tapping international markets for different types of

bond issues than domestic ones. Our findings suggest that international markets are not

substitutes for domestic markets but rather complements, with firms that have access to both

markets conducting some types of issues at home and others abroad.

       These patterns provide suggestive and challenging information about corporate

financing decisions in a financially integrated world. In a frictionless world, the location where

firms issue securities is irrelevant. However, in practice, frictions might lead different markets

to provide different types of securities. For example, regulations, taxes, and information

asymmetries, among other factors, might hinder the ability of investors to purchase securities

outside their home market (Lewis, 1999; Karolyi and Stulz, 2003). In this context, investors

with different preferences, investment horizons, and abilities to diversify risk might dominate

particular markets, so that securities with distinct traits are offered in different locations. As

another example, securities may also differ across markets if market makers in different


                                                4
locations specialize in securities with particular characteristics. Consequently, for a variety of

reasons, bond attributes might differ across geographic locations, increasing the complexity of

financing decisions faced by those corporations with the ability to raise capital in different

markets. Although we do not formally test any theory regarding the sources of the patterns

documented in this paper, our results show that firms indeed issue bonds with different

characteristics in domestic and foreign markets and that the differences across markets are not

accounted for by differences across firms. Moreover, we find that that many firms remain active

in domestic bond markets after accessing international markets and that these firms often

choose to issue different types of bonds in different markets.

       One potential limitation of our analyses is that we focus on non-price characteristics of

debt issues. We do this because of the difficulties associated with comparing yields across

multiple markets and currencies. In an extension, Appendix 1 examines yields on U.S. dollar-

denominated bonds, since the dollar is the most common currency of denomination for bond

issues in our sample. This approach significantly reduces the sample of firms and limits cross-

country comparisons. Indeed, this strategy largely restricts these analyses to U.S. firms issuing

bonds in the Eurobond and U.S. markets. For this reason, we relegate these finding to an

appendix for interested readers. Again, we find that issues abroad are different from issues at

home. In particular, issues abroad tend to have lower yields than issues at home, after

conditioning on different bond characteristics, country-year dummies, and firm fixed effects.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents

descriptive statistics. Section 3 characterizes the main features of corporate bond issues in

domestic and international markets. Section 4 shows how firms that issue debt abroad use

domestic and international bond markets following their internationalization. Section 5

concludes.


                                                5
2. Data and Descriptive Statistics

2.1 Data

To compare the major characteristics of corporate bond issues in international and domestic

markets and analyze how firms use these markets, we assemble a comprehensive dataset on

firms‘ public debt issues in capital markets around the world from 1991 through 2008.

        Our data on firms‘ debt issuance activity come from Security Data Corporation‘s (SDC)

New Issues Database, which provides transaction-level information on new bond issues with an

original maturity of one year or more. Given that SDC does not collect data on debt issues with

a maturity of less than one year, our dataset does not include commercial paper issues with such

short-term maturities. Because our analysis focuses on corporate bond issues, we exclude all

public sector debt issues, comprising bonds issued by national, local, and regional governments,

government agencies, regional agencies, and multilateral organizations. We also exclude debt

issues by investment funds, investment companies, and real estate investment trusts (REITs),

as well as mortgage-backed securities and other asset-backed securities.4

        SDC provides data on several major characteristics of corporate bond issues, including

the amount raised, issue date, maturity date, currency denomination, credit rating, type of rate,

and yield at issue. SDC collects data on security issuances mostly from filings with local

regulatory agencies and exchanges. These data are augmented with data from other sources

such as offering circulars, prospectus, surveys of investment banks, brokers, and other financial

advisors, news sources, trade publications, and wires. While data for issues in the U.S. start in




4 SDC does not provide accurate data on the location of issuance of privately placed bonds. Thus, we cannot
classify these issues as domestic or international. We, therefore, exclude private placements from our sample.
Private placements account for less than 18 percent of the total amount raised thorough corporate bond issues in
capital markets around the world during our sample period according to SDC.

                                                       6
the 1970s, coverage of other markets starts later, with most regional databases starting in

1991.5 Therefore, we restrict our sample to the period 1991-2008.

        We considered several subsets of these data in our analyses. First, we were concerned

that including data for the onset of the recent global financial crisis might affect the results.

Consequently, we re-did all the analyses reported throughout the paper using data for only the

period 1991-2006 and obtained similar conclusions. Second, our sample includes bond issues by

both financial and non-financial firms. We include all firms in our analyses because we want to

provide a comprehensive view of bond markets around the world. Although financial and non-

financial firms might differ in their use of domestic and international bond markets, we obtain

results similar to those reported throughout the paper when restricting the sample to non-

financial firms. Third, there are some firms that are very active in debt markets, conducting

many issues and capturing a significant fraction of the overall debt issuance activity. Therefore,

as an additional robustness check, we re-estimated all our regressions excluding the top five

percent of the firms in terms of the number of debt issues and obtained similar results.

        To classify debt issues as domestic or international, we consider the main market in

which the bonds are issued and compare it to the issuing firm‘s nationality.6,7 For offerings that


5 The SDC database is divided into twelve regional sub-databases covering different markets: Asian Pacific
Domestic (Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand,); Australian/New
Zealand Domestic (Australia, New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea); Canadian Domestic (Canada); Continental
European Domestic (Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, and
Switzerland); Indian and Subcontinent (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka); International (Eurobonds and
other cross-border issues); Japanese Domestic (Japan); Korean Domestic (South Korea); Latin American Domestic
(Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay, and
Venezuela); United States (United States); United Kingdom Domestic (United Kingdom); and Rest of the World
(countries not included in other SDC regional sub-databases, such as China). The academic version of SDC to
which we have access does not include the Canadian and Korean Domestic sub-databases. Therefore, we exclude
all Canadian and South Korean firms from our analysis.
6 Although bond trading takes place mostly over-the-counter (OTC), most bonds are listed in exchanges due to

regulatory requirements that preclude institutional investors from holding unlisted securities. SDC provides
information on the market where bonds are issued, including both formal exchanges and OTC markets.
7 SDC classifies most Eurobonds as being listed on the Luxembourg exchange, although these securities trade

mostly OTC throughout Europe. This implies that Eurobond issues by firms from Luxembourg are classified as
domestic issues, even though they may trade in other European countries. However, the number of firms from

                                                       7
take place in more than one market, we consider issues in each market as separate issues. In the

case of subsidiaries, one could consider the nationality of the firm‘s parent company instead of

its own nationality for classifying issues as foreign or domestic. For instance, a debt issue by a

U.S. subsidiary of a British firm in the U.S. market could be classified as international, instead

of domestic as in our classification. Which approach provides a better criterion for classifying

bond issues depends on the degree of integration of financing decisions between firms and their

subsidiaries, among other factors. If financial decisions are highly integrated, considering firms‘

parent nationality may provide a more accurate classification of debt issuances. But if financing

decisions are relatively decentralized, considering subsidiaries‘ own nationality may be a better

criterion. Actual decision-making policies may lie somewhere in between these two extremes,

with multinational firms possibly coordinating financing decisions with their subsidiaries

across several markets. All the results reported in the paper are obtained classifying bond

issues as foreign or domestic based on subsidiaries‘ nationality. In unreported robustness tests,

we classified issues by subsidiaries based on their parents‘ nationality and obtained results

similar to those reported throughout the paper.

        We focus on four major non-price characteristics of corporate bond issues. First, we

analyze the size of bond issues, defined as the proceeds from the issue in U.S. dollars (at 2008

prices). Second, we study the maturity of debt issues, defined as the number of years between

the date of issuance and the final maturity date. Third, we analyze the currency denomination

of bonds. For our regressions, we use a dummy variable that equals one if the bond is

denominated in a foreign currency and zero otherwise. We define a foreign currency as one that

is different from the currency of the issuing firm‘s home country. Finally, we analyze whether




Luxembourg carrying out bond issuances at home according to SDC is relatively low. We re-did all our analyses
excluding these firms and obtained results similar to those reported throughout the paper.

                                                     8
issues have a floating or fixed rate, by using a dummy variable that equals one if the bond has a

floating rate and zero otherwise.

        After eliminating issues with missing data on bond characteristics and outliers

(observations in the top and bottom one percent), we are left with a sample of 116,338

corporate bond issues by 13,920 firms from 99 economies covering the period 1991-2008.

Appendix Table 1 lists the countries included in our dataset and their regional and income level

classification.



2.2 Descriptive Statistics

        To illustrate the development and internationalization of corporate bond markets

around the world, Figure 1 displays the evolution of the aggregate amount raised by firms

through debt issues in capital markets over the period 1991-2008, differentiating between

issues at home and abroad.

        Figure 1 shows that the aggregate amount raised by firms in bond markets around the

world almost doubled from 1991 to 2008, increasing from 635 billion to 1.1 trillion U.S. dollars

(at 2008 prices). The increase is even steeper when excluding the global financial crisis, as the

amount raised in corporate debt markets peeked in 2006 at 1.8 trillion U.S. dollars (at 2008

prices). Furthermore, the fraction of total debt issued abroad increased from about 34 percent in

1991 to 45 percent in 2006 and 38 percent in 2008, reflecting the collapse of global finance in

2008. Bond markets have become larger and more internationalized since the early 1990s.

        The statistics presented in Table 1 further emphasize that firms, both from developed

and developing countries, raise a substantial amount of resources through bond issues in

international markets. Over the period from 1991 to 2008, firms raised 8.4 trillion U.S. dollars

(at 2008 prices) in international bond markets, which accounts for 36.5 percent of all funds


                                               9
raised through the issuance of debt in capital markets. Developing country firms are especially

―internationalized,‖ raising 45 percent of the total amount raised in bond markets during the

period analyzed through issuances abroad. U.S. firms are a notable exception to the substantial

internationalization of corporate bond markets, even when compared to firms from other

developed countries with large domestic bond markets. Less than 15 percent of the total

amount raised in debt markets by U.S. firms over the sample period was raised abroad.



3. Differences between Corporate Bond Issues at Home and Abroad

This section addresses one question: How do international and domestic corporate bond issues

differ in terms of issue size, maturity, currency denomination, and rate type (fixed or floating)?

We first present some descriptive statistics to characterize domestic and international issues

and then present more formal analyses of the differences between issues at home and abroad,

accounting for time-varying country-specific factors and differences across firms.

       Table 2 shows the distribution of the number of issues at home and abroad according to

the different bond features. The table also shows the fraction of the different types of issues

conducted abroad. We examine the distribution of the number of issues to avoid giving

excessive weight to larger issues, but obtain similar results if we instead analyze the

distribution of the amount raised.

       A number of patterns emerge from Table 2. First, domestic bond issues tend to be

smaller than issues abroad. While more than 50 percent of domestic issues are below 100

million U.S. dollars, more than two-thirds of international issues are above this amount.

Furthermore, the fraction of issues abroad tends to increase with the size of the issue. Second,

domestic bond issues seem to have shorter maturities than international issues. About 43

percent of domestic issues mature in less than three years, but only 33 percent of international


                                               10
issues mature in this period. Third, while a majority of domestic currency issues tend to take

place at home, most of the foreign currency issues take place abroad. The dollar is the most

common foreign currency, both for foreign currency-denominated issues at home (49.8 percent)

and abroad (38.8 percent). In the case of foreign currency-denominated issues at home, the euro

and the yen are also quite common. Close to 17 percent of foreign currency domestic issues are

denominated in euros and 18 percent are denominated in yens. Fourth, the fraction of fixed rate

issues is slightly higher for issues at home than abroad. While close to 70 percent of domestic

issues carry a fixed rate, 64 percent of issues abroad have a fixed rate.

       Whereas the results in Table 2 suggest that bond issues abroad differ from those at

home, they might just reflect differences in the nationality, industry, or other characteristics of

firms that issue debt abroad relative to firms that issue debt at home. In fact, several papers

document that there are significant differences between those firms that access international

capital markets and those that are only active in local markets, in terms of size, profitability,

valuation, and other features that may also affect the characteristics of the bonds that they issue

(see, for example, Pagano et al., 2002; Lang et al., 2003; Claessens and Schmukler, 2007; Gozzi

et al., 2010). Therefore, accounting for differences across firms is important for reaching

meaningful conclusions regarding whether issues abroad actually differ from issues at home.

       Table 3 provides formal tests of whether issues in international and domestic markets

differ, controlling for differences across countries over time and cross-sectional differences

among firms. In particular, the table shows regression results for four dependent variables:

issue size (defined as the log of the amount raised per issue in U.S. dollars at 2008 prices), the

maturity of issues in years, a dummy variable that equals one if the issue is denominated in

foreign currency (and zero otherwise), and a dummy variable that equals one if the issue has a

floating rate (and zero otherwise). Each of these dependent variables is regressed on a dummy


                                                 11
variable that equals one for bond issues abroad (and zero otherwise) and four alternative sets of

control variables: country-year dummies (column (a)); country-year dummies plus issue size

(column (b)); country-year dummies and firm fixed effects (column (c)); and country-year

dummies and firm fixed effects plus issue size (column (d)). Using country-year dummies allows

us to control for time-varying country-specific factors that may affect the characteristics of debt

issues conducted by firms, both in domestic and international markets. We control for the size

of issues because larger bond issues may have different characteristics than smaller issues. The

firm-level fixed effects account for cross-sectional differences among firms and allow us to

analyze the within-firm differences between debt issues abroad and at home. We estimate

separate regressions for each of the dependent variables and sets of controls and only report the

coefficient on the issue abroad dummy in the table. All regressions are estimated using ordinary

least squares and adjusting the standard errors for clustering at the firm level. As a robustness

test, we also estimated our regressions using Logit models for the dummy dependent variables

(foreign currency denomination and floating rate) to take into account the binary nature of

these variables, and obtained results similar to those reported throughout the paper.

       Table 3 shows that issues in international and domestic bond markets have different

characteristics, conditioning on country-time and firm fixed effects. First, issues abroad tend to

be larger than domestic bond issues. Consistent with the unconditional results reported in

Table 2, Table 3 shows that bond issues in international markets are, on average, larger than

issues in domestic markets when controlling for various combinations of country-year dummies

and firm-level fixed effects. This difference is not only statistically significant, but also

economically relevant. For instance, the results in column (c) show that within a firm, issues

abroad are on average more than 19 percent larger than issues at home.




                                                12
       Second, foreign issues tend to have a shorter maturity than domestic issues when

conditioning on different combinations of country-year dummies, issue size, and firm-level fixed

effects. This result differs somewhat from the unconditional findings in Table 2, suggesting

that some of the differences between issues at home and abroad reported in that table may

reflect differences between those firms that issue debt in international markets and those that

do not. Once we account for these differences, we find that on average issues abroad tend to

have shorter maturities than domestic issues by about six months, according to the estimations

reported in column (d).

       Third, foreign bond issues include a higher fraction of foreign currency-denominated

bonds than those issued in domestic markets. Consistent with the unconditional summary

statistics reported in Table 2, this pattern holds after controlling for various combinations of

country-year dummies, issue size, and firm-level fixed effects.

       Fourth, we find that bond issues in foreign markets tend to include a smaller fraction of

floating rate issues than those in domestic markets. Although on average foreign bond

issuances tend to include a higher fraction of floating rate issues than issuances in domestic

markets, as reported in Table 2, this observation reflects differences between those firms that

issue in foreign and domestic markets. The results in Table 3, however, indicate that once we

control for time-varying differences across countries, issues abroad are more likely to have a

fixed rate than issues at home.

       We find no evidence that the results in Table 3 reflect differences across issue types

rather than differences between domestic and international markets. In particular, one possible

concern about the results above is that they may reflect differences between different types of

issues. For example, if foreign currency bonds tend to be larger and have fixed rates

(irrespective of where they are issued), the finding that issues abroad are larger and include a


                                               13
higher fraction of fixed rate issues might simply reflect the fact that issues abroad are

denominated in foreign currency, and not some additional difference between domestic and

international markets. To address this concern, we re-estimated the regressions in Table 3

considering different sub-samples based on bond characteristics (only fixed rate issues, only

medium and long-term bonds, only dollar-denominated issues). The results are broadly similar

to those reported in Table 3. We find significant differences between issues abroad and at home

for the different bond sub-samples, suggesting that our findings reflect differences across

markets and not simply differences between different types of bond issues.

        To account for other possible differences across firms, Table 4 repeats the regression

analyses of Table 3 but restricts the sample to firms that issue debt both at home and abroad at

some point during our sample period. This significantly reduces our sample, from 13,920 firms

(116,338 debt issues) to 1,597 firms (54,137 debt issues). In the regressions reported in columns

(c) and (d) of Table 3, we account for cross-firm differences by including firm-level fixed effects.

Thus, the identification of the issue abroad dummy in those regressions is driven only by those

firms that issue debt both abroad and at home at some point during our sample period. For

those regressions, the results presented in Table 4 will only differ from those in Table 3 to the

extent that firms that issue both abroad and at home may be subject to different country-

specific time trends than firms that do not issue in both markets.

        The results in Table 4 show that restricting the sample to firms that issue debt at home

and abroad does not affect the conclusions from Table 3. We find that issues abroad tend to be

larger, have shorter maturities, include a higher fraction of foreign currency issues, and a larger

fraction of fixed rate issues.

        While the results presented in Tables 3 and 4 show that debt issues in domestic and

international markets have different characteristics, it is important to understand to what


                                                14
extent these differences across markets may be driven by firms from certain countries.

Including country-year dummies as we do in the regressions reported in Tables 3 and 4

controls for (time-varying) differences across countries in the characteristics of issues in both

markets (e.g., the possibility that firms from a given country may be more likely to issue certain

types of bonds in a given period). However, it is possible that the differences between issues

abroad and at home also vary across countries. In particular, the differences between issues

abroad and at home that we find may mostly reflect the fact that when issuing debt abroad,

firms from developing countries are accessing deeper and more developed financial markets. If

this were the case, we would expect to find significant differences between issues abroad and at

home for developing country firms, but not necessarily for firms from developed countries,

which may already have access to active bond markets at home.

       To investigate the extent to which the differences between issues in domestic and

international markets hold across developed and developing countries, Table 5 presents

separate estimations for each group of countries. We report regressions controlling for

country-year dummies and firm-level fixed effects for all firms and only for firms that issue

bonds both at home and abroad at some point during our sample period.

       Table 5 shows that most of the differences we find between issues abroad and at home

exist for both developed and developing country firms. In particular, the results show that

issues abroad tend to be larger, include a higher fraction of foreign currency issues, and a lower

fraction of floating rate issues for both developed and developing country firms. The only

noticeable difference between developed and developing countries is that while issues abroad

tend to have a shorter maturity than issues at home in the case of developed countries, there is

no significant difference in terms of maturity between issues at home and abroad in the case of

developing countries.


                                               15
       As a robustness test, we re-estimated the regressions reported in Table 5 classifying

countries based on their level of financial development, instead of considering overall economic

development. In particular, we classified countries as high (low) financial development if they

are above (below) the median across countries of different measures of financial development

(alternatively, private credit/GDP, private bonds outstanding/GDP, and private credit plus

stock market capitalization and private bonds outstanding/GDP). We found that, consistent

with the results reported in Table 5, most of the differences between issues abroad and at home

exist for firms from countries with high and low levels of financial development.

       Overall, the results presented in this section show that issues in international and

domestic bond markets have different characteristics: international bond issues are larger, of

shorter maturity, tend to be denominated in foreign currency, and entail more fixed interest

rate contracts. These differences do not seem to be driven by differences across countries or

differences between those firms that raise debt abroad and at home. We find that all the

differences between bond issues at home and abroad remain when controlling for country-year

dummies and firm-level fixed effects, and when analyzing only those firms that issue bonds

both in domestic and international capital markets. In other words, issues conducted abroad by

a given firm are different from those conducted in the local market by the same firm, consistent

with the claim that domestic and international markets offer different types of financial

services. Also, our results are not driven by firms from developing countries accessing larger

and more developed financial markets abroad, as we find significant differences between issues

at home and abroad even when analyzing only developed country firms.




                                               16
4. Bond Issuance Activities of Firms that Issue Debt Abroad

This section addresses three questions about how those firms that issue debt abroad use

domestic and international bond markets. First, do these firms remain active in their domestic

bond markets after they gain access to international markets? Second, do these firms change

the amount raised through debt issues in domestic markets after they internationalize? Third,

following internationalization, do firms issue different types of bonds in domestic and

international bond markets?



4.1 Do Firms Continue Issuing Bonds Domestically After They Internationalize?

To analyze whether firms remain active in domestic bond markets after they internationalize,

Table 6 shows, for different types of issues, the average across firms of the ratio of capital raised

through bond issues at home to total capital raised in bond markets for each year following

firms‘ first debt issue abroad during our sample period. The sample in this table includes only

those firms that conduct at least one bond issue (in any market) following their first debt issue

abroad in our sample. For the results reported in Table 6, we first compute for each firm the

ratio of the amount raised through bond issues at home to the total amount raised through

bond issues in each year following internationalization and display the average of this ratio

across firms.8

        Table 6 shows that firms remain active in domestic markets after they access

international bond markets, conducting a significant share of their bond issuances at home.

While firms tend to conduct most of their bond issues abroad in the year when they first access

international bond markets, the fraction of debt capital raised at home increases rapidly


8 An alternative way to measure firm‘s reliance on domestic markets is to aggregate the total amount raised
domestically by all firms in each year after they internationalize and divide it by the aggregate amount raised by
these firms in all debt markets in the same year. This alternative measure gives more weight to larger firms that
conduct bigger bond issues and yields patterns similar to those reported in Table 6.

                                                       17
following internationalization. For example, when considering all types of bond issues (column

(a)), the average firm raises about 28 percent of debt capital from domestic bond markets one

year after it internationalizes, while it raises over 45 percent of debt capital from domestic bond

markets more than three years after it first internationalizes. Aggregating over all the years

since a firm first issues debt abroad, Table 6 further shows that, after it internationalizes, the

average firm raises almost one-third of the total capital raised through issuances in domestic

markets (excluding issues during the month of the first issue abroad).9 As shown in Table 6,

there are some differences across bond types with regards to the reliance of firms on domestic

markets following internationalization. For instance, while on average firms raise at home over

50 percent of the total amount raised through long-term bond issues more than three years

after internationalization (column (d)), this statistic is about 36 percent in the case of short-

term issues (column (b)).

         While the results presented in Table 6 suggest that after accessing international bond

markets firms conduct a significant fraction of their debt issuances in their local markets, these

averages may hide significant differences across firms. To further analyze the domestic bond

market activities of firms that internationalize, Figure 2 shows the number of firms according

to the ratio of the amount raised through bond issues at home to the total amount raised

through bond issuances, calculated over all years following their internationalization. The

figure excludes issues during the month of the first issue abroad; we obtain similar results when

considering all issues after internationalization, including the first debt issue abroad.

         Figure 2 shows that, consistent with the evidence in Table 6, a large fraction of firms

remain active in domestic corporate bond markets following internationalization—though

there is great heterogeneity across firms in terms of their reliance on these markets. For
9 The ratio is smaller if we consider all debt issues after internationalization, including the first issue abroad. In
this case, issues at home account, on average, for about one quarter of all the capital raised through bond issues
following internationalization.

                                                         18
example, the figure shows that following internationalization, 18 percent of firms only issue in

domestic bond markets, 29 percent issue bonds in both domestic and foreign markets, and 53

percent of firms only issue bonds abroad. That is, only about half of the firms completely

substitute out of the domestic corporate bond market and into foreign markets after they

internationalize. The other half remains active domestically, with a significant fraction issuing

bonds both at home and abroad.



4.2 Do Firms Change Their Domestic Bond Market Activity After They Internationalize?

We next analyze whether firms modify their debt issuance activity in domestic bond markets

after they internationalize. Table 7 compares the annual amount raised in domestic bond

markets before and after firms first access international bond markets. The table reports

estimates for different types of debt issues.

       To formally test whether firms change their issuance activity after internationalization,

Table 7 displays a series of regressions of the logarithm of one plus the annual amount raised at

home by each firm on a dummy variable that equals one on the years after a firm

internationalizes and zero before, and different combinations of country-year dummies and

firm-level fixed effects. We use the log of one plus the amount raised per year because we want

to include those years when firms do not conduct debt issues at home. Results similar to those

reported in Table 7 are obtained if, instead of taking logs, we directly use the amount raised per

year as our dependent variable. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares and

adjusting the standard errors for clustering at the firm level. We also estimated Tobit

regressions to account for the censored nature of the dependent variable and obtained results

similar to those reported in Table 7. In these regressions, we use annual observations on all




                                                19
firms that issue debt both at home and abroad at some point during the sample period.10 This

includes observations on firms that conduct debt issues at home before they internationalize,

but that do not issue domestic debt after they raise debt capital abroad. For such firms, the

dependent variable equals zero for all years following internationalization.11 We include these

firms because we want to capture the reduction in domestic bond issuance activity that results

from some firms opting out from domestic markets following internationalization. We obtain

similar results if we restrict the sample to firms that raise debt at home both before and after

internationalization. Furthermore, we also obtain similar results when including all firms that

issue debt abroad, irrespective of whether they issue debt at home or not at any point during

the sample period. For those firms without bond issues in domestic markets, the annual amount

raised at home equals zero both before and after internationalization. Although including these

firms drives down the estimated coefficient on the after internationalization dummy in our

regressions, we still find evidence of a significant and large increase in domestic bond issuance

activity after firms first issue abroad.

        Table 7 shows that firms substantially increase the annual amount they raise in

domestic bond markets after they internationalize, controlling for country-year dummies

(column (a)) and country-year dummies and firm-level fixed effects (column (b)). This increase

is not only statistically significant, but also economically very large. For instance, the results in

column (b) suggest that, on average, firms increase the annual amount they raise through debt

issues in domestic markets by over 86 percent after they internationalize. Note that this


10 We exclude observations for the year when firms first issue debt abroad. Similar results are obtained if we
include this year. Note that for firms that internationalize early (late) in our sample, we don‘t have many
observations for the before (after) internationalization period. As an alternative, we re-estimated our regressions
restricting the sample to firms for which we have at least three annual observations during our sample period
before and after they internationalize (that is, restricting the sample to those firms that first issued debt abroad
between 1994 and 2005) and obtained results similar to those reported in Table 7.
11 Similarly, we include firms that only issue debt at home after they internationalize, for which the dependent

variable equals zero every year before internationalization.

                                                        20
increase is not explained by firms issuing debt abroad for the first time when their domestic

markets are doing well, and as a result issuing more debt at home as well, because all country-

specific time-varying factors are captured by the country-year dummies included in the

regressions. Furthermore, we find a significant increase in domestic issuance activity for all

types of bond issues, although the magnitude of this increase varies across different types of

issues. For instance, the results in column (b) show that while, on average, the annual amount

raised through domestic currency issues at home increases by over 77 percent after

internationalization, the amount raised through foreign currency issues in local markets

increases by only 18 percent. Overall, our results suggest that firms do not substitute out of the

domestic corporate bond market and into international markets once they issue debt abroad.

Rather, firms tend to increase the annual amount raised through domestic bond issues after

they internationalize.



4.3 Do Firms Issue Different Types of Bonds across Markets After They Internationalize?

We now assess whether firms issue different types of bonds in foreign and domestic corporate

bond markets after they access international debt markets. That is, for a firm that issues bonds

in both foreign and domestic markets following internationalization, do the size, maturity,

currency, and rate characteristics of these issues differ across markets?

       Table 8 presents (1) unconditional comparisons of the average characteristics of bond

issues in domestic and international markets and (2) regression analyses that assess whether

issues abroad differ from domestic bond issues after a firm internationalizes, while conditioning

on various combinations of country-year dummies, issue size, and firm-level fixed effects. The

sample only includes firms that issue debt at home and abroad after internationalization and

only issues that occur after a firm internationalizes. This reduces the sample to 818 firms and


                                                21
38,542 debt issues. Thus, Table 8 evaluates whether firms issue bonds with different

characteristics in domestic and international markets after they access international debt

markets, conditional on issuing in both markets.

        Table 8 differs importantly from Table 4 along two dimensions. First, Table 4 includes

all firms that issue debt at home and abroad at some point during our sample period. This

includes firms that issue debt at home before internationalizing, but do not issue debt at home

after going abroad. Table 8 instead includes only those firms that issue debt at home and

abroad after they internationalize. Second, Table 4 includes issues at home both before and

after internationalization. This could raise some concerns that the differences we find in this

table between issues abroad and at home may reflect differences between issues conducted

before and after internationalization, as firms may change the type of issues they carry out in

any market after going abroad, and not necessarily differences across markets.12 Table 8

restricts the sample to issues conducted by firms after they internationalize. Thus, in Table 8,

we explicitly test whether a firm issues different types of debt in domestic and foreign markets

once it accesses international bond markets, conditional on the firm issuing in both markets

after it internationalizes.

        The results in Table 8 show that firms issue different types of bonds in domestic and

international markets after they internationalize. When a firm issues a bond in a foreign

market, the issue tends to be larger, of shorter maturity, is more likely to be denominated in a

foreign currency, and is more likely to have a fixed rate, than when a firm issues a bond in its

domestic market. These findings hold for all the regressions in Table 8 that condition on


12  In unreported tests, we analyzed whether the characteristics of debt issues at home change following
internationalization. For most characteristics, we found no significant difference between issues conducted at home
before and after internationalization. Only in the case of maturity we found evidence of a significant increase
following internationalization. This suggests that the differences we find in Table 4 between issues abroad and at
home do not reflect differences in the characteristics of issues conducted before and after internationalization, but
rather differences across markets. The results in Table 8 confirm that this is the case.

                                                         22
various combinations of country-year dummies and firm-level fixed effects. These results

complement those in Table 4. While Table 4 shows that firms issue different types of securities

in domestic and international markets when examining all firms that issue in these markets at

any point and including the periods before and after a firm internationalizes, Table 8 shows

that these differences hold when only considering the period after a firm internationalizes.

       The results in Table 8 suggest that cross-market differences in bond characteristics

reflect differences in the markets per se, not differences between the firms that access those

markets. Since we restrict the sample to issues following internationalization and to firms that

access both domestic and international markets after going abroad and also control for

country-year dummies and firm fixed effects, the differences we find between bond issues in

domestic and international issues cannot be not attributed to differences over time or across

firms. In other words, firms that have access to domestic and international corporate bond

markets use the two types of markets for different types of issues, suggesting that these

markets are not perfect substitutes.



5. Conclusions

This paper offers the first comprehensive documentation of the main characteristics of

corporate bond issues in domestic and international markets and analyzes how firms use these

markets after they internationalize. We find that firms issue different types of bonds in

domestic and international markets. These differences do not seem to be explained by

differences across firms or countries. Firms use international markets to conduct larger issues,

of shorter maturity, in foreign currency, and with fixed interest rates. These results suggest

that domestic and international bond markets offer different types of securities. Moreover,

almost half of the firms remain active in domestic bond markets after accessing international


                                               23
markets, and actually increase the amount they raise at home. Many of these firms use both

domestic and international bond markets after issuing debt abroad, tapping international

markets for different types of issues than domestic ones. The evidence presented in this paper

suggests that international and domestic markets are complements rather than substitutes.

        The findings in this paper pose challenging questions to the corporate and international

finance literatures. First, why do domestic and international markets provide different types of

debt securities? Second, why do some firms issue bonds in both domestic and international

markets after they internationalize, while other firms tend to specialize in terms of the location

in which they raise debt capital after accessing international markets?

        The patterns we uncover also contribute to important academic and policy discussions.

On the academic front, our results relate to a broad literature in corporate finance that

discusses why firms issue certain types of debt. One strand of this literature analyzes the

maturity structure of corporate debt. Short-term debt can play a disciplinary role as investors

may deny further financing to the issuing firm, reducing problems of moral hazard and adverse

selection (Myers, 1977; Flannery, 1986; Diamond, 1991, 1993).13 Therefore, when information

asymmetries are large, firms will tend to use more short-term debt. To the extent that foreign

investors (likely to be more prominent in international markets) have less information than

domestic ones, these arguments would predict that issues abroad tend to have a shorter

maturity than issues at home, which is consistent with our findings.

        This paper‘s findings also relate to research on why firms issue foreign currency debt.

Most of this literature argues that firms use foreign currency debt to hedge exchange rate risk.

Several factors may limit the ability of firms to issue foreign currency debt in their domestic

markets. For instance, given size constraints, it may be difficult to develop deep liquid local

13Similar arguments are mentioned in the international finance literature when discussing why governments issue
short-term debt (Rodrik and Velasco, 1999; Jeanne, 2009; Broner et al., 2011).

                                                      24
markets for issues in different currencies (Cohen, 2005). In addition, regulatory restrictions on

investments in foreign currency assets by local institutional investors and financial institutions

could also lead to currency denomination being associated with the market of issuance (Lanoo,

1998). Our findings that issues abroad tend to be denominated in foreign currency are

consistent with these arguments.14 We also find that firms from developing countries have

almost no issues abroad in their domestic currencies, while firms from developed countries do

place issues in their domestic currencies in foreign markets. These findings are broadly

consistent with the ―original sin‖ arguments (Eichengreen and Hausmann, 1999), which hold

that emerging market borrowers cannot borrow abroad in their domestic currencies, due to

historical reasons and imperfections in global capital markets.

        The patterns reported in the paper are also relevant for the broader policy discussion on

the role of domestic and international markets under financial integration. We find that firms

typically continue to use—and often increase their use of—domestic bond markets after they

internationalize. To the extent that domestic investors view firms that have accessed

international markets more favorably than firms that have not issued securities abroad,

internationalization may crowd out some firms from the domestic securities markets. This

might have material ramifications for the distribution of domestic financing and

entrepreneurship more generally, as emphasized by Levine and Schmukler (2006, 2007). Thus,

the patterns presented in this paper touch on broad themes associated with international

corporate finance and financial integration.




14 If we analyze in more detail the currency denomination of issues abroad, we find that they tend to be
denominated in the local currency of the market of issuance (e.g., foreign issues in the U.S. are mostly in U.S.
dollars, foreign issues in Japan are mostly in yens).

                                                      25
References
Alexander, G.J., Eun, C.S., Janakiramanan, S., 1987. Asset pricing and dual listing on foreign
      capital markets: A note. Journal of Finance 42, 151–158.

Allayannis, G., Brown, G., Klapper, L., 2003. Capital structure and financial risk: Evidence from
       foreign debt use in East Asia. Journal of Finance 58, 2667–2709.

Barclay, M.J., Smith, C.W., 1995. The maturity structure of corporate debt. Journal of Finance
       50, 609–631.

Benos, E., Weisbach, M.S., 2004. Private benefits and cross-listings in the United States.
       Emerging Markets Review 5, 217–240.

Berger, A.N., Espinosa-Vega, M., Frame, S., Miller, N., 2005. Debt maturity, risk, and
       asymmetric information. Journal of Finance 60, 2895–2923.

Black, F., 1974. International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers. Journal of
       Financial Economics 1, 337–352.

Broner, F., Lorenzoni, G., Schmukler, S., 2011. Why do emerging economies borrow short
       term? Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Carey, M., Nini, G., 2007. Is the corporate loan market globally integrated? A pricing puzzle.
       Journal of Finance 62, 2969–3007.

Claessens, S., Schmukler, S., 2007. International financial integration through equity markets:
       Which firms from which countries go global? Journal of International Money and Finance
       26, 788–813.

Coffee Jr., J.C., 2002. Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market
       competition on international corporate governance. Columbia Law Review 102, 1757–
       1831.

Cohen, B.H., 2005. Currency choice in international bond issuance. BIS Quarterly Review, June
      2005.

Diamond, D.W., 1991. Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk. Quarterly Journal of Economics
      106, 709–738.

Diamond, D.W., 1993. Seniority and maturity of debt contracts. Journal of Financial Economics
      33, 341–368.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Why are firms that list in the U.S. worth more?
      Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205–238.

Domowitz, I., Glen, J., Madhavan, A., 1998. International cross-listing and order flow
     migration: Evidence from an emerging market. Journal of Finance 53, 2001–2027.



                                               26
Eichengreen, B.J., Hausmann, R., 1999. Exchange rates and financial fragility. New Challenges
      for Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Errunza, V., Losq, E., 1985. International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and
      test. Journal of Finance 40, 105–124.

Errunza, V., Miller, D.P., 2000. Market segmentation and the cost of capital in international
      equity markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 577–600.

Faulkender, M., 2005. Hedging or market timing? Selecting the interest rate exposure of
      corporate debt. Journal of Finance 60, 931–962

Finnerty, J.E., Nunn, K.R., 1985. The determinants of yield spreads on U.S. and euro bonds.
       Management International Review 25, 23–33.

Finnerty, J.E., Schneeweis, T., Hegde, S.P., 1980. Interest rates in the $Eurobond market.
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 743–755.

Flannery, M.J., 1986. Asymmetric information and risky debt maturity choice. Journal of
      Finance 41, 19–37.

Froot, K., Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 1993. Risk management: Coordinating corporate investment
       and financing policies. Journal of Finance 48, 1629–1648.

Guedes, J., Opler, T., 1996. The determinants of the maturity of corporate debt issues. Journal
      of Finance 51, 1809–1833.

Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2008. Internationalization and the evolution of corporate
       valuation. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 607–632.

Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2010. Patterns of international capital raisings. Journal of
       International Economics 8, 45–57.

Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from the
      field. Journal of Financial Economics 61, 187–243.

Habib, M.M., Joy, M., 2010. Foreign-currency bonds: Currency choice and the role of
       uncovered and covered interest parity. Applied Financial Economics 20, 601–626.

Henderson, B.J., Jegadeesh, N., Weisbach, M.S., 2006. World markets for raising new capital.
      Journal of Financial Economics 82, 63–101.

Jeanne, O., 2009. Debt maturity and the international financial architecture. American Economic
       Review 99, 2135–2148.

Karolyi, A., Stulz, R.M., 2003, Are financial assets priced locally or globally? G. Constantinides,
       M. Harris, and R.M. Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier North
       Holland.


                                                27
Kidwell, D.S., Marr, M.W., Thompson, G.R., 1985. Eurodollar bonds: Alternative financing for
      U.S. companies. Financial Management 14, 18–27.

Kim, Y.C., Stulz, R.M., 1988. The Eurobond market and corporate financial policy: A test of the
      clientele hypothesis. Journal of Financial Economics 22, 189–205.

Lanoo, K., 1998. Institutional investors, capital markets and EMU. Blommestein, H., and
      Funke. N., eds., Institutional Investors in the New Financial Landscape. OECD: Paris.

Lang, M., Raedy, J.S., Yetman, M.H., 2003. How representative are firms that are cross listed in
      the United States? An analysis of accounting quality. Journal of Accounting Research 41,
      363–386.

Levich, R.M., 1985. Securities activities of U.S. commercial bank affiliates: Lessons from the
       international financial markets. Ingo Walter, ed., Deregulating Wall Street, John Wiley.

Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2006. Internationalization and stock market liquidity. Review of
       Finance 10, 153–187.

Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2007. Migration, liquidity spillovers, and trade diversion: The effects
       of internationalization on stock market activity. Journal of Banking and Finance 31,
       1595–1612.

Lewis, K., 1999. Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption. Journal of Economic
       Literature 37, 571–608.

Mahajan, A., Fraser, D., 1986. Dollar Eurobond and U.S. bond pricing. Journal of International
      Business Studies 15, 21–36.

McBrady, M., Schill, M., 2007. Foreign currency-denominated borrowing in the absence of
     operating incentives. Journal of Financial Economics 86, 145–77.

Miller, D.P., Puthenpurackal, J. J., 2002. The costs, wealth effects and determinants of public
        Yankee bond offerings. Journal of Financial Intermediation 9, 455–485.

Miller, D.P., Puthenpurackal, J. J., 2005. Security fungibility and the cost of capital: Evidence
        from global bonds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 849–872.

Mitchell, K., 1993. The debt maturity choice: An empirical investigation. Journal of Financial
      Research 16, 309–320.

Myers, S.C., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 145–
      175.

Pagano, M., Roëll, A., Zechner, J., 2002. The geography of equity listing: Why do companies
      list abroad? Journal of Finance 57, 2651–2694.

Peristiani, S., Santos, J., 2010. Has the U.S. bond market lost its edge to the Eurobond market?
        International Review of Finance 10, 149–183.

                                               28
Petrasek, L., 2010. Multimarket trading and the cost of debt: Evidence from global bonds. ECB
       Working Paper No. 1212.

Rodrik, D., Velasco, A., 1999. Short-term capital flows. Annual World Bank Conference on
       Development Economics. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Smith, C., Stulz, R.M., 1985. The determinants of firm‘s hedging policies. Journal of Financial
       and Quantitative Analysis 20, 391–405.

Solnik, B.H., 1974. Why not diversify internationally rather than domestically? Financial
       Analysts Journal 30, 48–54.

Stapleton, R., Subrahmanyam, M., 1977. Market imperfections, capital market equilibrium, and
       corporate finance. Journal of Finance 32, 307–319.

Stulz, R., 1999. Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital. Journal of Applied
       Corporate Finance 12, 8–25.




                                              29
Appendix 1: Differences in Yield Spreads between Bond Issues at Home and Abroad

Aside from the non-price attributes analyzed in the paper, it may also be interesting to study

whether there are differences in terms of yields between domestic and international issues.

However, comparing yields across markets raises several issues and complications that require

a somewhat different type of analysis and a more specialized comparison. Therefore, we report

the analysis of bond yields in this separate appendix.

        Several papers study the yields of international bonds. The earlier literature focuses on

analyzing differences in yields between issues in the Eurobond and U.S. markets by U.S. firms,

finding mixed evidence (Finnerty and Nunn, 1985; Kidwell et al., 1985; Mahajan and Fraser,

1986). Differences in borrowing costs between these markets may arise because of differences in

investor clienteles, risk, tax treatment, issuance procedures, flotation costs, indentures, and

legal remedies in case of default, which may not be easily arbitraged (Kim and Stulz, 1983).15

        Other papers study differences in yields across other markets. For instance, Miller and

Puthenpurackal (2002) analyze yields of Yankee bonds (bonds issued in the U.S. by non-U.S.

firms) and find that the difference between yields in the Yankee bond and Eurobond markets

seems to be a significant determinant of the location of issues. Miller and Puthenpurackal

(2005) and Petrasek (2010) find that global bonds (those issued and traded in simultaneously in

several markets around the world) tend to have lower spreads than bonds issued in the

Eurobond and U.S. markets. There is also evidence that interest rate spreads on syndicated

loans to corporate borrowers differ across markets, with spreads being lower in Europe than in

the U.S. and these differences not explained by observable borrower, loan, or lender

characteristics (Carey and Nini, 2007).


15Some papers compare underwriting costs between bond issues in the Eurobond and the U.S. markets, finding
evidence that these costs tend to higher for Eurobonds (Kidwell et al., 1985; Levich, 1985), although differences
across markets have decreased in recent years (Peristiani and Santos, 2010).


                                                       30
       Following the interest in the literature, we compare yields to maturity of debt issues in

domestic and international markets. To obtain the cleanest possible comparison, we restrict

significantly the data we analyze. First, we focus only on U.S. dollar-denominated issues to

avoid the problems associated with comparing rates across currencies. In particular, differences

in expectations about exchange rate movements might generate differences in observed yields

to maturity for bonds denominated in different currencies. We focus the analysis on the U.S.

dollar because it is the most common currency of denomination for the bond issues in our

sample (both for issues abroad and at home). Second, we restrict the analysis to fixed rate issues

because data on yields for floating rate bonds are not available for a large part of our sample

and comparing yields on fixed and floating rate bonds is not straightforward. Finally, we

exclude convertible bonds to avoid comparing yields on different types of bonds.

       All the restrictions above substantially reduce the sample size. In particular, of the total

116,338 corporate bond issues by 13,920 firms used in the analysis in the main part of the

paper, we use 30,828 bond issues by 4,763 firms to analyze yields. Though smaller than our

original sample, this sample is still large relative to the ones used in the literature to analyze

yields. This larger sample, together with the fact that several firms in our dataset issue bonds

both at home and abroad, allow us to better control for unobserved differences across firms by

including firm-level fixed effects in some of our specifications.

       Because of the high correlation between currency and country of issuance, when

restricting the sample to dollar-denominated issues the sample is reduced mostly to debt issues

by U.S. firms. Specifically, U.S. firms account for 98 percent of the issues at home and 81

percent of the issues abroad in the sub-sample we analyze (or 95 percent of all the issues).

Moreover, most of the dollar-denominated issues abroad by U.S. firms are conducted in the




                                                 31
Eurobond market. Thus, the analysis in this appendix mostly compares yields on bonds issued

by U.S. firms in the U.S. and Eurobond markets.

       The reduced sample size does not imply different results on the main non-price bond

characteristics studied in the paper. We re-estimated all the tables in the paper using the

sample employed for the analysis of yields and found results similar to those obtained when

considering the full sample. In particular, issues abroad are larger and have shorter maturities

than issues at home, consistent with our main results. We cannot analyze the type of rate for

this reduced sample because we are excluding floating rate issues. Also, we cannot analyze the

currency composition of debt issues because the only firms issuing abroad in domestic currency

in this sample are U.S. firms, so all the variation is absorbed by the country-time dummies.

       Following the literature, we measure the cost of debt using the yield spread at issue,

defined as the difference between the yield to maturity of a bond at the time of issuance and the

yield to maturity of a risk-free bond with the same maturity on the same date. As risk-free

bonds we use the constant maturity U.S. Treasury security series obtained from the Federal

Reserve Board. If there are no Treasury securities with the same maturity as the corporate

bond, we follow the literature and compute the risk-free rate as a linear interpolation between

the rates of the two Treasury bonds with the closest maturity.

       We estimate ordinary least square regressions of the yield to maturity on a dummy

variable that equals one for bond issues abroad (and zero otherwise) and various combinations

of country-year dummies, firm-level fixed effects, and other control variables used in the

literature. In particular, we control for the credit quality of issues by including several dummies

for different rating categories based on Standard & Poor‘s credit ratings. The excluded

category is the highest rated one, AA- to AAA, so the estimated coefficients measure the

premium that riskier borrowers may pay. We also control for the size of issues, by including


                                                32
the log of the amount raised per issue in U.S. dollars (at 2008 prices), and for the maturity of

issues. Moreover, we control for other bond characteristics that may affect yields, such as

whether the issue is subordinated and whether it has a sinking fund. Given that some of the

bond characteristics may be jointly determined with the spread, we present results both

excluding and including these controls. We report regressions for different firm samples,

following the same structure as the main results presented in the paper. In particular, we

present results including all firms (Appendix Table 2), only firms that issue both at home and

abroad during our sample period (Appendix Table 3), and restricting the sample to firms that

issue debt at home and abroad after internationalization and only issues that occur after a firm

internationalizes (Appendix Table 4).

       Overall, the results show that issues abroad tend to have lower yield spreads than issues

at home after controlling for different combinations of bond characteristics, country-year

dummies, and firm-level fixed effects. The difference is not only statistically significant, but also

quite large. For example, the estimates in Appendix Table 2 column (f) show that, controlling

for bond characteristics, country-time dummies, and firm-level fixed effects, issues abroad have

yield spreads that are on average about 14 basis points lower than those of issues at home. This

difference is approximately 13 percent of the mean spread in our sample. The coefficients on the

rest of the control variables are consistent with the literature: larger issues, issues with longer

maturities, and those with lower credit ratings tend to have higher spreads. The estimates are

broadly similar across the different specifications presented in Appendix Tables 2, 3, and 4.

       The results are robust to a number of alternative specifications. For example, we obtain

similar results if we use the log of spreads instead of spreads as dependent variable. Moreover,

while the reported regressions use Standard & Poor‘s credit ratings, similar conclusions are

obtained if we combine data from Standard & Poor‘s and Moody‘s (considering the lowest


                                                 33
credit rating of the two). Also, broadly similar results are obtained if we use ratings converted

to a numerical scale as a control variable, instead of controlling for dummies for the different

credit rating categories. Furthermore, we find that the differences in spreads between issues

abroad and at home exist for both financial and non-financial firms and when restricting the

sample to U.S. firms.

        Overall, the results in this appendix show that there are pricing differences across

markets, reaffirming the main conclusions of the paper that domestic and international markets

may offer different financial services. The differences in yield spreads we find between dollar-

denominated issues at home and abroad remain when controlling for country-year dummies

and firm-level fixed effects, when analyzing only those firms that issue bonds both in domestic

and international capital markets, and also when focusing only on issues that take place after

internationalization. In other words, dollar-denominated issues conducted abroad by a given

firm tend to have lower yield spreads than those conducted in the domestic market by the same

firm.

        Of course, the existence of pricing differences across markets does not necessarily imply

that there are unexploited arbitrage opportunities. There are many differences between the

domestic U.S. and Eurobond markets (which constitute the bulk of the sample used in these

regressions) in terms of tax treatment, issuance procedures, flotation costs, covenant

enforcement, and types of bonds, which could potentially generate the lower spreads for issues

abroad that we find. Nevertheless, regardless of the underlying cause, our results suggest that

these pricing differences persist even after controlling for several bond characteristics

highlighted by the literature and accounting for unobserved time-varying country-specific

factors and cross-sectional differences among firms.




                                               34
                                               Figure 1
                   Evolution of Bond Issuance in Capital Markets around the World
This figure shows the evolution of the aggregate amount raised by firms through bond issues in capital markets
around the world in each year over the 1991-2008 period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home
country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data are in U.S. dollars at 2008 prices.



                                       Amount raised through bond issues by firms
                                          (billion U.S. dollars at 2008 prices)


  1,800

  1,600

  1,400

  1,200

  1,000                                                                               Issues at home

    800

    600

    400

    200
                                                                                       Issues abroad
     -
          1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
                                                          Figure 2
                      Distribution of Bond Issuance Activity Across Markets After Internationalization
This figure shows the bond issuance activity in domestic markets of firms that isue bonds abroad at some point
during the 1991-2008 period. The displayed variable is the number of firms classified according to the ratio of the
amount raised through bond issues at home to the total amount raised through bond issues after
internationalization. The fraction of firms in each category is in parentheses. The sample includes only firms that
conduct bond issues following their first issue abroad during the sample period and considers bond issues after
internationalization, excluding issues during the month of the first issue abroad. Issues at home are those carried
out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on
amount raised are in U.S. dollars at 2008 prices.



                            Number of firms according to fraction of capital raised through bond issues at
                                                  home after internationalization
                    1,500      1,436
                               (53%)

                    1,200
  Number of firms




                     900



                     600
                                                                                                          475

                                                                                                         (18%)
                     300
                                            172                       150          172             171
                                                         133
                                            (6%)                     (6%)         (6%)         (6%)
                                                        (5%)
                       0
                                 0%        0 - 20%    20 - 40%     40 - 60%      60 - 80%    80 - 100%   100%
                                                       Amount raised at home/total amount raised
                                                                         Table 1
                                      Amount Raised, Number of Issues, and Number of Firms by Issuer Country/Region
This table reports the number of issues, the number of firms, and the aggregate amount of capital raised by firms from each country/region through bond issues over the 1991-
2008 period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in
U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Because firms may conduct issues both abroad and at home, the number of firms in the total column may differ from the sum of the number of firms
in the home and abroad columns. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the countries included in each income group and region.

                                                 Amount raised
                                       (million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices)                  Number of issues                                Number of firms
                                   Home        Abroad         Total     % abroad   Home      Abroad      Total     % abroad       Home       Abroad      Total     % abroad
Germany                          1,617,549    1,024,279    2,641,828      38.8%    5,328      4,264      9,592      44.5%          414        235         540       43.5%
Japan                            1,276,368     315,084     1,591,452      19.8%    5,874      1,301      7,175      18.1%         1,030       583        1,277      45.7%
United States                    8,570,571    1,494,800 10,065,371        14.9%    50,434     4,029      54,463      7.4%         3,735       575        4,021      14.3%

Africa                             4,534       24,498      29,032      84.4%         27         79        106       74.5%           18          35         50       70.0%
Asia                              254,317      206,576     460,893     44.8%       4,973      1,077      6,050      17.8%          972         681       1,503      45.3%
Australia & New Zealand           44,088       383,836     427,924     89.7%        243       1,677      1,920      87.3%          102         178        261       68.2%
Eastern Europe & Central Asia      1,368       117,594     118,962     98.9%         17        380        397       95.7%           16         200        213       93.9%
Latin America & Caribbean         311,503      159,987     471,490     33.9%       6,469       951       7,420      12.8%         1,706        392       1,969      19.9%
Middle East                        3,489       48,655      52,144      93.3%          6        382        388       98.5%           4           64         68       94.1%
Western Europe                   2,577,723    4,266,459   6,844,181    62.3%       11,596     15,085     26,681     56.5%         2,479       1,819      3,739      48.6%
Other                                57        382,292     382,349     100.0%         1       2,145      2,146      100.0%          1          278        279       99.6%

Developed countries              14,192,835   8,039,610   22,232,446    36.2%      75,821     29,419     105,240     28.0%        8,126       4,040      10,777     37.5%

Developing countries              468,731     384,450      853,181      45.1%      9,147      1,951      11,098      17.6%        2,351       1,000      3,143      31.8%

Total                            14,661,566   8,424,060   23,085,626    36.5%      84,968     31,370     116,338     27.0%        10,477      5,040      13,920     36.2%
                                         Table 2
  Distribution of the Number of Bond Issues at Home and Abroad by Issue Characteristics
This table shows the fraction of the number of bond issues conducted by firms over the 1991-2008 period for
different types of issues. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are
those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in U.S. dollars at 2008 prices.
Short-term issues are those with a maturity of three years or less. Medium-term issues are those with a
maturity between three and ten years. Long-term issues are those with a maturity of more than ten years.



                                                      Composition of     Composition of
                                                      issues at home     issues abroad          % abroad
Issue size (amount raised per issue)
Size below 40 million U.S. dollars                         35.8%             11.8%               10.9%
Size between 40 and 100 million U.S. dollars               18.3%             20.8%               29.5%
Size between 100 and 250 million U.S. dollars              23.9%             31.4%               32.7%
Size above 250 million U.S. dollars                        22.0%             35.9%               37.6%


Maturity
Short term                                                 43.0%             33.4%               22.3%
Medium term                                                41.9%             53.1%               31.8%
Long term                                                  15.1%             13.6%               24.9%


Currency denomination
Domestic currency                                          94.7%             31.5%               10.9%
Foreign currency                                           5.3%              68.5%               82.7%

Currency denomination of foreign currency issues
U.S. dollar                                                49.8%             38.8%               78.8%
British pound                                              2.6%              7.3%                93.0%
Japanese yen                                               18.0%             5.7%                60.3%
Swiss franc                                                0.9%              9.2%                97.9%
Euro                                                       16.8%             13.8%               79.7%
Other                                                      11.9%             25.1%               91.0%


Rate type
Fixed rate                                                 69.6%             63.9%               25.3%
Floating rate                                              30.4%             36.1%               30.5%

Total number of issues                                    84,968             31,370              27.0%
                                                                 Table 3
                                    Comparison between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
This table compares the characteristics of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008 period. Issues at home are those carried
out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars at 2008
prices. Columns (a), (b), (c), and (d) report least squares regressions of the different bond characteristics on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different
sets of control variables. Only the coefficient on the issue abroad dummy is reported. The regressions in column (a) are estimated including country-year
dummies. The regressions in column (b) are estimated including country-year dummies and the log of the amount raised per issue. The regressions in
column (c) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The regressions in column (d) are estimated including firm-level fixed
effects, country-year dummies, and the log of the amount raised per issue. In the regressions of issue size, the dependent variable is the log of the amount
raised per issue. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at
ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                              Mean                                   Regression coefficient on issue abroad dummy, controlling for
                                                                                                                      Firm fixed effects and Firm fixed effects and
                                                                        Country-year            Country-year
                                  Issues at                                                                               country-year             country-year
                                                 Issues abroad            dummies          dummies + issue size
                                    home                                                                                     dummies          dummies + issue size
Dependent variable                                                           (a)                      (b)                       (c)                    (d)
Issue size                          172.6            268.5                0.418 ***                                          0.194 ***
(amount raised per issue)                                               [9.223]                                            [3.441]


Maturity (years)                     5.8              5.4                 -0.758 ***              -0.823 ***               -0.537 ***              -0.528 ***
                                                                         [6.377]                 [6.886]                  [3.017]                 [2.960]


Foreign currency denominated         0.05             0.69                0.612 ***                0.616 ***                0.579 ***               0.581 ***
                                                                       [35.685]                 [35.640]                 [23.732]                [23.581]


Floating rate                        0.30             0.36                -0.041 **               -0.053 ***               -0.074 ***              -0.080 ***
                                                                         [2.482]                 [3.083]                  [2.871]                 [2.987]

No. of observations                 84,968           31,370
No. of firms                        10,477           5,040
                                                                Table 4
                                  Comparison between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
                                            Only Firms that Issue Bonds at Home and Abroad
This table compares the characteristics of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008 period. The sample includes only firms
that issue bonds both at home and abroad at some point during this period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad
are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Columns (a), (b), (c), and (d) report
least squares regressions of the different bond characteristics on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different sets of control variables. Only the
coefficient on the issue abroad dummy is reported. The regressions in column (a) are estimated including country-year dummies. The regressions in column
(b) are estimated including country-year dummies and the log of the amount raised per issue. The regressions in column (c) are estimated including firm-
level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The regressions in column (d) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects, country-year dummies, and the
log of the amount raised per issue. In the regressions of issue size, the dependent variable is the log of the amount raised per issue. Standard errors are
estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent,
respectively.

                                             Mean                                 Regression coefficient on issue abroad dummy, controlling for
                                                                                                                   Firm fixed effects and Firm fixed effects and
                                                                     Country-year            Country-year
                                 Issues at                                                                             country-year             country-year
                                                Issues abroad          dummies          dummies + issue size
                                   home                                                                                   dummies          dummies + issue size
Dependent variable                                                        (a)                      (b)                       (c)                    (d)
Issue size                         220.4            286.4              0.206 ***                                          0.184 ***
(amount raised per issue)                                            [3.465]                                            [3.151]


Maturity (years)                    5.3              5.3              -0.305 *                -0.313 *                  -0.538 ***              -0.513 ***
                                                                     [1.916]                 [1.945]                   [2.928]                 [2.770]


Foreign currency denominated       0.06              0.67              0.593 ***               0.598 ***                 0.576 ***               0.579 ***
                                                                    [24.636]                [24.478]                  [23.029]                [22.835]


Floating rate                      0.40              0.36             -0.099 ***              -0.103 ***                -0.076 ***              -0.081 ***
                                                                     [3.571]                 [3.642]                   [2.883]                 [2.975]

No. of observations               36,055            18,082
No. of firms                      1,597             1,597
                                                       Table 5
            Comparison between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets - By Country Income Level
This table compares the characteristics of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008 period. The top panel reports
regression results for developed countries. The bottom panel reports results for developing countries. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the
countries included in each income group. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted
outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Columns (a), (b), (c), and (d) report least
squares regressions of the different bond characteristics on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different sets of control variables. Only the
coefficient on the issue abroad dummy is reported. The regressions in columns (a) and (c) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and
country-year dummies. The regressions in columns (b) and (d) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects, country-year dummies, and the
log of the amount raised per issue. In the regressions of issue size, the dependent variable is the log of the amount raised per issue. Standard
errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five,
and one percent, respectively.

                                                                                   Developed countries
                                                          All firms                                 Only firms that issue bonds at home and abroad
                                                              Regression coefficient on issue abroad dummy, controlling for
                                                                  Firm fixed effects and                                       Firm fixed effects and
                                     Firm fixed effects and                                       Firm fixed effects and
                                                                 country-year dummies +                                       country-year dummies +
                                     country-year dummies                                         country-year dummies
                                                                        issue size                                                   issue size
Dependent variable                             (a)                          (b)                             (c)                          (d)
Issue size                                 0.173 ***                                                    0.166 ***
(amount raised per issue)                [2.953]                                                      [2.761]
Maturity (years)                          -0.567 ***                  -0.558 ***                     -0.560 ***                   -0.537 ***
                                         [3.098]                     [3.042]                        [2.984]                      [2.838]
Foreign currency denominated               0.573 ***                   0.576 ***                      0.572 ***                    0.576 ***
                                        [22.494]                    [22.320]                       [22.149]                     [21.931]
Floating rate                             -0.067 **                   -0.072 ***                     -0.071 **                    -0.075 ***
                                         [2.477]                     [2.582]                        [2.573]                      [2.654]
No. of observations                     105,240                      105,240                         52,551                       52,551
No. of firms                             10,777                       10,777                          1,389                        1,389

                                                                                   Developing countries
                                                          All firms                                 Only firms that issue bonds at home and abroad
                                                              Regression coefficient on issue abroad dummy, controlling for
                                                                  Firm fixed effects and                                       Firm fixed effects and
                                     Firm fixed effects and                                       Firm fixed effects and
                                                                 country-year dummies +                                       country-year dummies +
                                     country-year dummies                                         country-year dummies
                                                                        issue size                                                   issue size
Dependent variable                             (a)                          (b)                             (c)                          (d)
Issue size                                 0.858 ***                                                    0.887 ***
(amount raised per issue)                [9.992]                                                      [8.291]
Maturity (years)                           0.401                       0.377                          0.344                        0.344
                                         [1.181]                     [1.107]                        [0.893]                      [0.855]
Foreign currency denominated              0.748 ***                    0.734 ***                      0.718 ***                    0.696 ***
                                            [21]                         [20]                      [15.555]                     [14.503]
Floating rate                             -0.295 ***                  -0.291 ***                     -0.299 ***                   -0.276 ***
                                         [6.543]                     [6.508]                        [5.422]                      [5.146]
No. of observations                      11,098                       11,098                          1,586                        1,586
No. of firms                              3,143                        3,143                            208                          208
                                                                       Table 6
                                         Bond Issuance Activity in Domestic Markets After Internationalization
This table shows the bond issuance activity in domestic markets of firms that issue bonds abroad at some point during the 1991-2008 period. The displayed
variables are, for different types of issues, averages across firms of the ratio of the amount raised through bond issues at home to the total amount raised
through bond issues in each year after their first issue abroad. The sample includes only firms that conduct bond issues after their first issue abroad during
the sample period. The first issue abroad is included in the calculations. The number of observations used to calculate the averages in each case is in
parentheses. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Short-
term issues are those with a maturity of three years or less. Medium-term issues are those with a maturity between three and ten years. Long-term issues
are those with a maturity of more than ten years. Data on amount raised are in U.S. dollars at 2008 prices.


                                                                    Amount raised through bond issues at home/total amount raised through bond issues in each year
                                                                                                        (average across firms)
                                                                                                                            Issues above     Foreign
                                                                               Short-term      Medium-        Long-term                                   Fixed rate
                                                                   All issues                                                40 million     currency
                                                                                  issues     term issues        issues                                      issues
                                                                                                                            U.S. dollars      issues
                                                                       (a)          (b)           (c)             (d)            (e)            (f)           (g)
Year of first bond issue abroad                                      8.3%         18.7%          8.7%           19.0%           8.4%           1.6%          9.8%
                                                                    (2,753)        (838)        (2,101)          (590)         (2,614)       (2,034)        (2,226)

One year after first bond issue abroad                              28.1%          35.0%          28.8%         37.1%          27.5%          5.8%           29.9%
                                                                    (1,536)        (634)         (1,196)        (422)         (1,442)         (985)         (1,247)

Two years after first bond issue abroad                             32.6%          33.0%          33.4%         40.4%          32.3%          5.4%          36.8%
                                                                    (1,229)        (496)          (929)         (384)         (1,163)         (750)         (975)

Three years after first bond issue abroad                           36.0%          35.6%          36.7%         46.5%          36.0%          8.4%          40.9%
                                                                    (959)          (426)          (718)         (290)          (910)          (587)         (760)


More than three years after first bond issue abroad                 46.5%           36.2%         48.7%          51.4%         46.2%          8.5%           50.8%
                                                                    (4,408)        (1,897)       (3,491)        (1,297)       (4,240)        (2,181)        (3,656)

All issues following internationalization (including first issue    24.4%          29.4%          24.9%          32.4%         24.1%          4.1%          25.9%
abroad)                                                             (2,753)       (1,505)        (2,528)        (1,194)       (2,697)        (2,234)       (2,508)

All issues following internationalization (excluding issues in      32.5%          33.1%          34.3%          39.1%         32.2%          6.4%          34.8%
month of first issue abroad)                                        (2,709)       (1,389)        (2,330)        (1,058)       (2,589)        (1,827)       (2,367)
                                                      Table 7
                 Comparison of Bond Issuance Activity at Home Before and After Internationalization
This table reports the average annual amount raised by firms through bond issues in domestic markets before and after their first
bond issue abroad over the 1991-2008 period for different types of issues. The sample includes only firms that issue bonds at home
and abroad at some point during our sample period. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Years
without bond issues are assigned a zero. The year of the first issue abroad is excluded from the estimations. Issues at home are
those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Columns (a) and
(b) report least squares regressions for the different types of bond issues of the log of (one plus the amount issued) on a dummy
identifying the period after internationalization and different sets of control variables. Only the coefficient on the after
internationalization dummy is reported. The regressions in column (a) are estimated including country-year dummies. The
regressions in column (b) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. Short-term issues are those
with a maturity of three years or less. Medium-term issues are those with a maturity between three and ten years. Long-term
issues are those with a maturity of more than ten years. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute
values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.



                                          Annual amount raised through bond
                                                    issues at home                             Regression coefficient on after
                                                (average across firms)                 internationalization dummy, controlling for
                                                                                                                Firm fixed effects and
                                             Before                  After           Country-year dummies
                                                                                                                country-year dummies
                                       internationalization   internationalization
                                                                                                (a)                        (b)
All issues                                    142.3                  331.1                   0.830 ***                  0.863 ***
                                                                                          [10.548]                    [9.630]

Issues by size
Issues below 40 million U.S. dollars           4.7                    6.2                    0.177 ***                 0.162 ***
                                                                                           [5.938]                   [5.071]

Issues above 40 million U.S. dollars          137.6                  324.9                   0.796 ***                 0.824 ***
                                                                                          [10.155]                   [9.267]


Issues by maturity
Short-term issues                              56.6                  127.9                   0.333 ***                 0.431 ***
                                                                                           [5.715]                   [7.053]

Medium-term issues                             64.0                  153.0                   0.617 ***                 0.592 ***
                                                                                           [9.514]                   [8.091]

Long-term issues                               21.7                   50.1                   0.395 ***                 0.380 ***
                                                                                           [8.575]                   [7.427]

Issues by currency
Domestic currency issues                      138.0                  306.8                   0.774 ***                 0.774 ***
                                                                                          [10.071]                   [8.952]

Foreign currency issues                        4.3                    24.3                   0.130 ***                 0.179 ***
                                                                                           [5.058]                   [5.719]

Issues by type of rate
Floating rate issues                           48.6                  131.2                   0.376 ***          .      0.469 ***
                                                                                           [6.315]                   [7.519]

Fixed rate issues                              93.7                  199.9                   0.746 ***          .      0.721 ***
                                                                                          [10.309]                   [8.923]

No. of observations                          10,329                 16,820
No. of firms                                 1,311                  1,570
                                                            Table 8
                              Comparison between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
            Only Firms that Issue Bonds at Home and Abroad After Internationalization - Issues After Internationalization
This table compares the characteristics of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008 period. The sample includes only firms
that issue bonds both at home and abroad after their first bond issue abroad and includes only bond issues conducted after internationalization. Issues at
home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the firm's home country. Data on amount raised are in
million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Columns (a), (b), (c), and (d) report least squares regressions of the different bond characteristics on a dummy identifying
issues abroad and different sets of control variables. Only the coefficient on the issue abroad dummy is reported. The regressions in column (a) are estimated
including country-year dummies. The regressions in column (b) are estimated including country-year dummies and the log of the amount raised per issue.
The regressions in column (c) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The regressions in column (d) are estimated
including firm-level fixed effects, country-year dummies, and the log of the amount raised per issue. In the regressions of issue size, the dependent variable
is the log of the amount raised per issue. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **,
*** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                              Mean                                   Regression coefficient on issue abroad dummy, controlling for
                                                                                                                      Firm fixed effects and Firm fixed effects and
                                                                        Country-year            Country-year
                                  Issues at                                                                               country-year             country-year
                                                 Issues abroad            dummies          dummies + issue size
                                    home                                                                                     dummies          dummies + issue size
Dependent variable                                                           (a)                      (b)                       (c)                    (d)
Issue size                          237.1            282.6                0.180 **                                           0.164 **
(amount raised per issue)                                               [2.575]                                            [2.425]


Maturity (years)                     5.5              5.2                 -0.374 *                -0.370 *                 -0.543 **               -0.514 **
                                                                         [1.952]                 [1.917]                  [2.537]                 [2.381]


Foreign currency denominated         0.08             0.69                0.591 ***                0.596 ***                0.586 ***               0.590 ***
                                                                       [21.217]                 [20.961]                 [20.940]                [20.669]


Floating rate                        0.42             0.35                -0.112 ***              -0.115 ***               -0.086 ***              -0.091 ***
                                                                         [3.560]                 [3.565]                  [2.903]                 [2.949]

No. of observations                 21,948           16,594
No. of firms                         818              818
                                                                               Appendix Table 1
                                                                             Country Classification
This table presents the list of countries that constitute the different regions and their classification by income level. Countries are classified as developed or developing based on
the World Bank income level classification in 2008. Developed countries correspond to high-income economies according to the World Bank classification, those with a GNI per
capita of 11,456 U.S. dollars or higher in 2007. Developing countries correspond to low- and middle-income economies according to the World Bank classification, those with a
GNI per capita below 11,456 U.S. dollars in 2007. * means the country is classified as developed.



                                                                      Eastern Europe &         Latin America &
                           Africa                   Asia                Central Asia              Caribbean           Middle East        Western Europe               Other

Australia *        Central African Rep.     China                   Bulgaria                 Argentina              Bahrain *          Austria *             Aruba *
Germany *          Egypt                    Hong Kong, China *      Croatia                  Barbados *             Iran               Belgium *             Bahamas *
Japan *            Ghana                    India                   Czech Republic *         Bolivia                Israel *           Cyprus *              Bermuda *
New Zealand *      Liberia                  Indonesia               Estonia *                Brazil                 Jordan             Denmark *             Cayman Islands *
United States *    Mauritius                Malaysia                Georgia                  Chile                  Kuwait *           Finland *             Guernsey *
                   Morocco                  Mongolia                Hungary *                Colombia               Lebanon            France *              Jersey *
                   Nigeria                  Pakistan                Kazakhstan               Costa Rica             Qatar *            Greece *              Netherlands Antilles *
                   South Africa             Philippines             Latvia                   Dominican Rep.         Saudi Arabia *     Iceland *             Puerto Rico *
                   Tanzania                 Singapore *             Lithuania                Ecuador                UAE (United        Ireland *
                   Tunisia                  Sri Lanka               Poland                   El Salvador            Arab Emirates) *   Italy *
                                            Taiwan *                Romania                  Guatemala                                 Liechtenstein *
                                            Thailand                Russian Federation       Jamaica                                   Luxembourg *
                                            Vietnam                 Serbia & Montenegro      Mexico                                    Malta *
                                                                    Slovak Republic *        Panama                                    Netherlands *
                                                                    Turkey                   Peru                                      Norway *
                                                                    Ukraine                  Uruguay                                   Portugal *
                                                                                             Venezuela                                 Slovenia *
                                                                                                                                       Spain *
                                                                                                                                       Sweden *
                                                                                                                                       Switzerland *
                                                                                                                                       United Kingdom *
                                           Appendix Table 2
         Comparison of Yield Spreads between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
This table compares the yield spread at issue of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008
period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the
firm's home country. The sample includes only U.S. dollar-denominated fixed rate issues. The table reports least squares
regressions of the yield spread at issue (in basis points) on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different sets of control
variables. The regressions in columns (a), (b), and (c) are estimated including country-year dummies. The regressions in
columns (d), (e), and (f) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The yield spread at issue
is defined as the difference between the yield to maturity on a given bond and the yield to maturity on a risk-free bond with
a similar maturity on the issuance date. The yield to maturity on a risk-free bond is measured as the yield to maturity on
the constant maturity Treasury securities published by the Federal Reserve. Data on amount raised are in million U.S.
dollars at 2008 prices. Credit rating dummies are based on Standard and Poor's credit ratings. The excluded rating
category dummy is that for bonds rated AA- and above. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level.
Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.


                                                           Dependent variable: Bond yield spread at issue
                                          (a)            (b)             (c)             (d)              (e)            (f)
Issue abroad dummy                    -22.907 **     -11.313 **     -13.844 ***      -15.133 ***     -15.555 ***    -14.563    ***
                                       [2.573]        [2.011]        [2.659]          [3.376]         [3.549]        [3.301]
Issue rated CCC- to CCC+ dummy                      428.814 ***    411.176 ***                      296.807 ***    261.675     ***
                                                    [10.404]         [9.889]                          [9.215]        [9.307]
Issue rated B- to B+ dummy                          342.456 ***    329.012 ***                      156.588 ***    145.212     ***
                                                    [45.952]       [43.101]                           [7.902]        [7.260]
Issue rated BB- to BB+ dummy                        161.500 ***    157.355 ***                        74.629 ***     74.661    ***
                                                      [6.325]        [6.559]                          [4.007]        [3.880]
Issue rated BBB- to BBB+ dummy                        62.098 ***     54.436 ***                       28.016 ***     25.344    ***
                                                    [10.964]       [11.674]                           [4.912]        [4.499]
Issue rated A- to A+ dummy                            27.605 ***     23.865 ***                         3.889          1.831
                                                      [5.810]        [5.722]                          [1.379]        [0.674]
Issue not rated dummy                                 15.785 ***     23.010 ***                         5.529          5.521
                                                      [3.179]        [4.742]                          [1.500]        [1.609]
Log of issue size                                                      4.161 ***                                       1.575   **
                                                                     [3.671]                                         [2.092]
Issue maturity                                                         2.536 ***                                       1.660   ***
                                                                   [14.710]                                        [12.698]
Subordinated issue dummy                                             23.202 ***                                      32.983    ***
                                                                     [6.320]                                         [7.912]
Sinking fund dummy                                                   21.149 **                                        -1.244
                                                                     [2.385]                                         [0.304]

Country-year dummies                     Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
Firm-level fixed effects                 No             No             No               Yes             Yes            Yes

No. of observations                     30,828         30,828         30,828           30,828         30,828         30,828
No. of firms                            4,763          4,763           4,763           4,763          4,763          4,763
                                           Appendix Table 3
         Comparison of Yield Spreads between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
                            Only Firms that Issue Bonds at Home and Abroad
This table compares the yield spread at issue of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008
period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the
firm's home country. The sample includes only U.S. dollar-denominated fixed rate issues and only firms that issue this type
of bonds both at home and abroad at some point during the sample period.. The table reports least squares regressions of
the yield spread at issue (in basis points) on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different sets of control variables. The
regressions in columns (a), (b), and (c) are estimated including country-year dummies. The regressions in columns (d), (e),
and (f) are estimated including firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The yield spread at issue is defined as
the difference between the yield to maturity on a given bond and the yield to maturity on a risk-free bond with a similar
maturity on the issuance date. The yield to maturity on a risk-free bond is measured as the yield to maturity on the
constant maturity Treasury securities published by the Federal Reserve. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars
at 2008 prices. Credit rating dummies are based on Standard and Poor's credit ratings. The excluded rating category
dummy is that for bonds rated AA- and above. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute
values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.


                                                           Dependent variable: Bond yield spread at issue
                                          (a)            (b)             (c)             (d)              (e)            (f)
Issue abroad dummy                    -23.383 ***    -19.153 ***    -17.273 ***      -16.640 ***     -16.522 ***    -13.721    ***
                                       [3.568]        [4.056]        [3.511]          [4.039]         [4.071]        [3.105]
Issue rated B- to B+ dummy                          306.814 ***    308.698 ***                      262.668 ***    260.458     ***
                                                    [18.363]       [18.170]                         [17.837]       [15.475]
Issue rated BB- to BB+ dummy                        163.792 ***    163.231 ***                      162.523 ***    158.898     ***
                                                      [3.952]        [3.886]                          [3.866]        [3.618]
Issue rated BBB- to BBB+ dummy                        75.757 ***     74.799 ***                       45.523 ***     42.692    ***
                                                      [5.955]        [5.746]                          [2.781]        [2.700]
Issue rated A- to A+ dummy                            29.788 ***     27.212 ***                         3.137         -0.119
                                                      [4.772]        [4.706]                          [0.514]        [0.020]
Issue not rated dummy                                 25.469 ***     28.431 ***                      -10.359          -7.328
                                                      [2.780]        [3.099]                          [0.948]        [0.690]
Log of issue size                                                     -0.068                                           0.727
                                                                     [0.046]                                         [0.667]
Issue maturity                                                         2.129 ***                                       2.202   ***
                                                                     [5.040]                                         [8.562]
Subordinated issue dummy                                               3.181                                           2.769
                                                                     [0.462]                                         [0.376]
Sinking fund dummy                                                  -43.291                                         -44.277
                                                                     [1.646]                                         [1.367]

Country-year dummies                     Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
Firm-level fixed effects                 No             No             No               Yes             Yes            Yes

No. of observations                     6,715          6,715          6,715            6,715           6,715          6,715
No. of firms                             189            189            189              189             189            189
                                            Appendix Table 4
         Comparison of Yield Spreads between Bond Issues in Domestic and International Markets
             Only Firms that Issue Bonds at Home and Abroad After Internationalization -
                                    Issues After Internationalization
This table compares the yield spread at issue of bond issues at home and abroad conducted by firms over the 1991-2008
period. Issues at home are those carried out in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those conducted outside the
firm's home country. The sample includes only U.S. dollar-denominated fixed rate issues and only firms that issue this type
of bonds both at home and abroad after their first bond issue abroad during the sample period.. Only bond issues conducted
after internationalization are included. The table reports least squares regressions of the yield spread at issue (in basis
points) on a dummy identifying issues abroad and different sets of control variables. The regressions in columns (a), (b),
and (c) are estimated including country-year dummies. The regressions in columns (d), (e), and (f) are estimated including
firm-level fixed effects and country-year dummies. The yield spread at issue is defined as the difference between the yield
to maturity on a given bond and the yield to maturity on a risk-free bond with a similar maturity on the issuance date. The
yield to maturity on a risk-free bond is measured as the yield to maturity on the constant maturity Treasury securities
published by the Federal Reserve. Data on amount raised are in million U.S. dollars at 2008 prices. Credit rating dummies
are based on Standard and Poor's credit ratings. The excluded rating category dummy is that for bonds rated AA- and
above. Standard errors are estimated with clustering at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **,
*** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.


                                                            Dependent variable: Bond yield spread at issue
                                           (a)            (b)             (c)             (d)              (e)            (f)
Issue abroad dummy                     -25.261 ***    -23.766 ***    -22.271 ***      -18.255 ***     -19.738 ***    -16.961    ***
                                        [4.809]        [5.306]        [4.018]          [3.606]         [4.310]        [3.330]
Issue rated B- to B+ dummy                           297.315 ***    298.676 ***                      281.110 ***    279.057     ***
                                                     [19.090]       [17.751]                         [14.576]       [13.842]
Issue rated BB- to BB+ dummy                         151.335 **     149.256 **                       196.289 ***    193.138     ***
                                                       [2.400]        [2.325]                          [3.399]        [3.262]
Issue rated BBB- to BBB+ dummy                         89.547 ***     93.761 ***                       65.235 **      62.919    ***
                                                       [3.860]        [4.218]                          [2.585]        [2.695]
Issue rated A- to A+ dummy                             28.592 ***     27.594 ***                         9.719          5.797
                                                       [4.259]        [4.117]                          [0.882]        [0.555]
Issue not rated dummy                                  32.165 ***     35.163 ***                        -6.810         -3.098
                                                       [2.742]        [2.929]                          [0.444]        [0.207]
Log of issue size                                                       0.785                                           1.686
                                                                      [0.357]                                         [1.000]
Issue maturity                                                          1.861 ***                                       2.545   ***
                                                                      [2.712]                                         [5.225]
Subordinated issue dummy                                                1.049                                        -10.809
                                                                      [0.108]                                         [0.902]
Sinking fund dummy                                                   -13.131                                         -11.741
                                                                      [0.420]                                         [0.332]

Country-year dummies                      Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
Firm-level fixed effects                  No             No             No               Yes             Yes            Yes

No. of observations                      3,738          3,738          3,738            3,738           3,738          3,738
No. of firms                              102            102            102              102             102            102
