                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         IS THERE AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY GAP?

                                           Hunt Allcott
                                        Michael Greenstone

                                       Working Paper 17766
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17766


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2012




We thank Michael Blasnik, Lucas Davis, Ken Gillingham, Matt Golden, Paul Joskow, Therese Langer,
Jim McMahon, Sendhil Mullainathan, Steve Nadel, Richard Newell, Jim Sallee, Alan Sanstad, Cass
Sunstein, Rich Sweeney, and Catherine Wolfram for helpful discussions and feedback. We also thank
JEP Editors David Autor, Chad Jones, John List, and Timothy Taylor for helping to shape the article.
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Sloan Foundation and the MacArthur Foundation
for our research on the economics of energy efficiency. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Hunt Allcott and Michael Greenstone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?
Hunt Allcott and Michael Greenstone
NBER Working Paper No. 17766
January 2012, Revised July 2012
JEL No. D11,D18,D61,D62,H23,L91,L94,Q41

                                              ABSTRACT

Many analysts have argued that energy efficiency investments offer an enormous “win-win” opportunity
to both reduce negative externalities and save money. This overview paper presents a simple model
of investment in energy-using capital stock with two types of market failures: first, uninternalized
externalities from energy consumption, and second, forces such as imperfect information that cause
consumers and firms not to exploit privately-profitable energy efficiency investments. The model clarifies
that only if the second type of market failure cannot be addressed directly through mechanisms such
as information provision, energy efficiency subsidies and standards may be merited. We therefore
review the empirical work on the magnitude of profitable unexploited energy efficiency investments,
a literature which frequently does not meet modern standards for credibly estimating the net present
value of energy cost savings and often leaves other benefits and costs unmeasured. These problems
notwithstanding, recent empirical work in a variety of contexts implies that on average the magnitude
of profitable unexploited investment opportunities is much smaller than engineering-accounting studies
suggest. Finally, there is tremendous opportunity and need for policy-relevant research that utilizes
randomized controlled trials and quasi-experimental techniques to estimate the returns to energy efficiency
investments and the welfare effects of energy efficiency programs.


Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu

Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu
       Many analysts of the energy industry have long believed that energy efficiency offers an
enormous “win-win” opportunity: through aggressive energy conservation policies, we can both
save money and reduce negative externalities associated with energy use. In 1979, Pulitzer Prize-
winning author Daniel Yergin and the Harvard Business School Energy Project made an early
version of this argument in the book Energy Future:


       If the United States were to make a serious commitment to conservation, it might well
       consume 30 to 40 percent less energy than it now does, and still enjoy the same or an
       even higher standard of living . . . Although some of the barriers are economic, they are
       in most cases institutional, political, and social. Overcoming them requires a government
       policy that champions conservation, that gives it a chance equal in the marketplace to that
       enjoyed by conventional sources of energy.


       Thirty years later, consultancy McKinsey & Co. made a similar argument in its 2009
report, Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy:


       Energy efficiency offers a vast, low-cost energy resource for the U.S. economy—but only
       if the nation can craft a comprehensive and innovative approach to unlock it. Significant
       and persistent barriers will need to be addressed at multiple levels to stimulate demand
       for energy efficiency and manage its delivery . . . If executed at scale, a holistic approach
       would yield gross energy savings worth more than $1.2 trillion, well above the $520
       billion needed through 2020 for upfront investment in efficiency measures (not including
       program costs). Such a program is estimated to reduce end-use energy consumption in
       2020 by 9.1 quadrillion BTUs, roughly 23 percent of projected demand, potentially
       abating up to 1.1 gigatons of greenhouse gases annually.


       In economic language, the “win-win” argument is that government intervention to
encourage energy efficiency can improve welfare for two reasons. First, the consumption of
fossil fuels, which comprise the bulk of our current energy sources, causes externalities such as
harm to human health, climate change, and constraints on the foreign policy objectives of
energy-importing countries. Second, other forces such as imperfect information may cause


                                                 2
consumers and firms not to undertake privately profitable investments in energy efficiency.
These forces, which we refer to as “investment inefficiencies,” would create what is popularly
called an Energy Efficiency Gap: a wedge between the cost-minimizing level of energy
efficiency and the level actually realized. Yergin, McKinsey & Co., and other analysts have
argued that this gap represents a significant share of total energy use: in their view, the ground is
littered with $20 bills that energy consumers have failed to pick up.
       The energy efficiency policy debate often comingles these two types of market failures—
energy use externalities and investment inefficiencies—causing imprecision in research
questions and policy goals. In this paper, we distinguish between the two market failures and
clarify their separate policy implications. If energy use externalities are the only market failure, it
is well known that the social optimum is obtained with Pigouvian taxes or equivalent cap-and-
trade programs that internalize these externalities into energy prices, and that substitute policies
are often much less economically efficient. If investment inefficiencies also exist, the first-best
policy is to address the inefficiency directly: for example, by providing information to
imperfectly informed consumers. However, when these interventions are not fully effective and
investment inefficiencies remain, policies that subsidize or mandate energy efficiency might
increase welfare. The central economic question around energy efficiency is thus whether there
are investment inefficiencies that a policy could correct—in other words, “Is there an Energy
Efficiency Gap?”
       We examine two classes of evidence on the existence and magnitude of investment
inefficiencies that could cause the Energy Efficiency Gap. First, we examine choices made by
consumers and firms, testing whether they fail to make investments that would increase utility or
profits. Second, we focus on specific investment inefficiencies, testing for evidence consistent
with each. After presenting the evidence, we discuss policy implications. Throughout the paper,
we highlight how the economics of energy efficiency connects to important questions in other
applied micro fields, including behavioral economics, industrial organization, and development
microeconomics.
       Three key conclusions arise. First, although there is a long literature assessing investment
inefficiencies related to energy efficiency, this body of evidence frequently does not meet
modern standards for credibility. A basic problem is that much of the evidence on the energy
cost savings from energy efficiency comes from engineering analyses or observational studies


                                                  3
that can suffer from a set of well-known biases. Furthermore, even if the energy cost savings
were known, energy efficiency investments often have other unobserved costs and benefits,
making it difficult to assess welfare effects. This problem is general to other economic
applications: in order to argue that an agent is not maximizing an objective function, the analyst
must credibly observe that objective function in full. We believe that there is great potential for a
new body of credible empirical work in this area, both because the questions are so important
and because there are significant unexploited opportunities for randomized controlled trials and
quasi-experimental designs that have advanced knowledge in other domains.
       Second, when one tallies up the available empirical evidence from different contexts, it is
difficult to substantiate claims of a pervasive Energy Efficiency Gap. Some consumers appear to
be imperfectly informed, and the evidence suggests that investment inefficiencies do cause an
increase in energy use in various settings. However, the empirical magnitudes of the investment
inefficiencies appear to be smaller, indeed substantially smaller, than the massive potential
savings calculated in engineering analyses such as McKinsey & Co. (2009).
       Third, because consumers are quite heterogeneous in the degree of their investment
inefficiencies, it is crucial to design targeted policies. Subsidizing energy efficient durables, for
example, changes relative prices for all consumers. While this policy will increase welfare for
some consumers, such benefits must be traded off against distortions to consumers not subject to
inefficiencies. Policy evaluations must therefore consider not just how much a policy increases
energy efficiency, but what types of consumers are induced to become more energy efficient.
Welfare gains will be larger from a policy that preferentially affects the decisions of consumers
subject to investment inefficiencies.



Background Facts on Energy Demand


Overview of Energy Demand and Energy Efficiency

       Table 1 presents the breakdown of total energy demand across the sectors of the U.S.
economy. Much of our discussion focuses on household energy use and personal transportation
instead of commercial and industrial energy use, because these are areas where inefficiencies of
imperfect information might be more severe. In 2007, the average U.S. household spent $2,400

                                                  4
on gasoline for their autos and another $1,900 on natural gas, electricity, and heating oil (U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2007). Of this latter figure, heating and cooling are the most
significant end uses, which suggests that they may also be the areas where energy conservation
could have the largest effect.
        The smaller the variance in energy costs across products relative to the total purchase
price, the more likely it is that consumers will choose to remain imperfectly informed about, or
inattentive to, these costs (Sallee, 2011). Figure 1 shows the lifetime energy cost of a selection of
energy-using durables, discounted at 6 percent over each good’s typical lifetime, as well as the
ratio of energy cost to the purchase price. For example, if gasoline costs $3 per gallon, lifetime
gasoline costs are $19,000 for a typical pickup truck, or 83 percent of the purchase price, and
$10,000 for a relatively energy efficient sedan, or about 66 percent of purchase price. Typical
lifetime energy costs are five times greater than purchase prices for air conditioners and 12 times
greater for incandescent light bulbs, but only about one-third of purchase price for a typical
refrigerator.
        The most aggregate measure of energy efficiency is the ratio of GDP to total energy use,
with different energy sources combined using common physical units. As shown in Figure 2,
U.S. “energy productivity” per unit of GDP is 2.4 times higher than in 1949. Various factors
drive this continual improvement, including compositional changes in the economy toward less-
energy-intensive industries, energy efficiency policies, and other forces that drive total factor
productivity growth. Energy prices also induce factor substitution and technical change: the
figure suggests this effect, showing that the fastest improvements in energy productivity were in
the 1970s and the most recent 15 years, both periods of relatively high energy prices. The figure
also shows that U.S. energy productivity has grown faster than total factor productivity since the
beginning of that data series in 1987, meaning that through some combination of directed
technical change and factor substitution, the United States is economizing on energy faster than
it is economizing on other factors. The U.S. economy is more energy intensive than other OECD
countries, although it has improved more quickly since 1980, and less energy intensive than the
set of low- and middle-income countries. In sum, the U.S. economy is progressively becoming
less energy intensive, although this is uninformative about whether the United States is at or near
the economically efficient level of energy efficiency.



                                                 5
Energy Efficiency Policy in the United States

       The United States has enacted a wide array of policies to encourage energy efficiency,
many of which were originally promulgated during the energy crises of the 1970s. Table 2
presents the most significant of these policies, along with some measure of their annual costs.
Auto industry policies include: Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards, which
require that the new cars and trucks sold by each auto manufacturer meet a minimum average
rating based on miles-per-gallon; tax credits of up to $3,400 for hybrid vehicle buyers; and “gas
guzzler taxes” ranging from $1,000 to $7,700 on the sale of passenger cars with low fuel
economy. There are a series of national-level minimum energy efficiency standards for
household appliances, such as refrigerators, air conditioners, and washing machines.
Additionally, many states have building codes that encourage energy efficiency by, for example,
stipulating minimum amounts of required insulation. Furthermore, electricity bill surcharges
fund billions of dollars of utility-managed “demand-side management” programs, which include
subsidized residential and commercial energy audits, energy efficiency information provision,
and subsidies for energy efficient appliances and other capital investments.
       “Weatherization” is frequently used as a general term for a set of residential energy
efficiency investments primarily including wall and attic insulation, improved heating,
ventilation and air conditioning systems, and “air-sealing,” which reduces the leakage of hot or
cold outside air. Through the Weatherization Assistance Program, the federal government
transfers $250 million annually to state agencies to weatherize approximately 100,000 low-
income homes. Weatherization funding grew significantly due to the 2009 American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act. In total, that legislation and related economic stimulus bills included $17
billion in energy efficiency spending, including non-low-income weatherization programs,
automobile and appliance cash-for-clunkers programs with energy efficiency requirements on
new models, and other grants to state programs.
       In this paper, the phrase “energy efficiency policies” refers to this set of subsidies and
standards that directly encourage investment in energy efficient capital stock but do not directly
affect energy prices. Although gasoline taxes, cap-and-trade programs, or other policies that
affect energy prices will of course also increase investment in energy efficient capital stock,
these policies that act through energy prices are conceptually distinct in our policy analysis.



                                                  6
A Model of Investment in Energy Efficiency

       The basic economics of energy efficiency are captured by a model in which an agent,
either a profit-maximizing firm or utility-maximizing consumer, chooses between two different
versions of an energy-using durable good such as an automobile, air conditioner, or light bulb.1
This setup can also represent a choice of whether to improve the energy efficiency of an existing
building, for example through weatherization. In the first period, the agent chooses and pays for
capital investments. In the second period, the consumer uses the good and incurs energy costs.
       The two different goods are denoted 0, for the energy inefficient baseline, and 1, for the
energy efficient version. They have energy intensities e0 and e1, respectively, with e0 > e1. The
energy efficient good has incremental upfront capital cost c > 0 and unobserved incremental
opportunity cost or utility cost ξ. The variable ξ could either be positive (an unobserved cost) or
negative (an unobserved benefit). The private cost of energy is p, and the risk-adjusted discount
rate between the two periods is r > 0. The variable m depends represents an agent’s taste for
usage of the durable good; a high m reflects an air conditioner user in a hot climate or a car
owner who drives a long way to work. The variable m is implicitly a function of energy prices:
as energy prices rise, the cost of utilization increases, so utilization decreases. We index mi to
explicitly recognize that it varies across agents, although in practice ξ and p will also vary.
       In the basic case, an agent’s willingness-to-pay for the energy efficient good is the
discounted energy cost savings net of unobserved costs. Agent i will choose the energy efficient
good if and only if willingness to pay outweighs the incremental capital costs:


                          pmi(e0 – e1) / (1 + r) – ξ > c.               (1)




1
  The model presented here is an adaptation of the model in Allcott, Mullainathan, and
Taubinsky (2011). It resembles a generalized Roy model. It abstracts away from factors which
may be relevant in some settings, including the irreversibility of some energy efficiency
investments and uncertainty over energy costs (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994; Hassett and Metcalf,
1993) and explicit models of imperfect information in the purchase or resale of the good.


                                                   7
To capture the essence of the Energy Efficiency Gap, we introduce the parameter γ, which is an
implicit weight on the energy cost savings in the agent’s decision. Now, the agent chooses the
energy efficient good if and only if:


                              γpmi(e0 – e1) / (1 + r) – ξ > c.       (2)


        For the purpose of determining the effects of subsidizing the energy efficient good, the γ
parameter is a sufficient statistic for all investment inefficiencies. As we will discuss later in
more detail, there are several distinct types of investment inefficiencies. First, agents may be
unaware of, imperfectly informed about, or inattentive to energy cost savings. Second, agents
may be themselves perfectly informed but unable to convey costlessly the energy intensity e1 of
an improved house or apartment they are selling or renting to others. Third, credit markets may
be imperfect, meaning that agents may not have access to credit at the risk-adjusted discount rate
r. 2 The γ parameter is conceptually related to what others have called an “implied discount rate,”
which is the discount rate that rationalizes the tradeoffs that agents make between upfront
investment costs and future energy savings.
        It is often asserted that γ < 1, meaning that investment inefficiencies cause agents to value
discounted energy cost savings less than upfront costs. Notice that when this is the case, some
agents do not choose the energy efficient good despite the fact that this would be profitable at
current energy prices. Formally, asserting that there is an “Energy Efficiency Gap” is exactly
equivalent to asserting that there are investment inefficiencies and γ < 1. Of course, in some
settings it might be that γ > 1.
        Other than the investment inefficiencies captured by γ, the additional element of the
“win-win argument” is that there are additional social costs from energy use that are not
internalized into energy prices. We denote this uninternalized externality by φ. In the social
optimum, the agent adopts the energy efficient good if:


                           (p + φ)mi(e0 – e1) / (1 + r) – ξ > c.       (3)

2
  Credit constraints are a frequently discussed investment inefficiency. Although we note the
issue in theory, there is not much empirical evidence in the context of energy efficiency, so we
will not discuss it further.


                                                    8
The social optimum differs from the agent’s choice in the previous equation for two reasons.
First, the allocation accounts for the externality φ. Second, the allocation is not affected by
investment inefficiencies, so γ = 1.
       Figure 3 illustrates the three cases. The figure’s horizontal axis represents the quantity of
the energy efficient good that is purchased, while the vertical axis shows the incremental costs
and benefits of purchasing that good. The height of a demand curve at each point reflects some
individual agent’s willingness-to-pay from the left-hand side of a corresponding equation above.
The agents on the left side of the figure, with higher willingness-to-pay, tend to have high usage
m, low unobserved cost ξ, and high energy price p.
       The lowest demand curve, denoted D, reflects the case in the second equation with both
investment inefficiencies (γ < 1) and uninternalized energy use externalities. In this case, the
market equilibrium is at point a, the intersection of demand curve D with incremental cost c.
Demand curve D’ reflects the case in the first equation with no investment inefficiencies, but
energy still priced below social cost. Demand curve D’’ reflects the social optimum in the third
equation, where there are no investment inefficiencies and energy prices include externality φ.
Adding a Pigouvian tax on energy consumption (based on the energy source’s pollution content)
increases willingness-to-pay more for the consumers on the left of the figure with higher
utilization, so demand curve D’’ rotates clockwise relative to demand curve D’. The first-best
equilibrium is point d, where D’’ intersects incremental cost c.
       From a policy perspective, it is crucial to distinguish the two types of market failures,
energy use externalities and investment inefficiencies. The reason derives from the general
principle that policies should address market failures as directly as possible. If there are no
investment inefficiencies but energy prices are below social cost due to uninternalized energy
use externalities, demand is represented by D’. This causes a distortion both in the purchase and
in the utilization of energy-using durables: for example, consumers buy too many gas guzzlers
and drive them too much. A Pigouvian tax of amount φ on energy (on gas, in the example)
would give both the socially optimal quantity demanded (q’’) of the energy efficient good and
the socially optimal utilization. By contrast, as long as utilization is not fully price-inelastic, a
subsidy for the energy efficient good does not achieve the first best. While this could move
quantity demanded to q’’, consumers would not face the true social cost of energy when deciding


                                                 9
how much to use the good: consumers would buy the right number of gas guzzlers but still drive
them too much.
          Many investment inefficiencies, on the other hand, distort purchases but not utilization. If
there are investment inefficiencies but no uninternalized energy use externalities, the optimal
corrective policy affects purchases, but not utilization. For example, Allcott, Mullainathan, and
Taubinsky (2012) show that when consumers have homogeneous γ < 1 and vary only in
utilization mi, the first-best policy involves a subsidy for the energy efficient good.3 In Figure 3,
that optimal subsidy would move quantity demanded from q to q’. Notice that an energy tax
could potentially also correct the investment inefficiency, giving the same marginal consumer at
q’. However, as long as utilization is not fully inelastic, an energy tax that gives price above
social cost (to correct the investment inefficiency), would cause consumers to reduce utilization
below the first-best level: consumers would buy the right number of gas guzzlers and then drive
them too little.
          Putting these arguments together, when there are distortions from both uninternalized
energy use externalities and investment inefficiencies, the first-best policy involves both
Pigouvian taxes on energy and a second mechanism to increase quantity demanded of the energy
efficient good. This second mechanism may be a subsidy for the energy efficient good, although
as we will discuss later in the paper, heterogeneity in the investment inefficiency γ makes
subsidies potentially less desirable.
          How can this framework be used for cost–benefit analysis? Consider first adding the
subsidy in isolation, without any Pigouvian tax on energy. When there are investment
inefficiencies, the original marginal consumer at quantity q gains amount af from being induced
to buy the energy efficient good. In fact, there are allocative gains from inducing each of the
consumers between q and q’ to purchase the energy efficient good, as each of these consumers
has benefits that are larger than incremental cost c. The total private welfare gains are illustrated
by the triangle abf. If a Pigouvian tax on energy is added to this subsidy, then the total social
welfare gain is illustrated by the triangle adg.
          These benefits are then compared against the costs of the policy. A subsidy involves a
transfer of public funds to consumers of amount hbjk, as illustrated by the shaded rectangle. If

3
    Heutel (2011) obtains a comparable result using a different model of investment inefficiencies.


                                                   10
those funds could otherwise be used to lower labor taxes, the deadweight loss of these taxes
would be included as a social cost, along with any other costs of administering the subsidy. 4
Similarly, an information program that moved demand from D to D’ would also increase private
welfare by abf, and this welfare gain would be traded off with the costs of implementation. For
any policy, it will be an empirical question whether the costs exceed the benefits, and whether
the net benefits are larger than alternative policies. This approach to assessing net welfare
benefits is the appropriate test of whether energy efficiency policies are socially beneficial when
Pigouvian taxes are also available to correct energy use externalities.
       To summarize, this section has analyzed two forces that can cause behavior to differ from
the social optimum: energy use externalities and investment inefficiencies. If there are energy
use externalities but no investment inefficiencies, ideally only Pigouvian taxes would be used. If
there are investment inefficiencies, energy efficiency policies such as subsidies for energy
efficient capital stock might have benefits that outweigh their costs. If there are both investment
inefficiencies and energy use externalities, then Pigouvian taxes should be used in combination
with some welfare-improving energy efficiency policy. The central economic questions are thus
whether there are investment inefficiencies, and if so, whether the benefits of a corrective policy
outweigh its costs.
       In the next section, we will examine choices by consumers and firms to adopt or not
adopt energy efficient technologies and attempt to infer whether there is an Energy Efficiency
Gap. When there are no investment inefficiencies, agents’ choices are governed by the first
equation above, and unobserved factors such as costs ξ or utilization m can be inferred from their
decisions. Some analysts have relied heavily on this framework in explaining away an apparent
Energy Efficiency Gap, with an argument along the lines that “agents are well-informed, so if
they are not energy efficient, then it must be that the unobserved costs of energy efficiency are
large.” The analysis is more difficult when there might be investment inefficiencies. In that case,
we now must know everything about agents’ objective functions to estimate the size of γ.
       Three types of problems will pervade the analyses we review in the next section. First,
factors that are difficult to observe or quantify, as denoted by ξ in our model above, will be
potentially very relevant. Second, estimates of the net present value of energy cost savings are
4
 Analogously, a Pigouvian tax brings in public funds that can be used to lower labor taxes,
which should be counted as an additional benefit (Bovenberg and Goulder, 1996).


                                                 11
often questionable. Depending on the setting, this could be because the analyst does not know
the change in energy intensity (e0 – e1), the utilization m, or the appropriate discount rate r.
Third, there is often substantial heterogeneity across consumers in utilization and unobserved
costs, meaning that average returns for adopters might be uninformative about average returns
for non-adopters or returns for the marginal adopter.
       These empirical problems directly parallel other economic contexts. Consider, for
example, the question of whether farmers in developing countries could profitably adopt
agricultural technologies such as fertilizer and high-yielding variety seeds. These technologies
have unobserved costs, such as increased labor inputs (Foster and Rosenzweig, 2010). It is
difficult to know the resulting increase in profits without randomized controlled trials, as in
Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2011). Also, the substantial heterogeneity in costs and gross
returns means that the fact that adopters have high returns does not imply that non-adopters are
foregoing a profitable investment (Suri, 2011).



Evidence on Returns to Energy Efficiency Investments

       In this section, we analyze the evidence on whether consumers and firms leave profitable
energy efficiency investments on the table. There are four categories of evidence: engineering
estimates of returns to potential investments, empirical estimates of returns to observed
investments, the cost effectiveness of energy conservation programs run by electric utilities, and
estimated demand patterns for energy-using durables.


Engineering Estimates of Energy Conservation Cost Curves
       While the McKinsey & Co. (2009) study quoted in our introduction has garnered
substantial attention, it is preceded by a long literature that uses engineering cost estimates to
construct “supply curves” for energy efficiency (for example, Meier, Wright, and Rosenfeld
1983; ACEEE 1989; Goldstein, Mowris, Davis, and Dolan 1990; Koomey et al. 1991; Brown,
Levine, Romm, Rosenfeld, and Koomey 1998; National Academy of Sciences 1992; Rosenfeld,
Atkinson, Koomey, Meier, Mowris, and Price 1993; Stoft 1995; Blumstein and Stoft 1995;
Brown, Levine, Short, and Koomey 2001). The basic approach in such studies is to calculate the



                                                  12
net present value of a set of possible energy efficiency investments given assumed capital costs,
energy prices, investment horizons, and discount rates.
       Across many studies from different industries and sectors, a common theme seems to
emerge: large fractions of energy can be conserved at negative net cost. That is, the studies
conclude that consumers and firms are failing to exploit a massive amount of profitable
investment opportunities in energy efficiency. For example, a meta-analysis by Rosenfeld,
Atkinson, Koomey, Meier, Mowris, and Price (1993) concludes that between 20 and 60 percent
of total electricity use, depending on the study and the electricity cost assumption, can be
conserved at negative cost. The McKinsey & Co. (2009) analysis quoted in our introduction
suggests that 23 percent of U.S. non-transportation energy demand can be eliminated at negative
cost. These engineering studies are a large part of the basis for the claims about the Energy
Efficiency Gap.
       However, it is difficult to take at face value the quantitative conclusions of the
engineering analyses as they suffer from the empirical problems introduced in the previous
section. First, engineering costs typically incorporate only upfront capital costs and omit
opportunity costs or other unobserved factors (ξ in the model presented earlier). For example,
Anderson and Newell (2004) analyze energy audits that the U.S. Department of Energy provides
for free to small- and medium-sized enterprises. They find that nearly half of investments that
engineering assessments showed would have short payback periods were not adopted due to
unaccounted physical costs, risks, or opportunity costs, such as “lack of staff for
analysis/implementation,” “risk of inconvenience to personnel,” or “suspected risk of problem
with equipment.”
       Second, the engineering estimates of energy saved may be faulty. For example, in the
context of home energy weatherization, Dubin, Miedema, and Chandran (1986), Nadel and
Keating (1991), and others have documented that engineering estimates of energy savings can
overstate true field returns, sometimes by a large amount. Even in the two decades since these
studies, some engineering simulation models have still not been fully calibrated to approximate
actual returns (Blasnik, 2010).


Empirical Estimates of Returns on Investment



                                               13
        Another approach to measuring the Energy Efficiency Gap is to use empirical energy use
data to estimate the average returns for the set of consumers that adopt an energy efficient
technology. Most of the evidence in this category analyzes the costs and benefits of the
Weatherization Assistance Program, which is intended to be both a transfer to low-income
homeowners and an energy efficiency investment with positive net returns. The typical empirical
analysis compares natural gas billing data in the first year after the weatherization work was
done to the year before, using either a statistical correction for weather differences or a non-
randomly selected control group of low-income households. Schweitzer (2005) analyzes 38
separate empirical evaluations of weatherization projects from 19 states from between 1993 and
2005, reweighting them to reflect the observable characteristics of the national Weatherization
Assistance Program. The average weatherization job costs $2,600 and reduces natural gas use by
20 to 25 percent, or about $260 per year.
        As evidence on the Energy Efficiency Gap, such analyses again suffer from the problems
introduced in the previous section. First, there are potentially substantial unobserved costs and
benefits (the ξ in our model) from weatherization. Weatherization takes time, and for most
people it is not highly enjoyable: the process requires one or sometimes two home energy audits,
a contractor appointment to carry out the work, and sometimes additional follow-up visits and
paperwork. Some benefits are also difficult to quantify: for example, weatherization typically
makes homes more comfortable and less drafty. Furthermore, weatherization reduces the cost of
energy services such as warmer indoor temperatures on a cold winter day, and this cost reduction
causes people to increase their utilization of these services. (In the energy literature, this is called
the “rebound effect.”) Measuring the change in energy use from weatherization without
accounting for the utility gain from an increase in utilization of energy services understates the
welfare benefits.
        Second, the net present value of energy cost reductions is unknown. The empirical
estimates are based on short-term analyses, and the persistence of returns over many years is
rarely assessed.5 If the $260 annual savings from Schweitzer (2005) are assumed to have a

5
 Sumi and Coates (1989) find 14 percent cumulative degradation of energy savings for
Weatherization Assistance Program participants in Seattle after the first six years. Additional
evidence using more recent data would be valuable, as would information on whether the rate of
depreciation changes over time.


                                                  14
lifetime of 10 years or less, then weatherization does not pay back the $2,600 cost at any positive
discount rate. At lifetimes of 15 or 20 years, the discount rate that equates future discounted
benefits with current costs (the internal rate of return) is 5.6 or 7.8 percent, respectively.
Furthermore, all of the estimates are non-experimental, and households that weatherize may also
engage in other unobserved activities that affect energy use. This may be a larger concern with
non-low-income weatherization programs, in which homeowners might be more likely to carry
out renovations and energy efficiency work at the same time.
       Third, the effects of weatherization on energy use are heterogeneous. For example,
Metcalf and Hassett (1999) estimate the distribution of returns to attic insulation in the U.S.
population using a weather-adjusted difference estimator with nationally representative panel
data. The estimated median and mean returns on investment are on the order of 10 percent, and
one-quarter of households had returns greater than 13.5 percent. This heterogeneity means that
while estimates of average returns for adopters could in principle be meaningful in evaluating the
costs and benefits of an existing program, a simple selection model like the one above would
imply that the net returns for adopters overstate the net returns for non-adopters. On net, the
available evidence seems inconsistent with significant investment inefficiencies in the context of
weatherization.


Cost Effectiveness of Energy Conservation Programs
       Many electric utilities run “demand-side management” programs, which largely consist
of subsidies to households and firms to purchase energy efficient appliances, air conditioning and
heating systems, and other equipment. If these programs can reduce energy use at less than the
cost of energy, the argument goes, then there were investment inefficiencies, and the programs
should be viewed as welfare-enhancing.
       The simplest example of this approach is to divide the annual spending on these programs
by utilities’ estimates of electricity savings, as in Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer (2006). These
estimated savings are typically from engineering estimates of electricity savings or non-
experimental comparisons of energy use between program participants and non-participants. For
2009, U.S. electric utilities reported $2.255 billion in direct costs and 76.9 terawatt-hours of
savings for demand-side management programs, according to the 2009 Electric Power Annual
(EIA 2010, tables 9.6 and 9.7). Dividing these two figures gives a cost effectiveness of 2.9 cents


                                                15
per kilowatt-hour (kWh). Friedrich, Eldridge, York, Witte, and Kushler (2009) also use utilities’
estimates of electricity savings to calculate a cost effectiveness of 2.5 cents per kilowatt-hour.
       Analyses such as these suffer from the same problems introduced in the previous section.
First, the reported “costs” are typically costs to the utility, not including costs incurred by
program participants, which may be almost as large (Nadel and Geller, 1996; Joskow and
Marron, 1992; Eto, Kito, Shown, and Sonnenblick 1995; Friedrich, Eldridge, York, Witte, and
Kushler 2009). Second, energy savings are estimated using engineering analyses or observational
data, and it is difficult to establish a credible counterfactual level of energy use in the absence of
the program. The most rigorous solution is to use randomized controlled experiments to evaluate
demand-side management programs. The feasibility of this approach is demonstrated by recent
experimental evaluations of programs that send letters that compare a household’s energy use to
that of their neighbors and provide energy conservation tips (Allcott 2011b; Ayres, Raseman,
and Shih 2009).
       The most advanced estimate in this literature is by Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer
(2011), whose point estimates indicate that between 1992 and 2006, demand-side management
conserved electricity at a program cost of 5.0 and 6.1 cents per kilowatt-hour, assuming discount
rates of 5 and 7 percent, respectively.6 If one further assumes, based on the analyses in the
paragraph above, that additional costs to consumers might be 70 percent of program costs, one
concludes that demand-side management programs have reduced energy use at an average cost
of 5.0 x (1 + .70) = 8.5 cents/kWh or 6.1 x (1 + .70) = 10.4 cents/kWh, again using 5 or 7 percent
discount rates, respectively. Comparing the investment cost per kWh conserved to the national
average electricity price of 9.1 cents/kWh, the investments that occurred because of demand-side
management programs were barely profitable at a discount rate of 5 percent, and barely
unprofitable at a discount rate of 7 percent.7 Arimura et al. (2011) estimate that these programs
reduced 1–2 percent of national electricity demand. Given that only a small percent of total
6
  Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer (2011) also calculate cost effectiveness of 3.0 and 4.1 cents
per kilowatt-hour using discount rates of zero percent and three percent, respectively. The
authors focus on their results for a five percent discount rate.
7
  The text offers a back-of-the-envelope version of the more sophisticated calculation that should
be done. One implicit assumption is that there are no consumers that are inframarginal to the
demand-side management subsidies. If there are inframarginal consumers, then some of the
program costs were in fact transfers, and the incremental investment costs induced by the
demand-side management programs were smaller.


                                                 16
electricity demand was reduced at nearly zero excess profits, this evidence on demand-side
management energy conservation programs does not suggest a pervasive Energy Efficiency Gap.


Tradeoffs between Durable Goods
       The final way of determining whether there are profitable returns to energy efficiency
investments involves estimating consumer demand for household appliances or automobiles.
This approach typically uses a discrete choice model to estimate utility function coefficients on
purchase price and on the present discounted value of energy costs. The estimated coefficient on
energy cost should be the same as the estimated coefficient on price: that is, consumers should be
indifferent between spending a dollar in present value on energy and a dollar in present value on
purchase price. If the analyst’s assumptions about discount rates, product utilization, and energy
prices are correct, the ratio of these two coefficients is the γ in our model above.
       In a seminal paper, Hausman (1979) estimated a discrete choice model using 65
observations of consumer choices between air conditioner models, which vary in upfront cost
and energy efficiency rating. Hausman framed his analysis as an estimate of an “implied
discount rate” that rationalizes the demand system by assuming γ = 1. Hausman’s paper, along
with Dubin and McFadden’s (1984) analysis of households’ choices between heating systems,
was the state of the art in this literature for 30 years. Both papers find real implied discount rates
of 15 to 25 percent, which is higher than returns on stock market investments but not much
different from real credit card interest rates, which were around 18 percent.
       However, such analyses suffer from the problems introduced in the previous section.
First, unobserved product attributes (which are analogous to ξ in our formal model) complicate
the cross-sectional econometric approach. The coefficient on the present discounted value of
energy costs is biased if energy efficient products have better or worse unobserved
characteristics. For example, automobile prices actually decrease in fuel economy, as the more
energy efficient vehicles are smaller and often have fewer luxury amenities. Furthermore,
product prices will often be correlated with unobserved attributes, giving the usual simultaneity
bias in estimating price elasticity. As in Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), this issue can
potentially be addressed by using instrumental variables, but the instruments available may be
dissatisfying.



                                                  17
       Working papers by Allcott and Wozny (2011), Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2012),
and Sallee, West, and Fan (2011) use an alternative approach to address the problem of
unobserved attributes. These papers take a panel of used durable goods, condition on product
fixed effects, and test how the relative prices of more energy efficient vs. less efficient products
change as energy price expectations vary over time. As an intuitive example of the identification
strategy, notice that as expected gasoline prices rise, we should expect to see the market price of
a three-year-old used Honda Civic increase relative to the price of a three-year-old Honda
Accord, because the Civic is more energy efficient than the Accord. If market prices are not very
responsive, this approach suggests that γ is small.
       Relative to the other categories of evidence on the Energy Efficiency Gap, this approach
is especially appealing because the fixed effects eliminate unobserved costs by construction.
However, these analyses still suffer from the second problem, which is that they still require
assumptions about the relevant discount rate, vehicle-miles traveled, and consumers’
expectations of future gasoline prices (r, m, and p in our model above), and other factors. Allcott
and Wozny’s (2011) results tend to suggest that γ < 1, while Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer’s
(2012) results tend not to support the hypothesis that γ < 1. The two analyses do agree that even
if there is some investment inefficiency, the welfare losses would be relatively small. Allcott and
Wozny show how to use discrete choice data to calculate the private welfare loss (equivalent to
triangle abf in Figure 3 above). Their preferred estimate of γ suggests that investment
inefficiencies in the auto market cause a welfare loss of about $1 billion per year and an increase
in gasoline consumption of about 5 percent. Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer’s results tend not to
suggest that there are investment inefficiencies, implying that there would be zero welfare losses.
In either case, the welfare loss and gasoline consumption increase appear to be small relative to
the total market size.



Investment Inefficiencies That Could Cause an Energy Efficiency Gap

       In the previous section, we examined evidence on whether consumers and firms fail to
exploit profitable energy efficiency investments. In this section, we reverse the perspective by
specifying particular investment inefficiencies that might cause underinvestment in energy
efficiency and assessing the empirical evidence on their magnitudes.

                                                 18
Imperfect Information
       Imperfect information is perhaps the most important form of investment inefficiency that
could cause an Energy Efficiency Gap. Two basic models of imperfect information are most
relevant. In one model, consumers and firms may be unaware of potential investments in energy
efficiency. For example, homeowners may not know how poorly insulated their home is and may
not be aware of the opportunity to weatherize. Similarly, factory managers may not know about a
new type of machine that could reduce their energy costs.
       An alternative model resembles Akerlof’s (1970) “lemons” model. Buyers know that
different products, such as apartments, commercial buildings, or factory equipment, have
different levels of energy efficiency, but these differences are costly to observe. Thus, they are
not willing to pay more for goods that are in fact more energy efficient. For example, a renter
evaluating a set of different apartments may be aware that there is a distribution of wall
insulation quality and thus of resulting heating costs, but the renter will not be willing to pay
more for a well-insulated apartment without taking the time to inspect the insulation.
       There are three approaches to assessing the magnitude of imperfect information in the
context of energy efficiency. The first approach is to test for market equilibria consistent with
imperfect information. Several recent projects used this approach in the context of renter-
occupied vs. owner-occupied housing units. The theory is that because imperfectly informed
renters will not be willing to pay more for energy efficient apartments, landlords have reduced
incentive to invest in energy efficiency. Homeowners, on the other hand, do capture the benefits
of improved energy efficiency, at least until they sell the property. Such a “landlord–tenant”
agency problem implies that rental properties are less energy efficient than would be socially
optimal.
       As an example of this approach, Davis (2010) studies the market penetration of
refrigerators, dishwashers, light bulbs, room air conditioners, and clothes washers that have
earned the U.S. government’s “Energy Star” designation, meaning that they are relatively energy
efficient. Conditional on observable characteristics, renters are 1 to 10 percentage points less
likely to report having Energy Star appliances. In percentage terms, these differences are large:
they represent between 5.6 and 68 percent of the overall average Energy Star saturation rate. But
because non-renters are themselves not very likely to own Energy Star appliances and because


                                                19
appliances make up only one-quarter of residential energy use, the differences in appliance
ownership do not add up to a large difference in energy use: the author calculates that if renters
had the same energy efficient appliance ownership rates as owner-occupied homes, total energy
bills in rental homes would be 0.5 percent lower.
        Heating and cooling represent close to one-half of residential energy use, meaning that
insulation is a more important investment that could be subject to the landlord–tenant agency
problem. Gillingham, Harding, and Rapson (2012) analyze data from California and show that
when the resident pays for heating and cooling, owner-occupied dwellings are 13 to 20 percent
more likely to have insulation than rentals, conditional on other observable characteristics of the
property, occupant, and neighborhood. As in the Davis (2010) analysis, large percent differences
do not translate into large increases in energy use: under the optimistic assumption that insulation
reduces total energy demand by 10 percent, we can see that rental properties would use 1.3 to 2.0
percent less energy if insulated at the same level as owner-occupied properties.
        Additional research in this area would be important to address problems of both internal
and external validity. As both Davis (2010) and Gillingham, Harding, and Rapson (2012) note,
conditional differences in appliance ownership between owners and renters are not ironclad
causal evidence of a market failure, because preferences could vary in unobservable ways.
Furthermore, even if estimates from California are internally valid, differences in policies and
housing stock make it difficult to generalize nationwide. For example, California was a relatively
early adopter of building codes, which means that more buildings in the state may now be
insulated, and thus the difference between rental and owner-occupied properties may be smaller
than in other states.
        If these estimates are assumed to be causal and generalizable, how big is the investment
inefficiency from the landlord–tenant agency problem? The magnitude is the number of affected
households times the extent of the reduced energy efficiency. Of U.S. households, 29 percent are
rental units where the renter pays energy bills (Murtishaw and Sathaye, 2006). Multiplying this
figure by several percent of total energy demand, to approximate the magnitude of the
inefficiencies estimated above, implies that the landlord–tenant information problem might
increase total residential energy use on the order of 1 percent. Thus, while the empirical evidence




                                                20
points to some inefficiency, it explains only a very small fraction of the purported Energy
Efficiency Gap.8
       An additional example of testing for imperfect information using equilibrium outcomes is
to examine whether information disclosure increases the elasticity of energy-saving technical
change with respect to energy prices. The idea is that consumers who are better informed about
energy use will be more responsive to energy price changes when choosing between models of
an energy-using durable. Therefore, firms with better-informed consumers will be more likely to
offer more energy efficient models as energy prices rise. Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) show
that the mean energy efficiency of room air conditioners and water heaters was more responsive
to energy prices after 1981 and 1977, respectively, the years when the federal government
introduced energy efficiency labeling requirements for the two goods. While other factors might
also have changed in these years, this finding suggests that the labeling requirements may have
reduced the extent of imperfect information. However, this approach is not informative about the
magnitude of any remaining investment inefficiency.
       A second approach that can allow a direct assessment of the magnitude of imperfect
information is to observe information sets through surveys. Turrentine and Kurani (2007) and
Larrick and Soll (2008) use structured interviews and laboratory studies to show that consumers
are not very good at calculating the gasoline costs for different automobiles. The 2010 Vehicle
Ownership and Alternatives Survey (Allcott, 2011a, 2012) adds nationally representative
evidence on how accurately consumers perceive the financial value of energy efficiency. The
data suggest that consumers are indeed imperfectly informed: over half of Americans
misestimate the gasoline cost differences between the vehicle they own and their “second choice
vehicle” by more than 40 percent. However, the errors run in both directions. On average,
consumers appear to either correctly estimate or slightly underestimate the energy cost savings
from higher-fuel economy vehicles.
       A third approach to assessing the magnitude of imperfect information is to test for the
effects of information disclosure on purchase decisions. This approach has the benefit of being
8
 A related agency problem is that some landlords pay the utilities, while tenants set the
utilization levels for appliances and heating and cooling equipment. This problem is a small, as
only 4 percent of U.S. households are rentals with utilities included and demand for energy
services is relatively inelastic. Levinson and Niemann (2004) estimate that energy costs are 1 to
1.7 percent higher when utilities are included in rent.


                                                21
based on observed choices in the marketplace, instead of beliefs stated on a survey. We are not
aware of any large-scale randomized evaluations of energy efficiency information disclosure.


Inattention
       Interventions that resemble information disclosure might change the buying patterns of
consumers who are already well-informed. For example, Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) find
that despite the fact that consumers are well-informed about sales taxes, posting information
about sales tax amounts in a supermarket changes buying patterns. This finding suggests the
existence of another type of investment inefficiency, which behavioral economists call
inattention.
       The psychology of inattention starts by recognizing that choice problems have many
different facets, and some of these facets are less salient at the time of choice even if they are
potentially important to the utility that will later be experienced. When buying printers, for
example, we might focus on the purchase price and fail to consider that replacement ink
cartridges make up the bulk of the total cost. Inattentive consumers are misoptimizing: they fail
to recognize opportunities to save money by choosing products with lower ancillary costs.
Research in a variety of other non-energy settings is suggestive of inattention (Hossein and
Morgan 2006; Barber, Odean, and Zheng 2005; and Gabaix and Laibson 2006). It seems possible
that some consumers might be inattentive to energy efficiency when purchasing energy-using
durable goods.



Policy Implications

       The available evidence on the size of an Energy Efficiency Gap is situation-specific,
mixed, and often inconclusive. However, policymakers must make policy even in the absence of
ironclad evidence.
       If the goal is to achieve efficient economic outcomes, then market failures should be
addressed as directly as possible. In response to energy use externalities, a Pigouvian tax gives
the first-best outcome. If agents are imperfectly informed and the government has an inexpensive
information disclosure technology, an information disclosure approach should be used.
Formulating policy becomes more challenging if the first-best solutions are not possible—when

                                               22
information disclosure is not fully effective, or when a Pigouvian tax is not politically feasible
because of aversion to new taxes or to policies that explicitly regulate greenhouse gases. In this
section, we examine the effects of energy efficiency policies, considered as a second-best
alternative.


Energy Efficiency Subsidies and Standards as a Second-Best Approach to Pollution
Abatement
        Until now, we have set aside the uninternalized energy use externalities and focused on
investment inefficiencies. We now examine the converse: imagine a setting where no investment
inefficiencies exist, but energy is priced below social cost (in our model, φ > 0). If Pigouvian
taxes or cap-and-trade programs are politically infeasible, would energy efficiency subsidies and
standards be a relatively promising approach to pollution abatement?
        When no investment inefficiencies exist, energy efficiency policies such as subsidies for
energy efficient durable goods and minimum energy efficiency standards would have larger
welfare costs per unit of pollution abated compared to the first-best Pigouvian tax for several
reasons. First, subsidies and standards change relative prices for all consumers equally, while the
Pigouvian tax provides a larger incentive for consumers with higher utilization to choose energy
efficient capital stock. Second, the first-best policy must impose the right price on the utilization
decision, which only the Pigouvian tax does. Third, it is difficult to calibrate the stringency of an
energy efficiency standard or subsidy precisely, meaning that it will likely generate more or less
carbon abatement than a Pigouvian tax set at the level of marginal damages. Energy efficiency
policies in different sectors can also be miscalibrated against each other, causing inefficiency due
to unequal marginal costs of abatement.
        Of course, if these three theoretical factors were small in reality, then energy efficiency
policies might be a reasonable second-best substitute for Pigouvian taxes. Several analyses have
simulated the relative cost effectiveness of particular energy efficiency policies relative to
Pigouvian taxes. Jacobsen (2010), for example, simulates automobile supply and demand and
shows that Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards have a welfare cost of $222 per
metric ton of carbon dioxide abated, compared to $92 per ton for a gas tax that generates the
same amount of abatement. Krupnick, Parry, Walls, Knowles, and Hayes (2010) come to a
similar qualitative conclusion. They compare the cap-and-trade provisions of the proposed


                                                 23
Waxman–Markey climate change legislation to the legislation’s energy efficiency provisions,
which include standards for buildings, lighting, and appliances. The cap-and-trade, or an
equivalent carbon tax, abates carbon dioxide at an upfront welfare cost of $12 per ton. Under the
assumption that there are no investment inefficiencies, the energy efficiency standards are five
times more costly, or $60 per ton. This significantly exceeds the United States government’s
estimated social cost of carbon dioxide emissions, which is about $21 (Greenstone, Kopits, and
Wolverton 2011).9
       These results forcefully argue that Pigouvian taxes or cap-and-trade programs are the
most efficient way to address energy use externalities. Energy efficiency subsidies, CAFE
standards, and other energy efficiency policies can also reduce energy use externalities, but in
any settings where there are no investment inefficiencies, such policies will often impose a
significantly larger cost on the economy per unit of pollution reduction.


Energy Efficiency Subsidies and Standards as a Second-Best Approach to Correcting
Investment Inefficiencies
       The United States has long required energy-use information disclosure: for more than 30
years, retailers have been required to display fuel economy ratings for new vehicles and energy
cost information for home appliances. However, consumers may not notice, understand, or pay
attention to this information. If information disclosure or other direct solutions to market failures
are not fully effective, how useful are energy efficiency subsidies and standards as a second-best
approach to addressing investment inefficiencies?
       Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky (2011) analyze this question when consumers are
inattentive to energy costs. As we discussed earlier, their model shows that energy efficiency
subsidies can increase welfare and, when consumers are sufficiently homogeneous, the first-best
can be obtained. The intuition is straightforward: if consumers and firms underinvest in energy
efficiency, subsidizing or mandating them to invest more can increase welfare. However, any
corrective policies must be properly calibrated. For example, the vast majority of benefits in the

9
 As we will argue in the next section, energy efficiency policies can increase welfare when there
are investment inefficiencies. Krupnick, Parry, Walls, Knowles, and Hayes (2010) quantify this,
showing that under an assumed level of investment inefficiencies, energy efficiency standards
abate carbon at a cost of $7 per ton.


                                                 24
U.S. government’s cost–benefit analysis of Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards derive
from the assumption that the regulation corrects consumers’ inattention to energy efficiency
when buying autos.10 However, Allcott (2012), Allcott and Wozny (2011), Fischer, Harrington,
and Parry (2007), and Heutel (2011) use different models to show that the current and proposed
CAFE standards are much more stringent than can be justified by even worst-case estimates of
investment inefficiencies.11 Of course, if there are zero investment inefficiencies, then there are
zero welfare benefits through this channel.
       Heterogeneity in the investment inefficiency γ weakens the policy argument for
subsidizing energy efficient goods, as Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky (2011) also show. In
Figure 3 presented earlier, imagine that some consumers are on demand curve D’ with γ = 1,
while others are on demand curve D with γ < 1. Now, a subsidy moves the high-γ agents to point
z, where they consume more energy efficiency than they would in the social optimum. This
offsets the welfare gains from improving the decisions of the low-γ consumers. A key
implication for policy analysis is that we must understand not just how much a policy increases
sales of energy efficient goods, but who are the people induced to buy these goods. For example,
even in a setting where the average consumer has γ < 1, energy efficiency subsidies might
decrease total welfare if they are largely taken up by environmentalists and homeowners, who
are more likely to be well-informed about energy efficiency and are not subject to a “landlord–
tenant” agency problem.
       This discussion highlights that energy efficiency policies are more likely to increase
welfare if they target agents subject to the largest investment inefficiencies. Some existing
policies do appear well-targeted. For example, households that use more energy than other

10
   For more background, see the federal government’s Regulatory Impact Analysis of the 2012–
2016 CAFE standards (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2010) or the discussion
in Allcott and Wozny (2011).
11
   Heutel calibrates the extent to which investment inefficiencies that cause consumers to
undervalue gasoline costs by 30 percent decrease the average fuel economy of vehicles sold,
relative to the optimum. An optimal policy response would therefore increase fuel economy by a
corresponding amount. In Table 4, comparing column (1) to column (2) shows the effect of
investment inefficiencies: 0.0439 gallons per mile (GPM) - 0.0426 GPM = 0.0013 gallons per
mile. Thus, an optimal policy response decreases GPM by 0.0013 gallons per mile, or
equivalently increases fuel economy by slightly more than 0.5 MPG. In Heutel’s model, CAFE
standards would not be justified by his assumed level of investment inefficiency, given that they
require fuel economy to increase by much more than 0.5 MPG.


                                                25
comparable households are more likely to have low-cost energy conservation opportunities of
which they are unaware, and many U.S. utilities now target energy conservation information to
these relatively heavy users (Allcott, 2011b; Ayres, Raseman, and Shih, 2009). “Smart meters”
that record hourly consumption, which as described in a companion paper by Paul Joskow in this
symposium are increasingly being deployed across the United States, also provide information
useful for targeting. For example, utilities can now identify households that use more energy on
afternoon hours of particularly hot days, suggesting that they have energy inefficient air
conditioners, and send them information on new energy efficient models.
       Aside from heterogeneity in the investment inefficiency, consumers and firms also have
substantial heterogeneity in other factors that affect demand for energy and for energy efficient
capital stock. For example, the mild climate of Los Angeles compared to the more extreme
weather of Chicago means that there is substantial variation in utilization of air conditioners and
heating equipment, and residential retail electricity prices vary across the country from 4 to 30
cents per kilowatt-hour. As a result, national-level minimum efficiency standards for home
appliances seem likely to decrease welfare for subsets of consumers with low prices and
utilization and could increase welfare for high-price and/or -utilization consumers with
investment inefficiencies. Ideally, standards could vary geographically to take account of this,
targeting consumers that may have the most to gain. For example, building codes in states with
extreme weather often require more insulation than building codes in mild climates. On the other
hand, home appliance standards are set at the national level, and appliance manufacturers and
retailers operate nationwide. The benefits of heterogeneous standards must be weighed against
the costs of regulatory complexity.



Conclusion


       Since the energy crises of the 1970s, many have made the “win-win” argument for
energy efficiency policy: subsidies and standards can both address investment inefficiencies in
the purchase of energy-using durable goods and reduce externalities from energy use. However,
a reliance on observational studies of variable credibility and the possibility of unobserved costs
and benefits of energy efficiency make it difficult to assess the magnitude of the Energy


                                                26
Efficiency Gap definitively. Nevertheless, the available evidence from empirical analyses of
weatherization, demand-side management programs, automobile and appliance markets, the
“landlord–tenant” agency problem, and information elicitation suggests that while investment
inefficiencies do appear in various settings, the actual magnitude of the Energy Efficiency Gap is
small relative to the assessments from engineering analyses.
       Furthermore, it appears likely that there is substantial heterogeneity in investment
inefficiencies across the population. Thus, targeted policies have the potential to generate larger
welfare gains than general subsidies or mandates. Given this heterogeneity, policy analyses need
to do more than assess how much a policy affects energy efficiency: they must also identify what
types of consumers are induced to be more energy efficient.
       We believe that this area is ripe for rigorous empirical research. Future research should
utilize randomized controlled trials and quasi-experimental techniques to estimate the impacts of
energy efficiency programs on heterogeneous consumer types and to address the challenges
posed by unobserved costs and benefits. The economic insights from such research are
potentially generalizable, and the policy implications are significant.




                                                 27
References
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3): 488–500.

Allcott, Hunt. 2011a. “Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs.” American
Economic Review 101 (3): 98–104.

Allcott, Hunt. 2011b. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Economics
95 (9–10): 1082–95.

Allcott, Hunt. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and
Calibrations from the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
forthcoming. Available at: https://files.nyu.edu/ha32/public/research.html

Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2011. “Externalities,
Internalities, and the Targeting of Energy Policy.” Working Paper, New York University
(December).Available at: https://files.nyu.edu/ha32/public/research.html.

Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2011. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy
Paradox.” Working Paper, MIT (July). https://files.nyu.edu/ha32/public/research.html.

American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy (ACEEE). 1989. “The Potential for
Electricity Conservation in New York State.” Prepared for the New York State Energy RBD
Authority, Research Report U891, September.

Anderson, Soren T., and Richard G. Newell. 2004. “Information Programs for Technology
Adoption: The Case of Energy-Efficiency Audits.” Resource and Energy Economics 26 (1): 27–
50.

Arimura, Toshi, Shanjun Li, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2011. “Cost-Effectiveness
of Electricity Energy Efficiency Programs.” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 09-48-
REV, April.

Auffhammer, Maximillian, Carl Blumstein, and Meredith Fowlie. 2008. “Demand-Side
Management and Energy Efficiency Revisited.” Energy Journal 29 (3): 91–104.

Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2009. “Evidence from Two Large Field
Experiments that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage.” NBER
Working Paper 15386.

Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng. 2005. “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects
of Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows.” Journal of Business 78 (6): 2095–2120.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium.” Econometrica 63 (4): 841–90.

                                             28
Blasnik, Michael. 2010. “Energy Models vs. Reality.” Presentation. Southface Lecture Series.
January 26.

Blumstein, Carl, and Steven E. Stoft. 1995. “Technical Efficiency, Production Functions and
Conservation Supply Curves.” Energy Policy 23 (9): 765–68.

Bollinger, Bryan, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen. 2011. “Calorie Posting in Chain
Restaurants.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (1): 91–128.

Bovenberg, Lans, and Lawrence Goulder. 1996. “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the
Presence of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses.” American Economic Review 86 (4):
985–1000.

Brown, Marilyn A., Mark D. Levine, Joseph P. Romm, Arthur H. Rosenfeld, and Jonathan
G. Koomey. 1998. “Engineering–Economic Studies of Energy Technologies to Reduce
Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Opportunities and Challenges.” Annual Review of Energy and the
Environment 23, 287–385.

Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2012. “Are Consumers
Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review,
forthcoming.         Available          at          Meghan          Busse’s       website:
http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/faculty/directory/busse_meghan.aspx#research.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145–77.

Davis, Lucas. 2008. “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evidence
from a Field Trial.” RAND Journal of Economics 39 (2): 530–46.

Davis, Lucas W. 2010. “Evaluating the Slow Adoption of Energy Efficient Investments: Are
Renters Less Likely to Have Energy Efficient Appliances?” Energy Institute at Haas Working
Paper 205, June.

Davis, Lucas, and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural Gas?
An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics 41 (4): 791–810.

DeCanio, Stephen, and William Watkins. 1998. “Investments in Energy Efficiency: Do the
Characteristics of Firms Matter?” Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (1): 95–107.

Dixit, Avinash, and Robert Pindyck. 1994. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Dubin, Jeffrey, and Daniel McFadden. 1984. “An Econometric Analysis of Residential
Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption.” Econometrica, 52 (2): 345–62.



                                             29
Dubin, Jeffrey, Allen Miedema, and Ram Chandran. 1986. “Price Effects of Energy-Efficient
Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating and Cooling.” RAND Journal of
Economics, 17 (3): 310–25.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use
Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review 101(6):
2350–90.

Eto, Joseph, Suzie Kito, Leslie Shown, and Richard Sonnenblick. 1995. “Where Did the
Money Go? The Cost and Performance of the Largest Commercial Sector DSM Programs.”
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Working Paper No. LBL-38201.

Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry. 2007. “Do Market Failures Justify
Tightening Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards?” Energy Journal 28 (4): 1–30.

Foster, Andrew, and Mark Rosenzweig. 2010. “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption.”
Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 984.

Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2011. “An Experimental
Evaluation of the Weatherization Assistance Program.” Work in Progress.

Friedrich, Katherine, Maggie Eldridge, Dan York, Patti Witte, and Marty Kushler. 2009.
"Saving Energy Cost-Effectively: A National Review of the Cost of Energy Saved through
Utility-Sector Energy Efficiency Programs." ACEEE Report No. U092, September.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2):
505–540.

Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew Harding, and David Rapson. 2012. “Split Incentives and
Household Energy Consumption.” Energy Journal 33 (2): 37–62

Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2006. “Energy Efficiency
Policies: A Retrospective Examination.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 31:
161–92.

Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2009. “Energy Efficiency
Economics and Policy.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 1: 597–620.

Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Maryann Wolverton. 2011. "Estimating the
Social Cost of Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation."
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 11-04, March.

Goldstein David, R. Mowris, B. Davis, and K. Dolan. 1990. Initiating Least-Cost Planning in
California: Preliminary Methodology and Analysis, Natural Resources Defense Council and the


                                            30
Sierra Club, prepared for the California Energy Commission Docket No. 88-ER-8, Revised May
10.

Hassett, Kevin, and Gilbert Metcalf. 1993. “Energy Conservation Investment: Do Consumers
Discount the Future Correctly?” Energy Policy, 21 (6): 710–16.

Hausman, Jerry. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-
Using Durables.” Bell Journal of Economics, 10 (1): 33–54.

Hausman, Jerry, and Paul Joskow. 1982. “Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Appliance
Efficiency Standards.” American Economic Review 72 (2): 220–25.

Heutel, Garth. 2011. “Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods
under Time Inconsistency.” NBER Working Paper 17083.

Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan. 2006. ". . . Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue
(Non)Equivalence in Field Experiments on eBay." Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6
(2): Article 3.

Jacobsen, Mark. 2010. “Evaluating U.S. Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Producer
and                   Household                Heterogeneity.”              September.
http://econ.ucsd.edu/~m3jacobs/Jacobsen_CAFE.pdf.

Jaffe, Adam, and Robert Stavins. 1994. “The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of
Conservation Technology.” Resource and Energy Economics, 16(2): 91–122.

Joskow, Paul, and Donald Marron. 1992. “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from
Utility Conservation Programs.” Energy Journal 13 (4): 41–74.

Koomey, Jonathan G., Celina Atkinson, Alan Meier, James E. McMahon, Stan Boghosian,
Barbara Atkinson, Isaac Turiel, Mark D. Levine, Bruce Nordman, and Peter Chan. 1991.
“The Potential for Electricity Efficiency Improvements in the U.S. Residential Sector.” LBL-
30477, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.

Krupnick, Alan, Ian Parry, Margaret Walls, Tony Knowles, and Kristin Hayes. 2010.
Toward a New National Energy Policy: Assessing the Options. Resources for the Future Report ,
November.          http://www.energypolicyoptions.org/wp-content/uploads/reports/RFF-Rpt-
NEPI_Tech_Manual_Final.pdf.

Larrick, Richard, and Jack Soll. 2008. “The MPG Illusion.” Science 320 (5883): 1593–94.

Loughran, David, and Jonathan Kulick. 2004. “Demand-Side Management and Energy
Efficiency in the United States.” Energy Journal 25 (1): 19–43.

Levinson, Arik, and Scott Niemann. 2004. “Energy Use by Apartment Tenants When
Landlords Pay for Utilities.” Resource and Energy Economics 26 (1): 51–75.

                                             31
McKinsey & Co. 2009. “Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy.”
http://www.mckinsey.com/clientservice/electricpowernaturalgas/downloads/US_energy_efficien
cy_full_report.pdf.

Meier, Alan, and J. Whittier. 1983. “Consumer Discount Rates Implied by Purchases of
Energy-Efficient Refrigerators.” Energy 8 (12): 957.

Meier Alan, Janice Wright, and Arthur H. Rosenfeld. 1983. Supplying Energy through
Greater Efficiency: The Potential for Conservation in California's Residential Sector. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.

Metcalf, Gilbert, and Kevin Hassett. 1999. “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 81 (3): 516–28.

Meyers, Stephen, James McMahon, and Michael McNeil. 2005. “Realized and Prospective
Impacts of U.S. Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential Appliances: 2004 Update.”
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Working Paper LBNL-56417.

Murtishaw, Scott, and Jayant Sathaye. 2006. “Quantifying the Effect of the Principal–Agent
Problem on US Residential Energy Use.” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Working
Paper Number 59773 Rev (August).

Nadel, Steven, and Howard Gelle. 1996. “Utility DSM: What Have We Learned? Where Are
We Going?” Energy Policy 24 (4): 289–302.

Nadel, Steven, and Kenneth Keating. 1991. “Engineering Estimates vs. Impact Evaluation
Results: How Do They Compare and Why?” Research Report U915, American Council for an
Energy-Efficient Economy. Available at: http://www.aceee.org/research-report/u915

National Academy of Sciences. 1992. Policy Implications of Greenhouse Warming: Mitigation,
Adaptation, and the Science Base. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), Office of Regulatory Analysis
and Evaluation. 2010. Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY 2012–MY 2016 Passenger
Cars and Light Trucks. Final Regulatory Impact Analysis, March. National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.

Newell, Richard, Adam Jaffe, and Robert Stavins. 1999. “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy-Saving Technological Change.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 941–75.

Parry, Ian, David Evans, and Wallace Oates. 2010. “Are Energy Efficiency Standards
Justified?” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 10-59, November.




                                              32
Rosenfeld, Arthur, Celina Atkinson, Jonathan Koomey, Alan Meier, Robert J. Mowris, and
Lynn Price. 1993. “Conserved Energy Supply Curves for U.S. Buildings.” Contemporary Policy
Issues, 11 (1): 45–68.

Sallee, James. 2010. “The Taxation of Fuel Economy.” NBER Working Paper 16466.

Sallee, James. 2011. “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency.” Work in progress, University
of Chicago (June).

Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan. 2011. “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel
Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations.” Work in Progress,
Macalester College (January).

Schweitzer, Martin. 2005. “Estimating the National Effects of the U.S. Department of Energy’s
Weatherization Assistance Program with State-Level Data: A Metaevaluation Using Studies
from 1993 to 2005.” Prepared for U.S. Department of Energy. Working Paper ORNL/CON-493,
September.

Stoft, Steven. 1995. “The Economics of Conserved-Energy “Supply” Curves.” Program on
Workable Energy Regulation (POWER) Working Paper 028, April.

Sumi, David, and Brian Coates. 1989. “Persistence of Energy Savings in Seattle City Light's
Residential Weatherization Program.” Energy Program Evaluation: Conservation and Resource
Management; Proceedings of the August 23-25, 1989 Conference, pages 311-316. Chicago:
Energy Program Evaluation Conference.

Suri, Tavneet. 2011. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.”
Econometrica, 79 (1): 159–209.

Turrentine, Thomas, and Kenneth Kurani. 2007. “Car Buyers and Fuel Economy?” Energy
Policy 35(2): 1213–23.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2007. “Table 1. Quintiles of Income before Taxes: Average
Annual Expenditures and Characteristics, Consumer Expenditure Survey, 2007.”
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/ce/standard/2007/quintile.txt.

U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2011a. “Weatherization Assistance Program Goals and
Metrics.” Only available on the web at: http://www1.eere.energy.gov/wip/wap_goals.html

U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2011b. “American Recovery & Reinvestment Act.” Only
available on the web at: http://www1.eere.energy.gov/recovery/

U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2005. “Residential Energy Consumption
Survey: Table US12: Total Consumption by Energy End Uses, 2005.”
http://www.eia.gov/emeu/recs/recs2005/c&e/summary/pdf/tableus12.pdf.


                                              33
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2010. 2009 Electric Power Annual.
DOE/EIA-0348(2009).           Only          available  on the      web      at:
http://www.eia.gov/cneaf/electricity/epa/epa_sum.html.

U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2011. Annual Energy Review “Table 2.1a:
Energy    Consumption       Estimates     by     Sector,   Selected Years, 1949–2010.”
http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/pdf/sec2_6.pdf.

U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2011. Residential Energy Consumption
Survey. http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/.

U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 2011. “2009 Estimated Data Line Counts Individual
Income Tax Returns.” http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/09inlinecount.pdf

Yergin, Daniel. 1979. Energy Future: The Report of the Energy Project at the Harvard Business
School. New York: Random House.




                                             34
Table 1: United States Energy Use
By Sector (U.S. EIA 2011)
Commercial                                                                19%
Industrial                                                                30%
Transport                                                                 29%
Residential                                                               22%
         Residential Categories (U.S. EIA 2005)
         Refrigerators                                                     5%
         Air Conditioning                                                  8%
         Water Heating                                                    20%
         Space Heating                                                    41%
         Other Appliances and Lighting                                    26%




Source: Data are from U.S. Energy Information Administration (2005, 2011).




                                               Table 2: Significant US Energy Efficiency Policies
Name                                                Years        Magnitude
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards            1978-        $10 billion annual incremental cost from tightened 2012 rule (NHTSA 2010)
Federal Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit                   2006-2010 $426 million total annual credit (Sallee 2010)
Gas guzzler tax                                     1980-        $200 million annual revenues (Sallee 2010)
Federal appliance energy efficiency standards       1990-        $2.9 billion annual incremental cost (Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer 2006)
Residential and commercial building codes           1978-
Electricity Demand-Side Management programs         1978-        $3.6 billion annual cost (US EIA 2010)
Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP)             1976-        $250 million annual cost (US DOE 2011b)
2009 Economic Stimulus                              2009-2011 $17 billion total (U.S. DOE 2011b)
   Additional WAP funding                                           $5 billion
   Recovery Through Retrofit                                        $454 million
   State Energy Program                                             $3.1 billion
   Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants                  $3.2 billion
   Home Energy Efficiency Tax Credits                               $5.8 billion total credit in 2009 (U.S. IRS 2011)
   Residential and Commercial Building Initiative                   $346 million
   Energy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program                        $300 million
   Autos Cash for Clunkers                                          $5 billion


Source: Authors.




                                                                     35
               Figure 1: Energy Costs for Durable Goods




Source: Authors.




                                               36
                                                         Figure 2: Productivity Trends
                                                             Productivity Trends
                                          8                                                                      140
  2005 $ at PPP) per kg oil equivalent)
  Energy Productivity (GDP (Constant




                                                                                                                       Multi-Factor Prod. (1990=100)
                                          7                                                                      120
                                          6
                                                                                                                 100
                                          5
                                                                                                                 80
                                          4
                                                                                                                 60
                                          3
                                                       U.S. Energy Productivity                                  40
                                          2
                                                       Low/Med Income Country Energy Productivity
                                          1            OECD Energy Productivity                                  20
                                                       U.S. Multi-Factor Productivity
                                          0                                                                      0
                                              1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009


Note: PPP is “purchasing power parity.” Multifactor productivity index equals 100 in 1990.




                                                                                         37
Source: Authors.




                   38
