NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CORPORATION IN FINANCE
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 17760
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17760
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

Presidential address to the American Finance Association, Chicago, January 2012. This paper draws
from many conversations I have had with my co-authors over the years, in particular, Viral Acharya,
Douglas Diamond, Stewart Myers, Mitch Petersen, Henri Servaes, Jeremy Stein, Julie Wulf, and Luigi
Zingales. I thank Douglas Baird, Effi Benmelech, Steve Kaplan, Lubos Pastor, Amit Seru, Ram Shivakumar,and
Rob Vishny for valuable comments on this draft and Maryam Farboodi for very helpful research assistance.
I bear responsibility for all errors. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets
and the Fama Miller Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Corporation in Finance
Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 17760
January 2012, Revised March 2012
JEL No. G32,L22,L26
ABSTRACT
The nature of the firm and its financing are closely interlinked. To produce significant net present
value, an entrepreneur has to transform her enterprise into one that is differentiated from the ordinary.
To achieve the control that will allow her to execute this strategy, she needs to have substantial ownership,
and thus financing. But it is hard to raise finance against differentiated assets. So an entrepreneur has
to commit to undertake a second transformation, standardization, that will make the human capital
in the firm, including her own, replaceable, so that outside financiers obtain control rights that will
allow them to be repaid. I argue that the availability of a vibrant stock market helps the entrepreneur
commit to these two transformations in a way that a debt market would not. This helps explain why
the nature of firms and the extent of innovation differ so much in different financing environments.
Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

One of the cornerstones of modern corporate finance is the Modigliani Miller Theorem, which
essentially says that in a world where investors can borrow and lend as easily as corporations, the value of
a firm is determined by the present discounted value of its expected cash flows, and not by how these cash
flows are allocated to various claimholders. A firm’s capital structure is therefore irrelevant to its value,
or taken literally, much of what corporate finance spends its time on is second order.
Corporate finance researchers have spent the years since then trying to prove the value of their
field by challenging one assumption after another of the near-perfect world that Miller and Modigliani
postulated. Miller and Modigliani themselves acknowledged the tax deductability of interest, which
would imply that firm value should increase with leverage. Seminal contributions by Jensen and
Meckling (1976) and Myers (1977) showed that capital structure choices affected the firm’s investment
decisions. These were followed by Myers and Majluf (1984), who suggested that information
asymmetries between management and investors also influenced the choice of securities that are issued,
and hence corporate investment, and by Jensen (1986), who proposed that debt disciplines managerial
waste. Corporate finance thus responded well to the challenge posed by Miller and Modigliani, and
instead of witnessing its extinction, we have seen a tremendous flourishing of the field.2
Today, behavioral theories of capital structure and financing choice (see Baker and Wurgler
(2011) for a comprehensive survey) duke it out with asymmetric information and agency explanations to
provide a veritable cornucopia of theories of corporate financing choices. Theories have linked capital
structure decisions to everything from consumer fears (Titman (1984)) or predation (Bolton and
Scharfstein (1990)) to wage negotiations (Perotti and Spier (1993)) or the early life experiences of today’s
CEO (Schoar and Zuo (2011)). If anything, corporate finance has an excess of models, with many
explanations for the well-documented regularities in the data. Fortunately, empirical corporate finance too
has joined the fray, with researchers uncovering interesting new patterns in firm financing behavior to
2

Two excellent surveys of the field are Harris and Raviv (1991) and Shleifer and Vishny (1997), while a thoughtful
paper about future research challenges that I draw on is Zingales (2000). Tirole (2006) offers a comprehensive
integration and overview of research in corporate finance.

1

serve as grist for the theoretical mill, even while paying much more attention to issues like causality,
which earlier researchers had neglected. Hopefully, in the future we will be better able to tell our students
the empirical importance of each of the theories of corporate financing choice that we present to them,
without laying them out as an un-weighted stream of consciousness.
In all this, though, one of the most important assumptions of the Modigliani Miller Theorem has
gone unchallenged by researchers in corporate finance; the assumption is the existence of the corporation.
In the largely perfect world envisioned by Miller and Modigliani, it is not clear what, if anything,
determines the existence of the corporation with clear boundaries. As researchers on the theory of the firm
such as Ronald Coase, Oliver Hart, and Oliver Williamson have suggested, firms with well-defined
boundaries emerge in worlds with transactions costs stemming from difficulties in contracting. But these
costs are unimportant in the Modigliani Miller world. So is the Modigliani Miller theorem doubly
irrelevant – it postulates the irrelevance of corporate capital structure in a world where corporations are
irrelevant?
The substantial point I want to make is that a more general approach to corporate finance would
ask if the imperfections that lead to the boundaries of the firm being meaningful also lead to implications
for corporate capital structure, and vice versa. No doubt, many of the seminal papers in corporate finance
(see Myers (1977), for example) are based on the premise that the asset side and liability side of a firm’s
balance sheet are jointly determined, and much of the literature since links asset side frictions such as
illiquidity (see Diamond (1991) or Shleifer and Vishny (1992), for example) to the nature of financing.
But with a few exceptions (see, for example, Fama and Jensen (1983 a & b), or Zingales (2000)),
the firm in finance consists of a set of projects with a pattern of investments, cash flows, and liquidation
values, with little explanation as to why the projects or the people running them should be part of the
same firm. Similarly, with notable exceptions (for example, Williamson (1988) and Hart and Moore

2

(1990) read with Hart and Moore (1994)), those working on the theory of the firm have largely ignored
the issue of how the firm is financed.
Presidential addresses are occasions when you lament a misspent youth, and point to issues that
you wish you (and by implication, the profession) had spent more time on. Since the work of Fama and
Miller (1973) and Jensen and Meckling (1976), the firm in corporate finance has invariably been a single
person entity. The question of where the boundaries of the firm should lie is largely uninteresting in such
a setting, so the primary focus of analysis has been on the agency problem between the manager and
investors. But when one considers the firm’s activities as potentially involving many collaborators, with
their identity changing over time, the question of where the firm’s boundaries are drawn to promote
efficiency becomes an interesting one. It is equally fruitful to see how the factors that compel a certain
structure for the efficient operation of the enterprise also affect its need for, as well as its ability to, obtain
finance.
I would like to use my time at the podium to attempt such a synthesis, I will focus on the very
early stages of the firm where the links between the nature of the entity being financed and the availability
of financing are perhaps most clear. Clearly, my work is informed by a burgeoning empirical literature in
the area of entrepreneurship and venture capital, which more than any other area of corporate finance has
recognized the links between the corporation and financing (see, for example, Bhide (2000, 2008),
Hellmann and Puri (2000, 2002), Kaplan and Stromberg (2002), Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2009),
and Lerner and Malmendier (2010)).
I will argue that the typical innovative firm undergoes two important transformations over its
early life: The first transformation entails differentiation, whereby the entrepreneur brings a group of
people and the assets they work with together to create an organization, which she leads to produce
distinctive goods and services.3 The differentiated nature of the enterprise’s activities is critical to its
3

This resembles the Fundamental Transformation that Williamson (1985, 2002) refers to, but I emphasize the need
for the entrepreneur’s collaborators to coordinate with the entrepreneur rather than undertake asset-specific

3

being able to generate value, but the associated risk makes it hard for the entrepreneur to get collaborators
to coordinate in enterprise-building activities. I argue that the initial structure of the firm, with the
entrepreneur having significant ownership of assets, and thus control, is intended precisely to enable her
to differentiate substantially even while giving collaborators the incentive to follow.
But a differentiated unique enterprise is also hard for outsiders to finance. And for an
entrepreneur who is not independently wealthy, finance is critical to purchasing the assets she needs to
encourage enterprise building. This is why the firm needs a second transformation, whereby the firm’s
operations are standardized so as to make the firm’s key human capital more replaceable and liquid, even
while it continues to produce the differentiated product or service. In this way, outsiders obtain more
control over the going concern, and value can be committed to them to repay their earlier financing.
Equity is the appropriate instrument to finance such a transformation because equity relies on going
concern value. Equity markets play an important role by rewarding the entrepreneur for standardizing the
firm, and thus providing powerful incentives for the second transformation.
Because the cycle of up front financing followed by the two transformations is hard to commit
to, path-breaking innovation, enterprise creation, and the generation of positive NPV, are all difficult. The
availability of finance does alter the nature of firms that are created and explains why corporate finance is
so central to innovation, firm growth, and economic development. Of course, mature firms are more
capable of financing projects themselves, but the standardization many of them have undertaken to repay
past finance typically renders them less capable of innovation. Analyzing the firm and its financing in this
way gives us insights into who should own the firm, what the form of financing should be, and what kinds
of innovation and enterprises are possible when the financial system is underdeveloped.
My broader message, of course, is that a very rewarding area of research in the years to come will
be to open up the black box of the corporation so as to link its inner functioning to its financing needs. It

investment. The subtle distinction is that differentiation sets a direction for the entire enterprise, while asset-specific
investment ties specific groups of assets together.

4

is doubly exciting in these times of great technological, economic, and political change. I will devote the
last part of the paper to speculation on how innovation and finance might be altered in the years to come.

I.

The Creation of Distinctive Capabilities

The structure of a firm encompasses the people who work for it, the way their work is organized
and compensated, the assets it owns, the nature of ownership and control of the firm, the firm’s
relationship with suppliers and buyers, etc. And when we think about its financing, we refer to the variety
of claims it has issued, the division between inside and outside financing, and the power outside claimants
have over the firm’s operational and strategic decisions, as well as over its cash flows. The firm’s
structure and its financing center around one common problem: how to create net present value – that is,
value net of the opportunity costs of the inputs -- and then how to allocate this back to agents in the
economy in a way that maximizes value creation.4
An entrepreneur cannot create net present value simply by mimicking others unless she happens
to be extraordinarily lucky or the market extraordinarily uncompetitive– very few of the myriad laundry
shops or small restaurants that open (and close) every day repay anything more than the normal expected
returns for the factors that are employed. To create net present value, the entrepreneur has to go out on a
limb, distinguishing herself from the rest of the herd of potential competitors, and thus potentially earning
sustainable profits (provide the limb is narrow enough, the firm’s capabilities distinctive enough, or its
innovation continuous enough that others cannot follow). Thus, the process of creating positive net
present value invariably implies differentiation – whether in creating new products or product varieties

4

The firm and its financing structures need not arise only from conscious optimization. They also emerge from
political and social compromises, sometimes resulting from historical happenstance (see, for example, Roy (1997)).
Hysteresis plays an important role in economic development. Institutions developed for one purpose can be used for
another -- the comfort that U.S. investors developed with government war bonds during the First World War may
have eased the way for corporations to issue bonds after the war (Peach (1942)). However, while we should not be
Panglossian in believing that every structure exists because it is efficient, we should not also dismiss the economic
forces that push towards efficient structures.

5

that nobody else manufactures, in developing production methods that are more efficient than that of the
competition, or in targeting customer populations or needs that have hitherto been overlooked.
However, the entrepreneur faces a critical challenge. She needs to persuade others to join her in
enterprise-building activities, which is hard if the entrepreneurial venture is a significant departure from
the ordinary, and is therefore both risky as well as uncertain (in the Knightian sense of entailing unknown
unknowns). Clearly, one option would be to contract to buy inputs and hire services in the spot market.
The entrepreneur would then be a contractor who sets up a nexus of contracts (see Alchian and Demsetz
(1972) and Jensen and Meckling (1976)) with other independent contractors – collaborators who have full
independence of actions, as well as full ownership of the critical assets they use, bound only by the need
to make contracted deliveries at the stipulated time. This is typically the way undifferentiated products are
put together. But differentiated products often require producers to acquire special skills that have little
outside market value, place facilities in locations where there are few other uses, and put together
machinery in new ways that make them not just hard to sell but also hard to replace. Independent
contractors may worry about the likely decline in the outside value of their human capital and their assets
if they tie their fates to the venture, even as they also doubt the chances of the proposed venture. When
contracts are incomplete, the entrepreneur will find it hard to ensure through contract alone that
independent contractors coordinate and specialize to the desired extent.
An example may be useful to fix ideas. It is well known that car manufacturer Henry Ford
perfected progressive assembly or more colloquially, the moving assembly line, whereby men stayed put
and the parts and work flowed wherever they were needed. But Ford also implemented a second
innovation that was key to the success of the first (see, for example, Raff (1995)), the “American-system”
production of parts – that is the production of parts finished to such high tolerances that they were for all
practical purposes interchangeable. With it, the assembly line no longer needed artisans who could rework
poorly finished parts, it could manage with moderately skilled workers. Moreover, the assembly line was
not subject to delays as parts were re-jigged to fit each car. So the high tolerance of parts was essential to
6

the low cost and high efficiency of the assembly line. But since no other car manufacturer required such
high tolerances, and since Ford in his early years was known for his failures rather than his successes, it
would have been hard for him to persuade suppliers to produce the tolerances he needed.5
Indeed, it is far more attractive for the skeptical independent contractor to stay closer to the
mainstream and provide a more conventional intermediate product that will have a market if the
entrepreneur fails; the contractor’s downside is protected by the deep market for the conventional
intermediate product; he can obtain scale economies by producing for that larger market; he can also get
more of the surplus generated by the entrepreneur if she is successful, because he retains a credible
outside option. Matters are even worse in the “Prisoner’s Dilemma” situation where no independent
contractor wants to specialize to the business of the entrepreneur if they believe other key contractors will
not specialize.
Moreover, even when the independent contractor is convinced that the entrepreneur’s venture will
work, he can manoeuver to grab a greater share of the prospective surplus instead of working to enhance
it.6 More generally, if the venture shows initial signs of success, the presence of multiple irreplaceable
independent contractors who will each up their demands as the entrepreneur tries to get them to continue,
will greatly diminish the rewards to entrepreneurship, and potentially reduce the life of the enterprise.7
In sum, similar to the process emphasized in Williamson (1985,2002), the entrepreneur needs a
first transformation whereby some out of a large number of initially interchangeable people and assets
collaborate, coordinate, and build inter-relationships to create a well-honed organizational structure that
has a small number of mutually specialized and largely irreplaceable people and assets with a common
5

There is some debate on what Ford’s key innovations were, and whether in fact they were original to him. See
Baird (2009) for an alternative view.
6
For example, he can strengthen his bargaining position (as well as monetize future rents) by issuing significant
amounts of short term debt that he would be unable to repay unless he gets a greater share of the surplus. He can
also strive to expropriate the entrepreneur’s critical resources and set up as competition, with a head start because of
the resources he controls (see Rajan and Zingales (2001)).
7
Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) make a similar point in the context of multiple debt holders. See Baird and Casey
(2011) for a discussion of the costs and benefits of allocating property rights in complementary assets to different
creditors.

7

purpose. However, because of risk as well as uncertainty, it is hard to shape the transformation through ex
ante contracts – not only are the necessary enterprise-building actions difficult to specify contractually in
a complete state-contingent way, myriad enterprise-destroying actions are hard to rule out without more
control over the actions of collaborators.8 So how does the entrepreneur gain enough control to shape the
transformation?
The key is for the entrepreneur to have employees, who typically have fewer degrees of freedom
than independent contractors. Employees, unlike independent contractors, usually do not own the assets
they work with -- instead, someone else owns the irreplaceable assets that are key to the enterprise. For
now, it will be convenient to assume the entrepreneur owns all assets, but what is essential is that control
over their use be largely delegated to the entrepreneur. The ability to allow (or deny) access to the assets,
both initially and over time, is central to the entrepreneur’s ability to encourage coordination. I now show
this in a simple model before explaining why this implies a role for financing.
1.1. Differentiation, Enterprise-Building, and Ownership
Consider a two date economy with risk neutral participants. Let date 0 be today and date 1
represent the future, after uncertainty is revealed. Consider an entrepreneur who has an idea and related
assets (experience, patents, a committed core team, critical pieces of land or natural resources, etc.). For
now, I assume that the idea and the related assets (henceforth, collectively termed the entrepreneur’s idea
to distinguish it from the critical asset I will describe shortly) cannot be appropriated by others when they
are given access to it. I will discuss “ideas” and “assets” in more detail after laying out the basic model.
Let  be the degree of differentiation chosen by the entrepreneur coming in to date 0, where

  0 and   0 means the entrepreneur chooses to be with the mainstream, which is normalized to 0.
The entrepreneur’s project will be successful with probability p ( ) . After choosing the degree of

8

The terms “ex ante” and “ex post” in the literature are with respect to the timing of the specific investment or
transforming action.

8

differentiation, the entrepreneur picks a collaborator from the available set of independent contractors. In
doing so, the entrepreneur essentially decides to share access to her idea with the collaborator, giving him
the ability to coordinate.9 The remaining independent contractors who are not given access have no ability
to coordinate.
I assume the existence of a critical asset – a machine, a patent, or a piece of property – without
which the project is not feasible. Nothing hinges on who owns the asset up front, though the rationale for
financing, which I discuss later, will stem from the entrepreneur’s need to buy or create it.
Having chosen the collaborator, the entrepreneur and the collaborator settle who will own the
asset going forward, and any negotiated side payments are made. The collaborator then chooses the
degree of coordination  , the key enterprise-building activity the entrepreneur seeks to foster. I assume
that  is not contractible and intricate incentive contracts to force the optimal  are not possible.10
Coordination may involve building specific human capital (learning specific software and technology,
understanding the firm’s culture, building friendship and trust, developing complementary skills, creating
a bank of favors) or specializing assets (locating plants in the most appropriate places, linking and
calibrating machines to one another, specializing equipment to the main product).
If the project is successful, it produces an NPV of V ( , ) if the entrepreneur and the
collaborator work together with the asset – I assume the entrepreneur cannot work with anyone else at
that point. If it fails, the NPV produced by the project is zero. The collaborator can go back to being an
independent contractor if he has use of the asset, producing an NPV of v ( ) without the entrepreneur. I
assume (subscripts will denote derivatives):

9

See Rajan and Zingales (1998, 2001) for an elaboration of how selective access can allow the entrepreneur to
shape firm-specific investment. Access gives those who enjoy it the ability to acquire power conditional on making
the required investment.
10
See Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (2008) for similar assumptions. For a contrary viewpoint, see Maskin and Tirole
(1999).

9

Assumption 1
(i)

The greater the differentiation, the lower the probability of project success so p  0 .

(ii)

The expected value of the project first increases then decreases in differentiation so that

d
d
 p( )V ( , )   0 at   0 ,  p( )V ( , )   0 at    , and
d
d

d2
 p( )V ( , )   0 . The value of the successful project is increasing and concave in
d 2
differentiation so V  0, V  0
(iii)

.

The NPV of the successful project is maximized when    .

V  0 if

 ,

V  0 if

 ,

V  0
(iv)

The expected value of the collaborator’s outside option of working again as an independent
contractor, v ( ) , decreases with  at an increasing rate so that v  0,

(v)

v  0 .

V and p are small.

The assumptions are straight forward. More differentiation takes the entrepreneur into more unknown
territory and thus reduces the probability of project success, but it can enhance expected NPV over a
range. The collaborator coordinates best when he sets    , however, the higher he sets  , the further
he reduces his outside option of rejoining the mainstream if the project fails. The assumption that the
entrepreneur cannot produce with anyone else once she chooses a collaborator, and that the collaborator’s
outside option falls in value as he coordinates, reflect the first transformation. Finally, plausible
arguments can be made for V or p having either sign, so I assume they are small.

Given that contracts are incomplete, I have to propose some way surplus is allocated ex post.
Throughout this paper, I will assume surplus is split according to Nash Bargaining with outside options;
10

Each person gets their outside option plus half the surplus over and above the sum of values of outside
options. None of this is to say that there is actual bargaining when surplus has to be divided. Instead,
recognizing each player’s bargaining power, the system should gravitate towards dividing surplus
automatically according to the prospective equilibrium.
1.2. First Best
The first best is to set  and  to maximize the joint surplus pV ( , )  (1  p )v ( ) .11 The first
order conditions are

p V  pV  p v  0

(1)

pV  (1  p)v  0

(2)

(1) suggests that the first best degree of differentiation  FB will be set higher than  0 , the level that
ensures expected project NPV is maximized. Because the asset can be redeployed if the project fails, the
optimal strategy is to increase differentiation even further, till the marginal reduction in the expected
value of the project equals the marginal gain in the expected value of the redeployment option. In a sense,
the surplus from redeployment is a form of insurance if the project fails, and its availability enhances the
optimal amount of differentiation (effectively risk taking). The first best degree of coordination,  FB , as
(2) indicates, sets the marginal expected increase in project value equal to the marginal expected loss in
the redeployment option. Thus  FB   FB , implying that even in the first best, the collaborator should not
coordinate fully with the entrepreneur.12

Rather than assume V ( , 0)  v (0) , which would ensure V ( , )  v ( ) 
inequality holds for the values of  we are interested in.
11

12

 , it is sufficient that the latter

V is increasing and concave in  for    , and V  0 when    , hence (2) implies  FB   FB
11

1.3. Coordination and Differentiation if the Collaborator Owns the Critical Assets
Now consider what happens when the collaborator owns the key asset and therefore works as an
independent contractor for the entrepreneur. As in the Property Rights view, the owner of the asset
decides how an asset will be used. If the project succeeds, the collaborator will get his redeployment
option plus half the surplus , which equals v 

V v V v
V v
. The entrepreneur gets
. If the

2
2
2

project fails, the collaborator will simply redeploy the asset and get v . So he maximizes

V  v 
p
  (1  p)v w.r.t.  . The first order condition is pV  (2  p)v  0 . Comparing with (2),
 2 
and because v  0 , it follows that the level of coordination if the collaborator owns the asset,  CO , is
less than first best,  FB . Intuitively, the collaborator benefits from owning the asset and having the option
to redeploy it outside the relationship with the entrepreneur, both because it increases his bargaining
power over the surplus if the project succeeds, and because it cushions him if the project fails. As a result,
he is reluctant to jeopardize the value of his redeployment option, and undersupplies coordination relative
to the first best.

Totally differentiating the first order condition, and using Assumption 1 that V is small, I get


 pV  (2  p)v 
p V  v   pV
d




0

d
pV
p
v
(2
)




 pV  (2  p)v 
 

(3)

Intuitively, the higher the entrepreneur sets the degree of differentiation, the lower the probability of
project success, and lower the value to the collaborator of coordinating instead of maintaining the value of
his redeployment option.

12

Now consider the entrepreneur’s problem. She sets the degree of differentiation to maximize

p
V  v  . Recognizing that her choice will affect the collaborator’s choice of coordination, her first
2
order condition is

d
d
d
 p(V  v)   p(V  v).  0 , which gives us on simplifying and
d
d
d

substituting from the collaborator’s first order condition

p V  pV  p v  2v

d
d

(4)

From (3), we can see the right hand side of (4) is positive. Comparing with (1), it is immediate that under
collaborator ownership, the entrepreneur chooses a level of differentiation,  CO , that is less than the first
best. Intuitively, the entrepreneur does not see the “insurance” from redeployment if the project fails,
which accrues entirely to the collaborator when the collaborator owns the asset. Moreover, the
collaborator will reduce his level of coordination as the entrepreneur differentiates more. For both these
reasons, the entrepreneur will differentiate less than the first best. We have
Proposition 1: Under collaborator ownership, the entrepreneur sets the degree of differentiation less
than the first best, and the collaborator coordinates less than the first best.
By settling on a potential collaborator and giving them access, the entrepreneur exposes herself to
the collaborator’s future non-contractible actions. Knowing that he has a right to the joint surplus, the
collaborator focuses to a greater extent than he should on extracting a share of that surplus, rather than
enhancing it. Asset ownership expands his outside options, and the incentive to nurture these diverts him
from enterprise building activities.

13

1.4. Coordination and Differentiation if the Entrepreneur Owns the Critical Assets
If the entrepreneur owns the asset, she and the collaborator will share the surplus equally if the
project is successful, because the collaborator does not have a credible threat to exercise his redeployment
option. If the project fails, both the entrepreneur (who owns) and the collaborator (who is needed to
operate the asset when it is redeployed) are essential to redeployment. As a result, they share the surplus
from redeployment equally – the entrepreneur now obtains a stake in redeployment, which realigns her
incentives also. Thus, both the entrepreneur and the collaborator maximize

p
(1  p )
V
v , which is half
2
2

the overall expected surplus. The collaborator’s first order condition in setting coordination is just the first
best condition (2). The entrepreneur sets differentiation so that

d p
(1  p)  d  p
(1  p)  d
V
v 
V
v .
 0 . The second term is zero because its first part is


2
2
d  2
 d  2
 d
simply the collaborator’s first order condition. So the entrepreneur’s first order condition also reduces to
the first best condition (1). We have
Proposition 2: Under entrepreneur ownership, the entrepreneur sets the level of differentiation at the first
best level and the collaborator also sets the level of coordination at the first best level.
Example: Let p ( )  0.8e 0.8 , v( )  5  1.5e0.05 ,

V  ,   1  e  (  0.8 )  4 1  e  (1 0.8)   1  1.5e   2 .We then have

 FB  1.72,  FB  1.06, V FB  4.17  v FB  3.42
and  CO  1.43,  CO  0.27, V CO  3.67  vCO  3.47
Both differentiation and coordination are lower under collaborator ownership. It is easily checked that
taking probabilities into account, entrepreneur ownership is better than collaborator ownership.

14

1.5. Discussion
An entrepreneur who sets up a laundry shop or a run-of-the-mill restaurant generates very little
surplus over the cost of factors employed. The high rate of failure of such enterprises is not because the
entrepreneur ventures into the unknown but because their profit margins are so thin. There is little need
for enforcing coordination in such enterprises because their activities are not distinctive and the enterprise
could well be described as nexus of contracts.
The entrepreneur I focus on is instead the heroic leader found in Schumpeter (1911) and Knight
(1921), who “incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the
old one, incessantly creating a new one.”13 She must be willing to strike out, largely on the basis of
intuition, on courses of action in direct opposition to the established settled patterns, she must have “the
drive and the will to found a private kingdom”, the desire to create new things even at the expense of
destroying old patterns of thought and action.14 Such an entrepreneur should own the critical asset so as to
enhance differentiation, coordination, and project value. Implicit in this is the assessment that the
entrepreneur will choose the right direction, and is committed to it – that she will lead well.15 This is
precisely the assessment that collaborators and the financier make ex ante.
Entrepreneur ownership does not just curtail the collaborator’s outside options (see also Rajan and
Zingales (1998), Holmstrom (1999), or Van den Steen (2010)), it also gives the entrepreneur more of a
stake in her collaborators’ redeployment possibilities (rather than in the project alone). While the model is
specialized and the result that the first best is achieved under entrepreneur ownership is sensitive to
bargaining assumptions, the broader point is that when the entrepreneur does not own, she may have too
little concern for the outside options of her collaborators while single-mindedly focused on the project. At
the same time, independent collaborators may be focused too much on their outside options. Ownership

13

Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, page 83, 1942, Harper Brothers
John Elliott in the introduction to The Theory of Economic Development by Joseph Schumpeter, 1934, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge MA
15
For a model where the CEO may not be trusted, see Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2009).
14

15

by the entrepreneur shifts everyone’s incentives in the right way, allowing her to focus on creating the
next Google rather than limiting her aspirations to a laundry shop.
1.6. The Nature of Assets and Ideas
Let me now discuss the implicit assumptions I have made about the nature of assets that the
collaborator works with. First, the asset is capable of being owned, and if the asset is not already
possessed or owned by the entrepreneur, ownership can be transferred. So it is not a human capital asset
possessed by the collaborator such as management capabilities or industry experience. Second, the asset is
critical in that without it, neither the project nor the redeployment option generate value. Third, the asset
is hard to replicate.
The collaborator’s asset may be hard for him to replicate simply because he is specialized to it – for
example, a favored tool or instrument. More generally, though, an asset may be hard to replicate because
it occupies a strategic location (a port in recent times, or a fort in ancient times). It may enjoy property
right protection, as with a brand name or a trade mark, or equivalently, regulatory protection as with a
license or barriers on further entry. Some assets may enjoy multiple characteristics – a cluster of patents
situated strategically may make it hard for competitors to innovate around them. An asset may be hard to
replicate because doing so takes time, and by the time the competition has succeeded, the frontier could
have moved. Assets may also have the characteristics of a natural monopoly with large up-front fixed
costs, so that competitors will hesitate replicating the asset for fear of the ruinous competition that would
subsequently ensue.
Turning next to the entrepreneur’s “idea”, it could consist similarly of hard-to-replicate assets. But
because the entrepreneur is committed to the project and has no need to sell her idea, it could also consist
of personal assets like experience, a devoted team, industry relationships, management capabilities, trade
secrets, and plain charisma.

16

1.7. Ownership, Ex Ante Access, and Appropriability.
If financing is limited and there are many critical collaborator assets, what assets should the
entrepreneur own? The model suggests that, ceteris paribus, a collaborator’s incentives to coordinate are
most reduced by ownership when v (which is negative) is large in magnitude. The entrepreneur’s
incentive to differentiate is also reduced by more when v is large in magnitude. Thus assets whose use
value outside the relationship fall most with coordination ought to be owned by the entrepreneur.16
Clearly, ownership of assets that are neither hard to replace nor critical to the firm’s activities will not
help the entrepreneur control her collaborators’ outside options. Such assets should not be owned by the
entrepreneur.
In the model, I have ignored the possibility that asset ownership offers the entrepreneur additional
tools to limit the collaborator’s freedom ex ante and foster coordination. In practice, when the assets are
on the entrepreneur’s premises, she also has a greater ability to direct the efforts of her collaborator,
which is an additional advantage of ownership. Essentially, the collaborator would be subject to an
employment agreement that specifies the employee will obey reasonable commands, in return for
reasonable pay and working conditions – in a sense, the entrepreneur obtains the residual control rights
associated with having an employee.17 By requiring regular attendance at the workplace, the entrepreneur
could effectively rule out frequent contact between the collaborator and the competition, which would be
essential for the collaborator to preserve his outside options. The entrepreneur can also prohibit certain
activities by the chosen collaborator, such as practicing old skills, or taking on debt (that could serve as a
mechanism to extract rents from the entrepreneur). Conversely, an independent contractor would only be
16

A full treatment of optimal ownership when there are multiple collaborators and assets would, of course, require a
constrained maximization problem.
17
By the “residual rights of ownership”, Grossman and Hart (1986) refer to rights conferred by ownership that
cannot be, or are not habitually determined by, explicit contracts. In a similar vein, Masten (1988, p187) argues, “In
addition to obedience, an employer has the right to expect loyalty, respect, and faithfulness from his employees and
that each will "conduct himself with such decency and propriety of deportment as not to work injury to the business
of his employer." There is a legal basis for the employment relationship that makes it different from a contractual
relationship with an independent contractor, and the employment relationship offers both sides some rights that
could be termed “residual” in the Grossman and Hart (1986) terminology.

17

responsible for the final output, could keep the entrepreneur off his premises, and have greater freedom to
maintain outside options or choose financial structure.
All this presumes that the entrepreneur’s idea (and related assets) cannot be appropriated by the
collaborator ex post. If the collaborator could expropriate the entrepreneur after getting access to her idea,
the entrepreneur has the problem of retaining a share of the surplus in addition to incentivizing
coordination. This would suggest an additional reason for entrepreneur ownership than in the model we
have studied so far: By owning the irreplaceable collaborator assets, the entrepreneur prevents the
collaborator from expropriating her ex post. For instance, by owning iTunes music purchase and
management software, a key complementary asset to the iPod player, Apple ensures that competitors
cannot match it simply by replicating the hardware. Ownership by the entrepreneur of key irreplaceable
assets is thus not just a way to foster coordination but also to protect the entrepreneur’s idea ex post (see
Teece (1986), Pisano and Teece (2007)) and ensure continuity of the enterprise.
1.8. Discussion: Enterprise Building, Ownership and the Firm’s Boundaries
There is, obviously, a long history of viewing the firm as a governance structure that exercises fiat to
control misbehavior instead of eliciting cooperation through contract.18 My view of the entrepreneurial
firm is one where the entrepreneur limits employee freedoms through the power she gets from ownership
in order to lead a cohesive enterprise. There is a parallel to theories of government here: Much as the
government has a monopoly over violence so as to ensure civil order, the entrepreneur has a monopoly
over ownership so as to coordinate organizational movement in the chosen direction.
Theories of firm boundaries start, of course, with Coase (1937), who argues that a firm’s boundaries
are located where the costs of doing transactions within a firm exceed the costs of doing them in the
market (see Gibbons (2005) or Holmstrom and Roberts (1998) for excellent surveys). Transaction costs
18

Coase (1937) cites D.H. Robertson in Control of Industry (p85) describing firms as “islands of conscious power in
this ocean of unconscious co-operation like lumps of butter coagulating in a pail of buttermilk”. Williamson
(1985,2002) focuses on the firm as a governance system, while Grossman and Hart (1986) see owners as having the
right to exercise the “residual” control rights associated with ownership.

18

economics, which owes much to the work of Williamson (1975, 1985, 2002), takes this insight much
further. Williamson (2002, p 174) argues that “if human actors are not only confronted with needs to
adapt to the unforeseen (by reason of bounded rationality), but are also given to strategic behavior (by
reason of opportunism), then costly contractual breakdowns (refusal of cooperation, maladaptation,
demands for renegotiation) may be posed. In that event…efforts to devise supportive governance
structures, thereby to mitigate contractual impasse and breakdowns, have merit.” Thus Williamson, as
also Klein et al. (1978), emphasize ex post haggling costs over the quasi-rents created when parties are
tied through specific investments. Ownership allows the owner to settle disputes by fiat, reducing
haggling costs.
My basic model does not have ex post “haggling” costs, but I can incorporate them as outlined earlier.
If the entrepreneur’s idea can be expropriated in the future by the collaborator, ownership of other critical
complementary assets by the entrepreneur can prevent the collaborator from running away with the idea
on his own (thus obviating the need for costly security measures such as restricting collaborator access–
the equivalent of “haggling costs” in my model). Moreover, because the collaborator anticipates he will
not be successful in expropriating the entrepreneur when the entrepreneur owns, he has incentives to
undertake enterprise-building activities that complement the entrepreneur’s skills (instead of undertaking
activities that attempt to substitute for them). The key difference in my model is, however, the focus on ex
ante incentives for coordination rather than ex-post opportunism.
My work is closer in many ways to the Property Rights View of Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart
and Moore (1990), henceforth GHM. Ownership for GHM consists of a bundle of revenue and control
rights, including rights that are hard to contract that they term the “residual rights of control”. Ownership
attaches the assets to the owner, and can be useful in enhancing the owner’s incentive to invest.
Specifically, when the required ex ante investment by the owner is in her human capital and is asset
specific (e.g., learning to use a particular machine), it is plausible to think that an increase in investment
increases the value of both the owner’s contribution to the enterprise and her value with the asset in
19

alternative ventures. The owner’s threat to use her asset in alternative ventures when bargaining over ex
post surplus then enhances her share of the surplus. Because her threat point is directly increased by her
ex ante investment, ownership enhances her ex ante incentive to invest. As Holmstrom (1999) argues,
ownership is a way of bringing in market incentives embedded in the increase in asset values resulting
from investment to reinforce any pre-existing investment incentives.
Unlike Transactions Costs Economics, the Property Rights view assumes ex post efficiency. Thus the
owner never actually exercises her right to use the asset differently; it is just a bargaining ploy. My paper
relies heavily on the special nature of ownership suggested by the Property Rights view – that ownership
bundles a variety of rights, many of which are hard to contract. However, I depart from it when
considering the channel through which ownership “works”. In GHM, ownership goes to the agent whose
ex ante incentives to invest are most enhanced by the surplus he can extract by threatening to use the
greater outside options available with ownership. In contrast, ownership in my model works by closing
down the outside options of all except the entrepreneur, who is the only one trusted to lead. By owning
the key assets, the entrepreneur in my model actually takes the enterprise in the direction she chooses,
while having greater assurance that the collaborator will follow. It is precisely by eliminating the market
options of the collaborator that ownership “works” in my framework.
Put differently, I argue that the more important, and also necessarily more specific, activity in
new ventures is not asset-specific investment but enterprise-specific activities like learning to coordinate
with other people and other machines, which make the agent an integral part of a team.19 This
coordination tends to be irreversible in part, which is why it reduces the value of the owner’s outside
options. The freedom provided by ownership detracts from, rather than enhances, enterprise building
activities (see Rajan and Zingales (1998) for an early exposition of the detrimental effects of ownership).
This is why common ownership by one who can be entrusted to set the enterprise’s direction and stay the

19

The importance of coordination in an enterprise is also explored elsewhere, with recent examples including Baird
(2010), Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy (2008), Dessin and Santos (2006) and Hart and Holmstrom (2010).

20

course is typically more efficient (unlike in Grossman and Hart, the entrepreneur in my model does not
have a credible threat to use the asset in alternative ways – she is wedded to the project unless it fails),
and significant ownership by those who could prefer to exercise outside options is not. Indeed, because
ownership is not primarily about the owner’s investment incentives but about her control over firm
direction, ownership by unrelated third parties who delegate control to the entrepreneur can improve upon
ownership by the collaborator. This is unlike in Hart and Moore (1990) where ownership by unrelated
third parties is a waste of the incentives embedded in ownership.20
1.9. Enterprise Direction, Indivisibility and Continuity
The firm is a separate legal personality defined and protected by law. Therefore, if there are (unmodeled) benefits to legal boundaries, the Property Rights view would suggest firms could well be
associations of different independent contractors, each owning the assets they work with. In other words,
the legal boundary of the firm would be drawn around assets with different ownership, with ownership
allocated to maximize investment incentives, and the boundary drawn to minimize other transaction costs.
Assets would be owned together only to the extent that they are worthless in enhancing investment
incentives when owned separately (see Hart and Moore (1990)). But as Holmstrom (1999) argues,
nothing else in the Property Rights theory requires the legal boundary of the firm to be drawn around
commonly owned assets (other than tautologically).
Yet the legal concept of a firm emphasizes keeping assets together under common ownership for a
long duration, and most firms (as distinct from loosely coupled co-operatives) have this structure. A
separate indivisible legal personality for the corporation ensures it has a life of its own, and does not have
to be broken up (and reconstituted) if any of its owners or employees die or leave. Divisions within the
firm cannot depart at will and have no separate legal identity or standing. Furthermore, entity shielding
20

The point that the incentives provided by ownership can detract from enterprise-building parallels the multitasking literature (see Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991, 1994)). However, instead of primarily giving the collaborator
higher powered incentives to undertake some actions that cause him to neglect other poorly-measured ones,
ownership in my model enables him to go in directions the firm wants to discourage.

21

(see Hansmann, Kraakman, and Squire (2006)) ensures that the personal creditors of owners or
employees, or minority owners, cannot lay claim to the corporation’s assets – the assets are held together
in the firm, and will be sold only if the firm’s owners collectively vote to do so, or if the firm defaults on
its debts and its creditors seize assets. A number of legal scholars (for example, Blair (2003), Guinane,
Harris, Lamoreaux, and Rosenthal (2007), or Hansmann, Kraakman, and Squire (2006)) see the separate
indivisible legal personality of the firm and the “entity shielding” permitted by law as key features of the
modern corporation.
My model offers support for these views. Common ownership implies common authority and control
– the entrepreneur can set direction and the employees have an incentive to coordinate.21 The enterprise
survives regardless of the entrepreneur’s own continued association with the firm or that of any of her
collaborators (in contrast to, say, a partnership which could be dissolved when any partner wants to quit).
The indefinite life of the enterprise promotes ex ante enterprise-building actions (who would give up
outside options if they knew the enterprise would be dependent on the financial and physical health of
each of the contracting parties) while dis-incentivizing costly ex ante jockeying for position and other
fissiparous tendencies that would emerge if players saw a chance of the enterprise’s demise. Entity
shielding ensures that none of the collaborators can jeopardize the enterprise through injudicious personal
borrowing so, once again, other collaborators can focus on enterprise-building rather than preserving
outside options.
Finally, as the entrepreneur fosters enterprise-building activities, the effectiveness of the
enterprise as well as her authority grows – it is no longer just the assets she owns that give her power but
also the new direction she gives through differentiation, the employees tethered to that direction because
of their coordination, and the employees tethered to those employees... The firm, as Rajan and Zingales

21

Holmstrom (1999) argues that common ownership allows the firm to better tailor incentives. I would modify this
slightly to say that common ownership itself is the primary source of the improved incentive.

22

(2001) argue, has a time dimension, a history that makes it more effective than strangers coming together
via contract.
1.10. Debt Finance and Financing Frenzies
In order for the entrepreneur to buy the asset from the collaborator (or from outsiders) she will need
financing if she is not independently wealthy. Even if the capital requirements needed for innovation are
not high (products like new search engines or social networking sites do not need much capital at the
innovation stage), finance is necessary for the entrepreneur to create the organization that will roll out the
innovation. I now turn to how the enterprise should be financed and the additional issues that financing
raises.
Before exploring the difficulties in financing in the next section, let us start by assuming financing is
easily available. Consider first (again a stripped down version of) risky debt finance, and its effect on
incentives. Assume debt is promised a fixed amount D sufficient for the lender to break even, and the
creditors’ bargaining power conditional on project success is high enough that the payment can be
enforced (I will revisit this assumption shortly). Creditors acquire ownership of the assets if the project
fails (that is, the required face value of payment on debt D is higher than the value of the redeployment
option v ). In this case, creditors will take over the assets and split the redeployment surplus with the
collaborator. The entrepreneur therefore maximizes

p
(V  D ) while the collaborator maximizes
2

p
(1  p )
(V  D ) 
v . Note that the collaborator’s first order condition is still (2), so if he sees the
2
2
entrepreneur set the degree of differentiation at the first best level, the collaborator will set the level of
coordination at the first best level also.

23

The entrepreneur’s first order condition is easily shown to be p V  pV  p D  pV

where

d
0
d

d
can be shown to be negative as before. The higher the face value of debt, the greater the
d

incentive of the entrepreneur to differentiate the project – this is akin to standard risk shifting incentives
in finance where the entrepreneur gets the upside if the project succeeds while debt bears the downside if
it fails. However, the entrepreneur’s incentive to differentiate is also muted because the collaborator
reduces coordination as the entrepreneur increases differentiation. By inspection and comparison to (1),
there is a face value of debt D FB (  v 

p
d
V
, with all values calculated at    FB and    FB )
p
d

such that the first best is achieved if D  D FB . However, there is no reason to believe that the face value
that would allow a creditor to break even would be precisely at this level, and in general, financing will
introduce distortions in differentiation (and hence coordination).
Distortions notwithstanding, the above discussion points to an important effect of external debt
finance. Because the creditor takes the critical asset away from the entrepreneur in case the project fails
and shares the surplus from its redeployment with the collaborator, he limits the extent to which the
collaborator coordinates (and hence the extent to which the entrepreneur differentiates). Now consider a
financial frenzy where a disproportionate number of overoptimistic entrepreneurs, who think the
probability of success is high and who do not recognize failure even if it stares them in the face, are
financed (alternatively, entrepreneurs want to hide failure so as to avoid stigma). In the midst of the
frenzy, financiers also think the probability of success is high – they forecast p close to 1 and unaffected
by  . So they accept “pay-in-kind” bonds and “lite” covenants up front, implying they cannot effect a
change in control or redeployment when they see the project fail.
Given that the financier cannot force the continuation-minded entrepreneur to ever redeploy
assets, a rational collaborator has the incentive to set    . Knowing that the collaborator will not hold

24

back on setting  , the entrepreneur has an incentive to differentiate more. This means that even though
the high  makes the true probability of success small, if it succeeds the project could be a spectacular
innovation, both because it is so differentiated, and because collaborators coordinate so well.
In other words, financial frenzies typically lead to spectacular crashes, in part because the extent
of project differentiation, and hence riskiness, is endogenously high. The lack of financial controls and the
low likelihood of redeployment incentivizes collaborators to coordinate in a single minded way, and
removes any constraints on the differentiation entrepreneurs choose. However, the few projects that are
successful could be extraordinarily valuable precisely because they are so innovative as well as
coordinated. Crashes and disruptive product innovation may have common roots – in optimism and
excessively lax finance (see Perez (2002) for a discussion of the links between technological revolutions
and financial crashes).22
In drawing out the above point, I have assumed that creditors are willing to finance the enterprise
– I assumed away the financing problem. But given the enterprise has been differentiated, this will not be
the norm. The very uniqueness of the enterprise and its assets could make it hard for the financier to
obtain repayment. I now turn to examining this is more detail.

II.

Financing the Innovative Enterprise

The difficulty in starting an innovative differentiated organization has as much to do with the
availability of financing as it has to do with willing collaborators. The entrepreneur needs financing to
assemble the critical assets the enterprise needs, with the problem being particularly acute if the scale at
which she needs to start is large. But the financier needs to be assured of an adequate return.

22

Pastor and Veronesi (2006) suggest an alternative rational explanation for the link between projects with high
uncertainty about growth (the differentiated project in my model) and high ex ante stock prices. Essentially, the
Gordon valuation model suggests that firm value is convex in growth, so expected firm value increases in
uncertainty about growth. Of course, if the low growth scenario is realized, the stock price crashes.

25

2.1. Liquidation Values
Even if the differentiated enterprise succeeds, the entrepreneur and the employees will
appropriate much of the going concern value because their irreplaceable human capital gives them
bargaining power. The debt contract described earlier, whereby the creditor can lay claim to the firm’s
assets in case it does not make contracted payments, gives the creditor the ability to force repayment if the
redeployment value of the assets or the break-up value is high. But this will typically not be the case in
the differentiated firm; Critical irreplaceable assets will either be intrinsically special or will have been
specialized during the first transformation (for example, by moving them to a remote area or by altering
them to better coordinate with other firm assets), which reduces alternative uses. This is why I have
assumed that the more the collaborator coordinates, the lower the value of the redeployment option.
Moreover, the financier has to share some of the redeployment surplus with the collaborator, diminishing
his own recovery in redeployment.
In some industries (which use general purpose machinery, buildings, or untransformed real
estate), certain assets may retain substantial break-up value despite the first transformation. But such
assets are unlikely to be the source of the entrepreneur’s power because they are unlikely to be
irreplaceable. Irreplaceable assets such as patents and brands may not find as good a use or user on sale,
and may therefore fetch only fire sale prices. Also, certain past investments, such as those in employee
training or in building organizational capital, will intrinsically have little realizable break-up value.
When liquidation values (the higher of redeployment or break-up values) are low, the
entrepreneur has two options, neither particularly attractive, for obtaining outside debt finance. First, she
could “harden” debt claims by making them shorter term and dispersing them amongst many
claimholders (see Berglof and Von Thadden (1994), Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), Calomiris and Kahn
(1991), Diamond and Rajan (2001)). The threat of a destructive run coupled with the difficulty of
renegotiating with dispersed claimants would give her the incentive to repay whenever she can. She

26

would not default “strategically” for fear of getting tied up in costly bargaining, or losing the irreplaceable
assets because of inefficiencies in bargaining, and becoming unable to produce any output. The
anticipation of ex post inefficient debt renegotiation can thus allow her to credibly promise more than the
(low) liquidation value of assets. To the extent, however, that she genuinely does not have the ability to
pay, such a financing structure is unforgiving, and would lead to excessive liquidation. Moreover, to the
extent that there is substantial noise about the true prospects of a firm that is trying innovative strategies,
misinformed destructive runs on the firm could occur with high probability.
A second option is for the entrepreneur to differentiate less. By choosing this route, the
entrepreneur reduces the risk for the financier – not only will the project succeed with higher probability,
but the financier’s ability to extract more of the admittedly lower surplus if the project succeeds will be
higher, as will be his ability to recover value from liquidating assets if the project fails. The difficulty with
this option is, first, that the expected surplus is much diminished and, second, that the entrepreneur has
strong incentives, having obtained the financing, to push for a riskier strategy of greater differentiation,
which has the added advantage of specializing assets and reducing the financier’s ability to collect. Unless
the financier has a very good ability to monitor and prevent such actions, he is unlikely to want to finance.
2.2. Appropriating Going Concern Value
So how then can the entrepreneur obtain financing that will permit her to innovate to the extent
she desires? Given that the first transformation increases the firm’s going-concern value while reducing
alternative use values, the challenge is to increase the power of outside financiers over going-concern
surplus. Instead of relying on the liquidation value of assets, the financier should improve his threat of
replacing the firm’s human capital by making it more “liquid”, that is, replaceable, especially at the top of
the hierarchy where key decisions and surplus gravitate.
After undergoing the first transformation of differentiation, the firm must therefore undergo a
second transformation – standardization -- that gives the financier more effective rights over going27

concern surplus.23 The tension between generating NPV, which requires innovation and differentiation of
the firm’s assets and human capital, and offering financiers credible repayment, which requires reducing
the extent to which the firm’s employees are irreplaceable, has to be lowered by bringing every task done
by the enterprise closer to the mainstream (while ensuring that the tasks, taken together, produce the
differentiated product). Finance requires successful start-ups to grow up and standardize what they do
well, and the entrepreneur has an incentive to make this happen precisely because the firm will be run by
others over time. I now propose a simple model describing standardization. It could be appended to the
previous model at the cost of obscuring the simple mechanisms at work, so I present it as a stand-alone
model.
2.3. Standardization and Outside Control
Consider a two period three date world. Assume the entrepreneur has created the coordinated
enterprise I described in the last section. She has an employee (who could be the collaborator and stands
in for all collaborators and employees). At date 0, the entrepreneur picks the degree

 to which she

standardizes the enterprise, where   1 .

For instance, an entrepreneur who has been handling product development, marketing, personnel,
and finance in the early stages of the firm might hive the activities off into four separate functions, each of
which could be more easily managed by professionals recruited from outside. She might restructure the
enterprise to create organizational sub-units that resemble sub-units elsewhere in the industry. She might
formalize implicit agreements between employees and herself by putting in place a human resource

23

An early attempt at formalizing this is in Myers, Rajan, and Zingales (2005). An alternative to making the human
capital replaceable by an outsider or subordinate is to have redundant insiders (see Stole and Zwiebol (1996)). This
is arguably easier at lower levels in the hierarchy, where redundant workers are less costly, and no single worker
feels directly threatened by the presence of redundant workers. Not only is a redundant CEO extremely costly for a
firm to carry, it is unlikely that she would stay in the shadow and not interfere in management decisions. In turn, the
incumbent could engage in costly influence activities. Rather than ensuring redundancy at every level, it may make
more sense to make internal replacement possible through promotion. This is what I examine.

28

department.24 She might introduce strategic planning and management information systems so that the
information a CEO needs to make decisions is easily available. She might put in place rules for capital
budgeting and procurement so that there is some discipline on employee spending without every decision
being elevated to her. Finally, she might secure patents for innovations that were protected only by being
kept secret by her. Standardization therefore reduces the idiosyncratic and personalized aspects of the
entrepreneur’s role, allowing her job to resemble that of a typical CEO, and making it easier for an
employee or outsider to replace her as CEO. It also implies greater control over, and routinization of,
work down the hierarchy. Of course, this could result in an (unmodeled) loss of organizational flexibility,
which I discuss later.
After the entrepreneur sets the degree of standardization at date 0, the employee exercises effort

 in learning by doing (or innovation) at a personal cost  . At the end of the period, the entrepreneur can
E
produce V (  ) along with the employee and the firm’s assets at date 1, with V  0 . Before production,

E

the entrepreneur can be replaced by the employee, who can generate  V

E

with the assets at date 1. Thus

more standardization increases the amount the employee can produce if he replaces the entrepreneur,
while more learning by doing increases the amount each can produce.
The entrepreneur becomes old and retires after date 1 (if she is not replaced earlier).
Standardization increases external replaceability even as it increases internal replaceability; The
probability that an outside CEO comes in to lead the firm in period 2 is q   ,   , while the probability
the current employee will succeed the entrepreneur is (1  q ) , where q  0 and q  0 ; greater
standardization increases the probability of being able to find an outside CEO to replace the entrepreneur,
while more learning effort by the current employee reduces the probability that the succession will be

24

For implicit contracts, see Shleifer and Summers (1988) or Novaes and Zingales (1993), for formalization, see
Hellman and Puri (2002).

29

external. Finally, greater standardization increases the importance of the employee’s effort for his chance
of succeeding the entrepreneur as CEO, so q  0 .

Regardless of whether the next CEO is internal or external, he can produce V C at date 2 with the
enterprise’s assets, and he can be replaced by an (un-modeled) future employee who can generate  V C .
Everyone is risk neutral, the common discount rate for date-2 revenues is (1  r ) , and I assume wellbehaved functions so that the maximization problem is well defined: q  0,

q  0, VE  0 .

2.4. Financing The Going Concern Value
I assume the entrepreneur raised financing before date 0 from a venture capitalist to undertake the
initial asset purchases described earlier. The venture capitalist is essentially a large investor who can push
to improve the value of his claims. I will assume that the financing instrument issued is equity (I will
discuss why later), which is an instrument with perpetual life, where each share has identical cash flow
and voting rights, and where the controlling equity interest (or a board that works on behalf of dispersed
equity) has the right at any time to replace the firm’s incumbent CEO (in the first period, this is the
entrepreneur). So the CEO serves at the pleasure of the controlling equity. I assume the entrepreneur is
left with share  of the equity of the firm after financing, and the venture capitalist’s share (1   ) gives
him a controlling interest.
The controlling interest bargains (implicitly or explicitly) with the CEO over the surplus
generated at the end of the each period. He can threaten to fire the incumbent before production and
replace her with an insider – that constitutes controlling equity’s outside option. Following Nash
bargaining, the entrepreneur/CEO gets

V   V  while outside equity gets V   V  .25 Each period, the
2

2

25

This follows the formulation in Diamond and Rajan (2000). Controlling equity is assumed to be able to extract all
the surplus from any replacement CEO. This can be plausibly modified without a qualitative change in the results.

30

current employee gets a normalized wage of zero – I want to focus on the long term returns to effort and
learning, where the rewards to employees consists of promotion and rents over a career in the firm, which
dwarf short term annual compensation.
At the end of the first period, after surplus is produced and the entrepreneur replaced, the firm is
taken public, and the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist sell their stake in the initial public offering.
Outside equity is now represented by a board or a controlling interest that will bargain (implicitly or
explicitly) with the new CEO over the surplus. At date 2 the surplus produced is shared according to prior
agreement.
The time line is
Date 0

Date 1

Entrepreneur
issues equity
to buy assets,
retaining
stake  .

Entrepreneur
chooses the
level of
standardization
.

Employee
chooses
effort  .

Entrepreneur
bargains
with venture
capitalist
over split of
surplus.

Surplus produced
and shared
according to
agreement.
Entrepreneur
replaced by outside
CEO with
probability q and
insider with
probability (1- q ).

Date 2
Initial
public
offering

CEO
bargains
with
outside
equity over
split of
surplus.

Surplus
produced
and shared
according
to
agreement.

2.5. Solving the Model: Effort Choice and Standardization
E
The first best is for the employee to exert effort such that V  1 . The level of standardization

only affects transfers between insiders and outside claimants, and has no direct effect on output. However,
the employee is rewarded for his learning effort only indirectly, through the prospect of future promotion
possibilities, and a future share of the surplus. By affecting both the employee’s promotion prospects and
his share of surplus, standardization does affect output. I now show this.

All that is important is that standardization increases the threat of replacing the incumbent CEO. Implicit in the
formulation of the problem is that no one can make multi-period commitments.

31

V C 1   
In choosing effort, the employee maximizes (1  q ( ,  ))
  , where the first term is
2(1  r )2
his expected direct claim on the surplus as CEO at the end of the second period, and the second term is
C
2
his cost of effort. His first order condition is qV 1     2(1  r ) . Totally differentiating w.r.t. 

and rearranging, I get

d  q  q (1   )

d
q (1   )

(5)

The denominator in (5) is positive. So the effect of the change in standardization on the employee’s effort
depends on the numerator. The first term there is negative; more standardization directly reduces the
future CEO’s expected surplus (more is extracted by outside equity), and thus reduces the employee’s
incentive to exert effort to attain that position. The second term is positive reflecting the fact that greater
standardization increases competition for the top position and makes the role of effort in increasing the
employee’s chances of succession more important. The net effect of greater standardization on employee
effort depends on whether the adverse incentive effect of lower future surplus outweighs the positive
competitive effect.
Turn finally to the entrepreneur’s first order condition. In choosing  , the entrepreneur

maximizes

 V E (  ) 1    V C 1    
V E (  ) 1   
 

 . The first term is her direct share of the
2
2
2(1  r ) 


surplus generated under her tenure, while the second term is the present discounted value of her equity
stake. Clearly, the entrepreneur’s incentive to standardize departs from those of the venture capitalist
because of the presence of the first term, that is, the entrepreneur’s direct share of the surplus. Note also
that the entrepreneur does not really care about who succeeds but does very much care that her employee
is motivated by his future prospects to exert effort today, because greater effort enhances today’s surplus.

32

Differentiating w.r.t.  , I get the entrepreneur’s first order condition to be

V E   (V E 

VC
d
)  (1     (1   ))VE
 0 . The first term is the reduction in her personal
d
(1  r )

share of the surplus as she becomes more replaceable. Of course, this surplus goes to equity, and there is
an immediate offsetting increase in value of her own share of equity holdings, though only by  of what
she loses. In addition, the enhanced control right from standardization allows equity to extract greater
surplus in the future also, from future CEOs. This gives the entrepreneur an additional incentive to
standardize today (unlike in models where the entrepreneur is infinitely lived and this incentive absent).
Finally, standardization may enhance or reduce the employee’s incentive to exert effort (depending on
whether the surplus or incentive effect prevails in determining the sign of

d
), which will affect the
d

surplus from date 1 production that flows back to the entrepreneur directly, and via equity. Note that the
entrepreneur may set a positive level of standardization even if she owns no equity, so as to provide more
ex post competition for her employee in the succession battle, and thus spur more current effort.

 V E (  ) 1    V C 1    

 . His value is
2
2(1  r ) 


Finally, the venture capitalist gets (1   ) 

E
maximized when (V 

that

VC
d
)  (1   )VE
 0 . For this to have an interior solution, it is necessary
d
(1  r )

d
 0 , else the venture capitalist wants maximum standardization. Assuming the venture
d

capitalist’s maximization problem is concave in



, we have

Proposition 3:
The entrepreneur will set a lower level of standardization,  , than the venture capitalist would desire her
to. The higher the entrepreneur’s equity stake,  , the greater the degree of standardization the
entrepreneur will set.
33

Proof: See appendix.
The entrepreneur standardizes to a lesser extent than desired by the venture capitalist because she
loses personal rents doing so. Clearly, the venture capitalist has to leave the entrepreneur enough of a
stake, not just for her to have the incentive to bring the project to fruition, but also for her to forego
personal rents and standardize the firm in order to make it amenable to outside control. That the
entrepreneur plans to turn over managerial control is necessary for standardization to occur – it is the
prospect of capturing rents from future CEOs, which will be reflected in the elevated price of her shares at
the IPO, that makes her forego her own direct rents today.
2.6. VC Financing and Optimal Equity Holding
The venture capitalist is willing to finance the entrepreneur in the early stages of the enterprise if
he knows that the entrepreneur has sufficent incentive to standardize later on, and if the expected market
value of the venture capitalist’s equity claim compensates for the risk he takes up front in financing the
venture. Consider now an example.

Let V E (  )  K  

where 0    1 , and q(  ,  ) 

1  
 e where 0    1 . Let K=1,
1 

V C  10 , r=0.05,   0.7,   0.3. The first best level of  is easily checked to be 0.89.
I plot the equilibrium values of  and  for different values of the entrepreneur’s stake,  in Figure 1.
The standardization picked by the entrepreneur,  , increases with  as expected – the more equity the
entrepreneur owns, the greater her incentive to standardize. The employee’s effort does not depend
directly on  , but depends on standardization, and hence indirectly on  . At low levels of
standardization, the competitive effect dominates, and effort increases with standardization, while at
higher levels of standardization, the incentive effect dominates, and effort decreases.

34

I plot in figure 2 the amount of outside equity raised at date 0 for different values of the
entrepreneur share,  , and we see it reaches a maximum of 6.45, when   0.19 and the corresponding
standardization   0.632 , and effort   0.636 . I also plot the present value obtained by the
entrepreneur (including her direct rents, her equity stake, and her take from selling equity initially to the
venture capitalist) and we see that it reaches its maximum value when   1 . This is straightforward –
when the entrepreneur sells some of the equity up front, she does not take this equity into account while
setting standardization, and therefore obtains lower overall value than if she retained everything. So in
choosing the amount of equity to sell at date 0, the entrepreneur will retain the maximum stake  that
will allow her to finance asset purchases. So if asset purchases require an amount I A in Figure 2, she will
retain  A rather than a lower amount, even if it is possible to raise more outside funds with a lower
holding.
An aside: while standardization makes the firm easier to finance, it also has a potential downside
to it. Too much standardization eliminates future rents for the firm’s employees. To the extent that these
rents are a form of long term compensation that depend on firm performance and survival in a way that
ordinary long term compensation may not (rents are less susceptible, for example, to manipulation of
performance metrics, and the prospect of future rents could foster actions with long term payoffs such as
innovation), total elimination of these rents may not be desirable because that can undermine employee,
and firm, performance. Indeed, in Acharya, Myers, and Rajan (2011), the desire to obtain these rents
makes employees interested in firm survival, and allows them to check the otherwise rapacious behavior
of the CEO. I will come back to this shortly when I discuss innovation.
2.7. The Role of the Venture Capitalist
Thus far, the venture capitalist simply plays the role that any concentrated equity holder would. But
there are two key additional un-modeled tasks that he performs. First, I have assumed that the
entrepreneur knows how to standardize the firm. In practice, the venture capitalist provides help here,
35

using his past experience of standardizing other firms to advise the entrepreneur, and using his network of
contacts to bring in the right personnel.
Second, I have assumed that the entrepreneur can standardize only at date 0. However, unless her
equity stake is substantial and current surplus small, the entrepreneur has an incentive to delay
standardization, so as to appropriate more of the surplus directly, standardizing only near the end of her
term. Postponing standardization could also be a way to entrench herself and to prolong her tenure. The
venture capitalist (VC) may be useful again here. He can utilize the fact that some key standardization
milestones are contractible – for example, hiring a chief operating officer or making an operating unit an
independent division. The venture capitalist can tie further disbursements to them. Failure to meet
standardization milestones can be met with the loss of cash flow rights as well as control rights (see
Kaplan and Stromberg (2002)). Thus the venture capitalist can monitor progress on contractible elements
of standardization, even while the entrepreneur has an incentive through her equity stake to deliver on the
non-contractible elements.
The analysis also points to the kinds of firms the venture capitalist will back. While standardization
makes top management replaceable, it is critical that the collective assets be irreplaceable, so that top
management cannot simply walk out with the employees and set up a new venture in competition, leaving
a shell of a company behind. This suggests that the typical VC backed firm should have either a strong
proprietary underlying technology, or have developed complementary proprietary assets such as brand
names, that would be hard to replicate (also see Bhide (2000, 2008)). In contrast, firms that rely primarily
on the idiosyncratic talents and energies of the entrepreneur are unlikely to find VC backing at all.
Also, given the substantial amount of effort the venture capitalist has to devote to monitoring and
aiding standardization, the enterprise has to have sufficient promise of scale to be of interest. We will
shortly survey some evidence on the differences between VC backed firms and non-VC backed firms.

36

2.8. The Equity Claim
Unlike the entrepreneur, the shareholder post-IPO has no passionate a priori commitment to a
direction for the firm. Instead, the shareholder’s neutrality amongst the various interested operating
factions in the firm is his greatest strength (see Hansmann (1996) and Rajan and Zingales (1998)). He
cares about maximizing his own share value and will (through the board) appoint a CEO who will take
the firm in a direction to achieve that.
From the shareholder’s perspective, standardization has multiple effects that could be explored in
greater detail in future research. Standardization in the lower rungs of the corporate hierarchy strengthens
the CEO’s operational control, and allows her to draw the firm’s surplus to the top of the hierarchy.
Standardization at the top of the hierarchy strengthens outside control, and allows the equity holder to
draw the surplus out. The CEO, post standardization, thus resembles a tax farmer, who is delegated
authority so long as equity holders approve his strategic direction and he comes up with the requisite
“taxes” for them. The pro-rata nature of equity payouts serves to align the interests of the entrepreneur
with that of the equity holders (in influencing standardization), and the board with the equity holders (in
extracting and sharing future payouts).
2.9. Debt vs Equity
Equity seems the natural claim with which to finance when the entrepreneur’s intent is to commit
to share future going concern value, since equity supports payouts with the threat of replacing
management even while maintaining the firm as a going concern. Why cannot debt threaten to do this
(instead of threatening to liquidate assets) and extract repayment? Why is equity the favored instrument
for raising finance in many start-ups? Clearly, the high degree of uncertainty associated with start-ups and
the low initial cash flows militate against fixed payments. But there is another reason for preferring equity
that my model makes salient – the contingent nature of the control rights associated with debt makes

37

standardization less attractive for the entrepreneur, and allows her to capture less of firm value in a public
issuance.
To see this, note that outside equity (in the form of the venture capitalist early on and the public
market shareholder later) has ownership but delegates control, with the right to take it back (that is,
replace the entrepreneur/CEO) at any time. The right to intervene unconditionally in firm management is
a key distinguishing feature of equity. With debt finance, the creditor obtains ownership and control only
if the firm cannot pay the pre-determined debt payments.
Suppose then that the entrepreneur has financed initially by issuing debt to the venture capitalist
instead of equity. And assume that the proposed public offering will be of debt rather than equity. Unless
the proposed debt issue is extremely large the entrepreneur will typically have a lower incentive to
standardize than if she proposed to issue equity. The reason is that standardization cannot increase debt
value beyond its face value, while an increase in standardization will always increase equity value.26
Of course, debt of infinite face value is effectively equivalent to equity in the future, since the
creditors get control under all future circumstances. While we can appeal to costs of default and
renegotiation to explain why very high levels of debt are not issued, there is another reason why the
entrepreneur would prefer equity over debt. Controlling equity can intervene to force the pace of
standardization (as we have seen) or to prevent standardization being reversed. By contrast, debt cannot
intervene unless there is a default.
To see this last point, note that the entrepreneur wants to standardize primarily because by doing
so she can enable equity holders to extract surplus from future generations of firm managers. But what

26

The entrepreneur will never want to set standardization higher than

D 

2D
 1 where D is the total debt
VC

outstanding after the public debt issue at date 1. Of course, if the initial debt issued is low, higher standardization
will not hurt the personal rents of the entrepreneur. A full exploration of the incentives to standardize when the firm
issues debt is left to future research, but may offer interesting insights. For instance, a leveraged buyout could be
seen as an attempt to take the mature firm private in order to give management the incentive to standardize it once
again to more exacting standards.

38

ensures that a future CEO who owns little equity will not entrench himself (see, for example, Shleifer and
Vishny (1989)) by firing key subordinates, by restructuring the organization and its task allocations, and
by reversing past standardization? In other words, what ensures the persistence of standardization after
the public offering?
Clearly, a later CEO who wants make himself more central and indispensable will have to disempower strong constituencies – for example, those who were allocated critical functions the CEO used
to carry out. Taking back power will be more difficult than giving it away. Importantly, any aggrieved
party can appeal to outside equity. Since reversing standardization is against the interests of outside
equity, it has the incentive to step in and countermand the CEO’s changes. Thus the ability of equity to
intervene unconditionally in the enterprise ex ante allows it to maintain the standardization in place. Debt
holders, in contrast, would find it much harder to protect an existing level of standardization, because they
would not be able to intervene until the borrower defaulted. By then, it might be too late. Outside equity’s
ability to intervene to prevent a reversal in the capacity of outsiders to control the firm makes equity an
even more powerful means of financing young firms.
2.10. Life Cycle of Financing
The preceding might suggest that equity is always the preferred financing instrument. This is
probably true only when the firm is being standardized.27 Once the firm is standardized, the split of
surplus between equity and management is determined. If standardization is not high, equity gets only a
moderate fraction of the surplus generated by an investment. If this investment is financed with an equity

27

What if the entrepreneur issued debt first, then intends to issue equity in the initial public offering?
Standardization helps strengthen the ability of controlling investors to replace management. However, if the
entrepreneur has issued debt up front, she will not have strong incentives to put in place standardization measures
that strengthen investor control in bad times – for example, effective accounting systems that allow an incoming
CEO to cut costs quickly. This is because the benefits accrue primarily to existing outstanding debt at the likely
expense of the entrepreneur. So again, standardization may be lower than optimal.

39

issuance, it is possible that old equity is “diluted” by issuance, because the share of additional surplus
going to equity is outweighed by the significantly larger number of shareholders post-issue.
To see this, consider an investment opportunity at date 1, with required investment i P and net
C

revenues from the project of v P . Recall V is the surplus from existing projects. If the project is
financed using equity, equity holders get a present value of

(1   ) C
(V  v P ) at date 1, of which new
2(1  r )

(1   ) P P
v  i  0 , with the extent of dilution
2(1  r )

equity holders gets i P . So old equity is “diluted” if

increasing as standardization falls. In a sense, management does not bear the cost of investment, but gets
some of the gain, so investment financed by equity issues could be “dilutive” for existing equity even if it
is positive NPV for the firm as a whole. Equity holders will therefore demand a higher hurdle rate for
projects when standardization is low, if they are to be financed with equity – we have an underinvestment
problem because of the overhang of managerial rents.
Matters are unchanged if the firm finances with debt, d P , when d P or the level of outstanding
prior debt D are low (I assume debt is “hard” implying it cannot be renegotiated, and all debt is paid
before equity at date 2). So long as  (V C  v P )  D  d P , management contributes an incremental
surplus of (1   )(V C  v P ) relative to its replacement, so the present value of incremental management
rents are unaffected by the form of financing. Debt is “paid for” by old equity, which is effectively the
residual claimant.28 The underinvestment problem is unchanged.

28

To see this, note that if the equity exercises its “outside option” of replacing management, it gets

 (V C  v P ) but

has to pay D  d . So its outside option is worth  (V  v )  ( D  d ) at date 2, to which it adds half the
surplus contributed by retaining management. Thus the present value of its claim is
P

C

(1   ) C
(V  v P )  ( D  d P )
2(1  r )

40

P

P

However, if debt issued or outstanding is high enough that  (V C  v P )  D  d P , equity’s
outside option to replace management yields it zero, since the surplus then generated is insufficient to pay
off debt. Interestingly, managerial rents now go down with debt financing because the surplus
management contributes (relative to its replacement) is now only (V C  v P )  ( D  d P ) .29 Put
differently, the issuance of a hard claim forces management to co-invest in the project by foregoing some
rents, reducing the underinvestment problem relative to when the project is financed with equity. We have
Proposition 4: (i) Old equity is strictly better off when the firm finances with debt rather than with equity
if D  d P   (V C  v P ) and indifferent otherwise. (ii) Ceteris paribus, the extent of value gain to old
equity from financing the new project with debt increases as D increases.
Proof: See appendix.
Interestingly, as the proposition indicates and I show in the appendix, the higher the pre-existing
level of debt, the greater the benefit of financing with new debt, even though debt is not risky in my
model. Thus leverage begets more leverage. We also have another explanation of the well-documented
difference in effects on a firm’s stock price between the announcement of a seasoned equity issuance
(negative) and a debt issuance (neutral to positive) -- see, for example, Asquith and Mullins (1986).
However, we neither need risky debt (Myers (1977)) or asymmetric information (Myers and Majluf
(1984)) to explain the phenomenon. Of course, we have to rely on alert outside equity or a takeover
market (e.g., Zwiebel (1996)) to explain why in practice management might want to forego its own rents
and favor old outside equity by financing with debt rather than equity.
All this then suggests a life cycle of firm financing, with firms financing with equity early on so
as to enhance incentives for standardization, and financing later with debt so as to avoid diluting equity. It
also suggests that a firm’s early need to raise public equity finance, and the standardization efforts it had

29

See Diamond and Rajan (2000).

41

to undertake to obtain it, should affect the subsequent frequency of its seasoned equity issues and the
magnitude of their announcement effect.
2.11. Venture Capital, Equity Markets, and Innovation
Let me turn to evidence now. There is substantial evidence suggesting, first, that venture
capitalists tend to focus on the more innovative (aka differentiated) firms and, second, they help
standardize such firms. Hellmann and Puri (2000) find in a sample of hi-tech start-ups that firms they
classify as innovators are more likely to obtain venture capital than firms they classify as imitators.
Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2009, p 77) conclude on reading the business plans of 50 venture capital
financed firms that “almost uniformly, firms claim that they are differentiated by a unique product,
technology, or service at the stage we examine”.
Standardization should result in a substantial reduction in the importance of specific human
capital. Indeed, Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2009) document that over time, from early business plan
to IPO and after, most self-reported differentiating characteristics of a VC-financed firm remain stable,
except for management or employee expertise. This is claimed as a differentiating characteristic by 46
percent of firms at the time of the business plan, but is claimed by only 16 percent of the firms at the IPO
stage or after. That human capital is less of a differentiator is consistent with standardization. They also
find that 46 percent of firms have patent rights at the business plan stage, going up to 60 percent at the
time of the IPO and 66 percent soon after. Thus more of the intellectual property of the firm is embedded
in formal patents over time. Hellmann and Puri (2002) find that VC financed firms are more likely to put
in place formal human resource policies than firms financed otherwise, making VC financed firms less
dependent on implicit contracts between the founding team and employees. They also show that VC
financed firms are more likely to hire a VP of sales and marketing.
Consisting with increasing standardization over time, Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2009) find
that only 43 percent of the firms they follow list a Chief Financial Officer (CFO) as one of the top five
42

executives at the time of the business plan, while 77 percent list a Chief Technology Officer (CTO). By
the time of the first annual report after the IPO, 81 percent list a CFO, while only 46 percent list a CTO.
This suggests that firms move from emphasizing areas of differentiation (technology) to areas of
commonality (finance, sales and marketing).
Standardization should mean a greater ability to replace the founder. Hellmann and Puri (2002)
find that VC backed firms tend to be faster and more likely to replace founders than non-VC-backed firms
in the hi-tech industries. Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2009) find that the involvement of founders
declines steadily over time in their sample of VC-financed firms. At the business plan stage, 66 percent of
firms have a founder CEO (and 77 percent of firms with a CEO have a founder CEO). By the first annual
report after the IPO, this has fallen to 38 percent. They conclude that “over time, founders move from
operating positions to board positions to no involvement”.
VC financing and innovation are tightly linked. Kortum and Lerner (2000) examine the influence
of venture capital on patented inventions across 20 industries in the United States, and find that while it
accounted for less than 3 percent of the share of R&D, it accounted for over 8 percent of the share of
patents over the period 1983 to 1992. My model would suggest two explanations for the greater role of
venture capital in patenting. First, venture capital is associated with more differentiated, innovative
companies that promise greater rewards but also need more standardization effort, and hence help from
venture capitalists. Second, patenting is a form of standardization, so it is again not surprising to see it
associated with venture capital.
Differentiated innovative firms that obtain venture capital financing are different in a number of
ways from firms that start out with more run-of-the-mill technology. Bhide (2000) examines a set of 500
firms that appear in Inc. magazine’s annual list of the fastest growing companies. These companies are
less innovative – indeed they typically start out with an entrepreneur who “borrows” an idea from her old
employer. Only 12 percent of the founders of Inc. 500 firms examined by Bhide (2000) attributed success

43

to an exceptional idea. Instead, the firms appear to be successful because they adapt to exploit niches in
the marketplace. Because the idea is not distinctive enough early on to merit VC financing, Inc. 500 firms
typically are funded by the entrepreneur’s own savings, her family and friends, or by credit card debt.
Given the paucity of capital, Bhide argues Inc. 500 firms typically find it hard to attract quality personnel
or collaborators, and take longer to grow than VC backed firms. Finally, unlike VC-financed firms that
have substantial turnover of top personnel, Bhide (2000, p305) finds that in all but one of the companies
from the Inc. 500 cohort of 1985 that had crossed $ 500 million in revenue by 1995, the same CEO was
still involved in management.
Thus innovation, standardization, and finance seem to be linked, with venture capital backed
firms starting out with more innovative, distinctive ideas, getting more initial finance, in return for greater
standardization and greater possible replacement of the managerial team down the line as compared to
Bhide’s sample of Inc. 500 firms. This is not to say that firms in Bhide’s sample are doing the wrong
thing. Their strategy typically relies on finding the right new niche for methods or products that have
worked elsewhere. They need to be flexible to be opportunistic, which makes it harder for them to
standardize to attract finance, especially because their capabilities are so centered on the human capital of
the founder. They are doomed to be financially constrained until they hit upon their niche, at which point
they can standardize and obtain easier financing.
2.12. Stock Markets, Venture Capital, and Innovation
My model also suggests a reason why stock markets are so critical to the development of
innovation and venture capital. Brown, Martinsson, and Petersen (2011) find in a large sample of firms
across 32 countries that better access to stock market financing is associated with high levels of R&D
investment, particularly in small firms, but is unimportant for firm investment in fixed capital. Similarly,
Black and Gilson (1998) note the relative paucity of venture capital financing in Germany relative to the
United States, and suggest that it is primarily because exit through an IPO is largely unavailable in

44

Germany (the predominant form of exit in their sample is through a buyback by the company of the
venture capitalist’s stake).
Black and Gilson (1998) argue that the reason the IPO is so important is that it allows the
entrepreneur to reacquire control (they note that the venture capitalist typically gives up many of his
control rights and his controlling stake at the time of the IPO). Yet this explanation does not sit well with
the evidence I refer to in the previous sub-section, which suggests a significant number of entrepreneurs
in the United States tend to leave under venture capitalist tutelage. My model suggests an alternative
explanation. The role of the venture capitalist is to use his control rights to help standardize the firm, and
ready it for public control by more dispersed equity. Once standardization is achieved, the firm can be
taken public, and the venture capitalist no longer needs control rights. The role of the vibrant stock market
is not so much to reduce the burden on the entrepreneur of VC oversight, but to reward both for making
the firm “controllable”. The entrepreneur’s incentives are aligned with the venture capitalist because her
equity stake tends to benefit tremendously from standardization. My model suggests the reason venture
capital is less popular or effective in Germany at the time Black and Gilson write is because the majority
of the “exits” are entrepreneurs buying back their own stake from the venture capitalist, which gives them
little ability to capture the future rents of the enterprise, and hence little reward from VC financing.30

III.

Discussion

I now discuss the links between differentiation and standardization – bringing the two aspects of the
entrepreneur’s role together. This will also help us see where in the spectrum of innovations small startups may have an advantage over more mature firms, and vice versa. I then want to turn briefly to changes
in the environment that are affecting the nature of the corporation and its financing. I will conclude with a
discussion of the political environment and how that might impact the financing of innovation.
30

The entrepreneur could sell the firm to her managers (see Acharya, Myers, and Rajan (2011) or Kreps (1999)).
However, the amount she can raise will be limited by the financing capacity of those managers, which in turn will be
constrained by the availability of finance. She could allow her firm to be acquired, but the principle issues there
resemble the ones we have already explored with a public equity offering.

45

3.1. Differentiation and Standardization
The fundamental tension running through this paper is between the two transformations, between
differentiation and standardization, or put differently, the extent of innovation and the availability of
finance. Because of the difficulties in financing, start-ups are likely to stay away from capital intensive
fundamental innovation where the commercialization possibilities are uncertain.
But what of more mature firms who have the internal cash flows to finance innovation? To the
extent that central headquarters is remote, both in physical distance as well as in technical expertise, from
the research and development unit of the corporation, it is not clear that headquarters has better
knowledge to finance effectively than would an outside financier (though see Gertner, Scharfstein, and
Stein (1994)). Indeed, because of internal politics (see Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000) or Scharfstein
and Stein (2000)), innovative but disruptive projects may have less chance of being financed internally.
Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center, set up to create new technologies, played a key role in inventing laser
printing, the Ethernet, the graphical user interface, and personal distributed computing. Xerox’s
management based in Rochester, New York, skeptical of the maverick California-based group,
discouraged development, and many of these inventions were commercialized elsewhere (see Seru
(forthcoming) for evidence on the decline in a target’s innovation following diversifying acquisitions).
There are other reasons why a mature firm may be less innovative. An entrepreneur in a small
stand-alone start-up tends to experience high costs of failure. The scarcity of funds and the knowledge of
the fall that awaits her if the enterprise does not succeed give the entrepreneur focus. By contrast, the
manager of an incubator in a mature firm overflowing with cash flows can rely on the typically soft
budget constraint in large organizations to experiment endlessly. Neither the downside nor the upside he
faces is large enough, nor is his budget constraint tight enough, to induce urgency.
Furthermore, the very process of standardization, of disciplining the workforce, makes it difficult
for anyone in the more mature firm to think or act outside the box, to differentiate the firm significantly
46

once again. For instance, while the technologists in a start-up can order a piece of equipment quickly
when needed, those in a mature firm have to go through the procurement office, with extensive delays as
contracts are bid out. Rules and procedures bring order, efficiency, and ease of control to large scale
operations but tend to suffocate innovation, which is typically spontaneous and unplanned. If rules and
compensation structures differ for the mainstream division and for the innovation incubator, it will tend to
breed resentment and internal conflict, while if the firm puts in place common rules and compensation
structures, they will tend to be tailored for the mature businesses rather than for the incubator (see Kanter
(1989)).
So both the greater tolerance of failure and standardization make it harder for a mature public
firm’s employees to innovate radically and successfully. This is not to say that mature firms have no
advantages. Apart from their ability to deploy more resources, their previous cluster of patents allows
them to defend an innovation, while their existing organization and their network of collaborators and
customers allows them to commercialize it quickly. To the extent that top management is still
entrepreneurial in spirit, and is close to the technologies being developed, they may have the ability and
willingness to take big, radical risks. Mature corporations may also focus on buying out small innovators
and commercializing their products rather than innovating on their own.
3.2. Mature Firms and the Matrix
Much of my analysis has focused on the early stages of the firm. This may well be when the most
dramatic changes in the structure of a firm and its capital structure take place. Of course, much of the
existing capital structure literature focuses on more mature firms, where capital structure choices may
already be largely pre-determined by earlier decisions. The problems for mature firms are different – for
instance, the agency costs associated with dispersed equity, which has occupied center stage ever since
Berle and Means (1932) – though as I have hinted earlier, some of the issues I examine will carry over.

47

While I leave detailed analysis to future work, it is useful to lay out in Figure 3 the array of
possibilities for firms and financing when we consider both standardization and differentiation. A laundry
shop is low on both differentiation and standardization. A utility is low on differentiation but high on
standardization, hence it is easy to finance. A wealthy family enterprise can be high on differentiation and
relatively low on standardization – it can differentiate more (though families may be undiversified and
risk averse, which will eventually limit differentiation) without standardizing because it has little need to
cater to financial markets. Finally, a mature firm with entrepreneurial roots such as Microsoft scores high
on both differentiation as well as standardization. The central forces governing the structure of the
laundry shop or the small grocer are different from those governing the entrepreneurial high technology
firm, and a tremendous source of confusion in the literature has been to try and understand the latter by
examining the former.
3.3. Changes in the environment
My essential point has been that ownership improves coordination when key assets are
irreplaceable and coordination is costly. Recent changes in the environment have been making a variety
of assets more easily replicable, even while bringing down the costs of coordination. These clearly have
had effects on the nature of the firm and its financing.
In recent decades in industrial countries, there has been substantial deregulation and liberalization
of domestic product markets, of cross-border trade and capital flows, and of the financial sector. Taken
together, these changes have tended to increase the ease of replication, and thus have reduced the
criticality, of physical assets and of assets whose uniqueness is only protected by regulation. For instance,
when regulations limited entry, when the few domestic intermediate goods producers were locked into
contracts with the incumbent, and when financing was scarce, collaborators could not quit an enterprise
and set up easily in competition. The organization man (Whyte (1956)) was not just a product of the
cultural environment in the United States in the 1950s, he was evidence of the hold corporations had over

48

employees. Today, with few regulatory barriers to entry, a host of competing domestic and cross-border
producers of intermediate goods, and financing more available, it is easier for a collaborator to quit,
contract with suppliers, and buy the necessary assets to compete, which reduces the power of the
incumbent owner.
Even as physical-asset-based power has diminished, the costs of coordination have also fallen.
Machines today tend to be far more flexible, reprogrammable in an instant at low cost. They can make
small lots at much the same cost that they would take to make large lots. It makes far more sense for a
contract manufacturer to have multi-purpose programmable machines, which he uses to supply a variety
of downstream firms than for each firm to have a dedicated manufacturing base. In case a downstream
venture fails, the contract manufacturer can quickly redeploy his machines at low cost to someone else’s
order. The lower redeployment costs as a result of greater flexibility diminish the need for the
downstream firm to own the upstream firm in order to improve incentives to coordinate.
The greater availability of information and the ease of exchanging it add to the attractiveness of
contracting out because the cost of keeping in close touch, no matter what the distance separating
collaborators, is smaller. At the design stage, various collaborators in a project can share the same designs
electronically, so that each part fits perfectly. Designs can be shipped instantaneously to a distant contract
manufacturer, whose progress can be monitored in real time. Communications technology ensures that
everyone can be in close touch without ever being physically proximate. Given the ease of monitoring at a
distance, there is less need to bring a collaborator in as an employee who comes to the premises every day
to work.
Finally, detailed industry standards ensure that firms can be confident that others will coordinate
without any formal agreement. So long as a firm’s product adheres to the standard, it knows that it will be
inter-operable with a host of other products.

49

3.4. Effects on the Firm
Consider now the effects of the diminished power from certain kinds of assets as well as the
lower cost of coordination on the structure of firms:
Changes in the method of coordination: As the physical-asset-based authority of the entrepreneur
diminishes, any coordination will have to occur more by persuasion rather than by fiat. This means more
direct contact between the top and bottom of hierarchies – flatter hierarchies, more meetings, more
people-friendly management. The lower cost of communication does make it possible to reduce
managerial layers (see the arguments in Malone (2003) and the evidence in Rajan and Wulf (2006)).
Effective CEOs will earn power by creating bonds with key subordinates, building a strong and cohesive
management team. This reduction in asset-based authority extends to the financier also. Even if the
financier makes every single member of the management team replaceable, he is still exposed to the risk
that the entire management team walks out, taking the firm’s value with it. To the extent that the CEO has
made herself central to the team, more value will have to be paid to her than when she obtained power
only through delegated ownership of physical assets. One implication is that relative increases in CEO
compensation across countries should be viewed in the context of these regulatory and financial market
developments rather than narrowly through the lens of corporate governance.
Changes in critical assets: As physical and regulatory assets become less central to power,
protected intellectual property such as brand names and patents increasingly become the critical assets
around which firms are built. Moreover, because these assets have to be constantly refreshed through
human creativity and innovation, it is harder for firms to standardize, at least to the extent that was
possible in the past. More firm value will have to go to the firm’s innovators and creative personnel,
partly as rents as controls are more lax, partly as incentive. More equity based compensation may be
necessary across the flatter hierarchy (rather than just at the top) to align incentives of creative employees
with equity holders.

50

Changes in need for ownership: The lower cost of coordination can have complex effects on the
size of enterprises and their commonly owned assets. On the one hand, it can result in loosely coupled
global enterprises, tied together by common ownership of brand names, clients, and databases, but
without the close hierarchical control that characterized firms of the past. Global accounting, consulting,
and law firms are an example.
On the other hand, with physical assets providing less power, and with a lower need for
coordination, we would expect ownership of physical assets to be less important for business. Stories of
“virtual” businesses with a handful of employees generating hundreds of millions of dollars in sales are
legion today. However, these very factors make differentiation even more necessary to achieve a
sustainable advantage. When everyone uses the same contract manufacturer in Taiwan, the entrepreneur
has to make her idea or design attractively different because the quality of the manufacturing is the same.
Changes in organizations: Ownership was especially important when the entrepreneur knew the
direction she wanted to take the firm in, and had to enforce it. With greater need for differentiation,
innovation is more open-ended, and no one may know the precise direction that the enterprise has to go in
ex ante – unlike in my model where the entrepreneur knows where to take the firm. This may explain why
firms increasingly choose to innovate through alliances or consortiums with collaborators that have
important necessary capabilities (see, for example, Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy (2008) for the variety of
alliance structures). Alliances spread risk, bring the right capabilities together, and are more useful when
no one knows which way to proceed. They also become more viable when the costs of coordination are
low.
None of this is to say that the fundamental forces I have pointed to earlier in the paper have
ceased to be important. The seemingly high rate of break-up of alliances is consistent with the lower
commitment in those ventures that my model would predict. Boeing’s attempt to create the Boeing 787
Dreamliner by coordinating suppliers across the world came in very late and way over-budget, and ended

51

with Boeing having to buy some of its suppliers.31 Equally, the tension between the firm’s structure and
its financing are still extremely important. Even though the need for common asset ownership and hence
financing may be lower in a world where coordination across firms is easier, the entrepreneur has to
differentiate more, and because human capital is more critical, has a lower ability to promise the financier
an adequate return. On net, it is not obvious that the entrepreneurial problem of effecting the twin
transformations has become any easier.

Conclusion
Though presidential addresses are supposed to be timeless, it would be remiss of me to ignore the
political environment we are in. Finance is in some disrepute because of the near-death experience of
Wall Street in 2008, and the continuing travails of European banks. The crisis that started in 2007 is still
with us, and has severely damaged the real economy around the world. At times like these, there is a
strong tendency for critics to claim that finance is a zero, or even negative, sum game, adding risk to
economic activity without contributing real value. No doubt, a number of practices of the financial sector
ought to be re-examined, and regulation improved to reduce the financial sector’s ability to make one way
bets at the expense of the rest of the economy.
At the same time, we should not succumb to the rhetoric that financial innovation and creativity
are simply ways for the clever to part the innocent of their money. Such rhetoric does get louder after a
crisis, and makes it easier for governments to suppress finance (see Rajan and Zingales (2003 a, b)). What
I have tried to show in this paper is the very real potential cost if financiers are unable to play midwife to
innovative new firms, and if equity markets are not vibrant enough to reward entrepreneurial activity.
The broader point is that attempts to separate Main Street from Wall Street, real activity from “merely”
finance, are not useful. The two are intimately linked, both in theory and in practice.

31

See “Boeing’s Woes: Nightmareliner”, The Economist, September 1st 2011.

52

References

Acharya, Viral, Stewart Myers, and Raghuram Rajan, 2011, “The Internal Governance of
Firms”, Journal of Finance, Volume: 66 Issue: 3 Pages: 689-720: Jun 2011
Alchian, A. and H. Demsetz (1972), “Production, Information Costs and Economic
Organization'', American Economic Review, 777-705.
Alchian, A, Crawford and B.Klein (1978), “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents and the
Competitive Contracting Process'', Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2, 297326.
Asquith, Paul, and David Mullins, 1986, Equity issues and offering dilution, Journal of Financial
Economics 15, 61-89.
Baird, Douglas, 2009, “In Coase’s Footsteps”, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Baird, Douglas and Anthony Casey, 2011, “No exit: Withdrawal Rights in Chapter 11, mimeo,
University of Chicago.
Baker, George, Robert Gibbons and Kevin Murphy (2008), “Strategic Alliances: Bridges
Between “Islands of Conscious Power”, mimeo, M.I.T.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler (2011), “Behavioral Corporate Finance: An Updated
Survey”, NBER Working paper 17333.
Berglof, Erik and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden [1994], Short-Term versus Long-Term Interests: Capital
Structure with Multiple Investors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1055-1084.
Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means, Modern corporation and private property, 1933, New York :
Macmillan Company.

Bhide. Amar (2000) The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses, New York : Oxford University
Press.
Bhide, Amar (2008) The Venturesome Economy: How innovation sustains prosperity in a more interconnected world Princeton University Press, New Jersey.
Blair, Margaret, 2003, “Locking in Capital: What Corporate Law Achieved for Business Organizers

in the Nineteenth Century”, Working Paper no 495984, Georgetown University Law Center.
Black, Bernard and Ronald Gilson, 1998, “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets:
Banks versus Stock Markets”, Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 243-277.
Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripont. 2005. Contract Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bolton, Patrick and David Scharfstein (1990) “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency
Problems in Financial Contracting,” AER, 80, 93-106
53

Bolton, Patrick and David Scharfstein (1996) “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of
Creditors,” JPE, 104, 1-25
Brown, James, Gustav Martinsson, and Bruce Petersen (2011), “Law, Stock Markets, and
Innovation”, working paper, Iowa State University.
Brynjolfsson, Eric and Lorin and Hitt, 2003, “Beyond Computation: Information Technology,
Organizational Transformation, and Business Performance, in Inventing the
Organizations of the 21st Century, Thomas Malone, Robert Laubacher, and Michael Scott
Morton ed., M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn [1991], “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangements” The American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3. (Jun., 1991), pp.
497-513.

Coase, R. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm", Economica, 386-405.
Dessein, Wouter and Tano Santos. 2006. “Adaptive Organizations.” Journal of Political
Economy 114: 956-95.
Diamond, Douglas, 1991, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August 1991.
Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan (2000) "A Theory of Bank Capital", Journal of Finance,
vol 55, no 6, 2431-2465.
Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan (2001) “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and
Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking”, 2001, Journal of Political Economy , vol 109,
2, 287-327.
Fama, E. and M. Jensen (1983a) Separation of Ownership and Control, Journal of Law and
Economics, pp. 301-325
Fama, E. and M. Jensen (1983b) Agency Problems and Residual Claims, Journal of Law and
Economics, pp. 327-349
Gertner, Robert, David Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein. "Internal versus External Capital Markets."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 4 (November 1994): 1211-1230.

Gibbons, Robert, 2005, “Four formal(izable) theories of the firm?, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization”, vol 58, 200-245.
Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, David Scharfstein, 2009, “Performance persistence
in entrepreneurship”, Journal of Financial Economics 96 (2010) 18–32
Guinane, Timothy, Ron Harris, Naomi Lamoreaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, 2007, “Putting
the Corporation in its Place”, NBER Working Paper, 13109.
Hansmann, Henry, Reinier Kraakman, and Richard Squire, 2006, “Law and the Rise of the
54

Firm”, Harvard Law Review, vol 119, no 5, pp 1333-1403.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv (1991) “The Theory of Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance,
46, 297-355
Hart, Oliver and Sanford Grossman, 1986, "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration" , Journal of Political Economy (August 1986).
Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom , 2010, “A Theory of Firm Scope, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125 (2): (May 2010) 483-513.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1990) “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm”, The Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 6., pp. 1119-1158.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1994) "A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
Capital" (with J. Moore), Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4) (1994) 841-79.
Hellmann, Thomas and Manju Puri, 2000, “The interaction between product market and
financing strategy: The role of venture capital,” with Thomas Hellmann, Review of
Financial Studies, 13(4), 959-984.
Hellmann, Thomas and Manju Puri (2002) “Venture capital and the professionalization of startup firms: Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (1), 169-197.
Holmstrom, Bengt. 1999. “The Firm as a Subeconomy.” Journal of Law Economics and
Organizations 15: 74-102.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization 7: 24-52.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1994. “The Firm as an Incentive System.” American
Economic Review 84: 972-91.
Holmstrom, Bengt and John Roberts. 1998. “The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12: 73-94.
Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling (1976), “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305-360.
Jensen (1986) “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate finance, and Takeovers,” AER, 76,
323-329
Kaplan, Steven and Per Stromberg, 2002, “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World:
An Empirical Analysis of V ture Capital Contracts”, Review of Economic Studies, 1-35.
Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy, and Per Stromberg , 2009, “Should Investors Bet on the Jockey or
the Horse? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business Plans to Public
55

Companies”, Journal of Finance, vol 64, 1, 75-114.
Knight, Frank (1921) Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, Boston ; New York : Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1921
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000, "Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation" , Rand Journal of Economics, 31, 674-692.
Kreps, David, 1990, Corporate culture and economic theory, in James E. Alt and Kenneth A.
Shepsle, editors, Rational Perspectives on Political Science, Cambridge University Press, New York.
LANDIER, Augustin DAVID SRAER and DAVID THESMAR, "Optimal Dissent in Organizations", The
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 76, n. 2, March 2009, p. 761-794.
Lerner, Joshua and Ulrike Malmendier, 2010, “Contractibility and Contract Design in Strategic
Alliances”, American Economic Review, 100, 214–246.
Malone, Thomas, 2003, “Is Empowerment Just a Fad? Control, Decision Making, and IT” in
Inventing the Organizations of the 21st Century, Thomas Malone, Robert Laubacher, and Michael
Scott Morton ed., M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole (1999), “Unforseen Contingencies and Incomplete Contracts, Review
of Economic Studies, vol 66, 83-114
Masten, Scott, 1988, A Legal Basis for the Firm, Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, Vol.
4, No. 1 (Spring, 1988), pp. 181-198
Modigliani, Franco and Merton H. Miller, 1958, “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and the
Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48: 261-297.
Myers, Stewart, (1977) “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing” Journal of Financial Economics, 5,
147-175
Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majluf (1984) “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 187-222
Myers, Stewart, Raghuram Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, 2005, “Financing Organizations 1: Start-up”,
mimeo, University of Chicago.
Novaes, Walter and Luigi Zingales (1993), Financial Distress as a Collapse of Incentives, mimeo,
University of Chicago.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, “Was There a Nasdaq Bubble in the Late 1990s?”, Journal of
Financial Economics 81, 61–100.

Peach, W. Nelson, The Security Affiliates of National Banks, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press,

1941.

Perez, Carlota,2002, Technological revolutions and financial capital : the dynamics of bubbles and
golden ages, Northampton, MA, USA : E. Elgar Pub
56

Perotti, Enrico C & Spier, Kathryn E, 1993. "Capital Structure as a Bargaining Tool: The Role of
Leverage in Contract Renegotiation," American Economic Review, vol. 83(5), pages 1131-41,
December.
Rajan, R. and J. Wulf, 2006, “The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on the Changing Nature of
Corporate Hierarchies”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 2006, 88, (4), 759-773

Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, (1998), “Power in a Theory of the Firm'', Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol 113, pp 387-432.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, 2000, "The Governance of the New Corporation", in Xavier Vives, ed.
Corporate Governance Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, (2001), "The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A Theory of the Origins and
Growth of Firms", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (3): 805-851.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales (2003a), Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, Crown Business Division
of Random House, New York, NY.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales (2003b), "The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the
20th Century", Journal of Financial Economics, vol69, 1, July 2003, 5-50.
Roy, William (1997), Socializing capital : the rise of the large industrial corporation in America,
Princeton University Press, Princeto, NJ.
Scharfstein, David and Jeremy Stein, 2000, “ The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets: Divisional
Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 6, pp. 2537-2564
Schoar, Antoinette, and Luo Zuo, 2011, Shaped By Booms And Busts: How The Economy Impacts
CEO Careers And Management Style, NBER working paper 17590
Schumpeter, Joseph, (1911) The theory of economic development; an inquiry into profits, capital,
credit, interest, and the business cycle
Seru, Amit (forthcoming), “Firm Boundaries Matter: Evidence from Conglomerates and R&D
Activity. Journal of Financial Economics.
Shleifer, Andrei and Lawrence Summers (1988), “Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers”, in A. Auerbach
ed: Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1989, “Managerial Entrenchment: The Case of Manager-Specific
Investments” Journal of Financial Economics, November, 1989.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1997) “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 52,
737-783.
57

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1992, “Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
approach”, Journal of Finance (1992) vol. 47 (4) pp. 1343-1366
Stole, Lars and Jeffrey Zwiebol, 1996, Organizational Design and Technology Choice under Intra-firm
Bargaining," , American Economic Review, March 1996, 86(1):195-222.

Teece, David, 1986, “Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
collaboration, licensing and public policy”, Research Policy, Volume 15, Issue 6, Pages 285-305
Teece, David and Gary Pisano, 2007, “How to Capture Value from Innovation: Shaping Intellectual
Property and Industry Architecture” , California Management Review, 50th Anniversary Special
Issue on Leading Through Innovation, 50:1 , 278-296.
Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Corporate Finance, 2006, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Titman, Sheridan, 1984, “The effect of capital structure on a firm's liquidation decision”, Journal of
Financial Economics, Volume 13, Issue 1, March 1984, Pages 137-151
Van den Steen, Eric. 2010. “Interpersonal Authority in a Theory of the Firm.” American Economic
Review 100: 466-90.
Whyte, William, 1956, The Organization Man, Simon and Schuster, New York.
Williamson, Oliver 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New
York, NY: Free Press
Williamson, Oliver. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, Oliver, 1988, “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance, 43,
567-91.
Williamson, Oliver. 2002. “The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice to
Contract.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16: 171-95.
Zingales, Luigi (2000), “In Search of New Foundations”, Journal of Finance, vol 60, 4, 1623-1653.
Zwiebel, Jeffrey (1996), “Dynamic Capital Structure under Managerial Entrenchment”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 5 (Dec., 1996), pp. 1197-1215.

58

59

60

Figure 3: Differentiation and Standardization

Low
standardization

High
standardization

Low
differentiation

Laundry Shop

Utility

High
differentiation

Family firm

High tech IPO

61

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 3
We know that if

d
 0 , the VC wants to set standardization at its maximal level. Thus the theorem
d

holds weakly, and strictly so long as the solution to the entrepreneur’s maximization problem is interior.
Now let

V E (  ) 1    V C 1    
V E (  ) 1   
d
 0 . The entrepreneur’s utility is U E 
 


2
2
2(1  r ) 
d

 V E (  ) 1    V C 1    


2
2(1  r ) 


and the VC’s utility is U VC  (1   ) 

V E (  ) 1   

Therefore, the entrepreneur’s utility is

U VC . This implies the entrepreneur’s first
2
1
order condition is 

an interior optimal

V E (1   ) E d 
 dU VC

V

 0 . The VC’s utility is concave in  and has
2
2
d  (1   ) d 



VC

dU E
dU VC
VC
 0 at    . This means that
, where
 0 at    VC . If U E is
d
d

concave, we are done. If not, we know that

dU VC
VC
is decreasing in  by concavity of U . That means
d

dU E
 0 for    VC . So the entrepreneur preferred choice of standardization is lower than the venture
d
capitalist’s. Finally, since the weight the entrepreneur puts on the venture capitalist’s utility in his own
maximization problem is
in

.


, it must be that the standardization chosen by the entrepreneur increases
1

Proof of Proposition 4:
We have seen the basic underinvestment problem when the mature firm finances with a new equity
issuance and

(1   ) P P
v i  0.
2(1  r )

Now consider the multiple cases at different levels of legacy debt and new debt issuance, where

dP
 iP .
1 r





Case 1: D   V C and ( D  d P )   V C  v P .

62

Equity’s outside option of replacing management, if the project is not undertaken, fetches  V C  D . The
incremental surplus if it works with management is (1   )V C . So its date-2 value from Nash bargaining
is

(1   ) C
(1   ) C
V  D . Similarly, if the project is undertaken, equity gets
V  v P   ( D  d P ) .
2
2

This means the incremental present value (at date 1) to old equity of undertaking the project, financing

(1   ) P d P
(1   ) P P
v 

v  i . This is no different from the present value of
with debt, is
2(1  r )
1  r 2(1  r )
financing with equity explored in the text.





Case 2: D   V C and ( D  d P )   V C  v P .
In this case, equity’s outside option is unchanged if the project is not undertaken, but is zero if it is (since
the surplus generated after replacement is insufficient to repay debt). Hence the date-2 value of old equity
post investment is

V

C

 vP   (D  d P )
2

. If the firm does not invest, its value is

(1   ) C
V  D . So on
2

rearranging and substituting, the incremental date-1 present value to old equity from investment is

(1   ) P P  D  d P   (V C  v P ) 
v i  
 . The last term is the present value of rents foregone by
2(1  r )
2(1  r )


management relative to all equity financing, and is positive. Thus equity’s incentive to invest is greater
with debt financing than with equity financing.





Case 3: D   V C and  V C  v P  ( D  d P ) . In this case, it is easily checked that old equity bears the
full cost of debt financing, so there is no difference between financing with equity and financing with
debt.





Case 4: D   V C and ( D  d P )   V C  v P  D .
When the firm finances with equity, the incremental value to equity is

V C  D  P

1  1 
C
P
(
  i . When the firm finances with debt, the incremental value
) V  v   D 
1 r  2
2



C
P
P
C
1  V  v   ( D  d ) V  D  

 . Comparing the two, and simplifying, the present

to equity is
1 r 
2
2



 D  d P   (V C  v P ) 
value of equity at date 1 is higher financing with debt by the amount 
 , which is
2(1  r )


the extent of loss of rents to management from debt financing.

63





Case 5: D   V C and ( D  d P )  D   V C  v P . When the firm finances with equity, the
C
P
C
1  V  v   D V  D   P

  i . When it finances with debt, the

incremental value to equity is
1 r 
2
2



C
P
P
C
1  V  v   ( D  d ) V  D  

 . Comparing the two, and

incremental value to equity is
1 r 
2
2



simplifying, the present value of equity at date 1 is higher financing with debt by the amount

iP 

dP
iP
 .
2(1  r ) 2

Thus in all cases, the value of old equity when financing the new project with debt is weakly higher than





when financing with equity, and strictly higher when ( D  d P )   V C  v P . Note also that, ceteris
paribus, the incremental present value to equity from debt financing increases (weakly) with legacy debt
D and reaches a maximal value of

iP
when D   V C  v P  .
2

64

