                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      COLLATERAL CRISES

                                          Gary B. Gorton
                                         Guillermo Ordonez

                                        Working Paper 17771
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17771


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We thank Fernando Alvarez, Tore Ellingsen, Ken French, Mikhail Golosov, David K. Levine, Guido
Lorenzoni, Kazuhiko Ohashi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Alp Simsek, Andrei Shleifer, Javier Suarez, Warren
Weber and seminar participants at Berkeley, Boston College, Columbia GSB, Darmouth, EIEF, Federal
Reserve Board, Maryland, Minneapolis Fed, Ohio State, Richmond Fed, Rutgers, Stanford, Wesleyan,
Wharton School, Yale, the ASU Conference on ”Financial Intermediation and Payments”, the Bank
of Japan Conference on ”Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary Policy”, the 2011 SED Meetings
at Ghent, the 11th FDIC Annual Bank Research Conference, the Tepper-LAEF Conference on Advances
in Macro-Finance, the Riksbank Conference on Beliefs and Business Cycles at Stockholm and the
2nd BU/Boston Fed Conference on Macro-Finance Linkages for their comments. We also thank Thomas
Bonczek, Paulo Costa and Lei Xie for research assistance. The usual waiver of liability applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordonez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Collateral Crises
Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordonez
NBER Working Paper No. 17771
January 2012
JEL No. E2,E20,E32,E44,G01,G2,G20

                                              ABSTRACT

Short-term collateralized debt, such as demand deposits and money market instruments - private money,
is efficient if agents are willing to lend without producing costly information about the collateral backing
the debt. When the economy relies on such informationally-insensitive debt, firms with low quality
collateral can borrow, generating a credit boom and an increase in output and consumption. Financial
fragility builds up over time as information about counterparties decays. A crisis occurs when a small
shock then causes a large change in the information environment. Agents suddenly have incentives
to produce information, asymmetric information becomes a threat and there is a decline in output and
consumption. A social planner would produce more information than private agents, but would not
always want to eliminate fragility.


Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Guillermo Ordonez
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Av. Room 208
New Haven, CT, 06520
guillermo.ordonez@yale.edu
1       Introduction

Financial crises are hard to explain without resorting to large shocks. But, the recent
crisis, for example, was not the result of a large shock. The Financial Crisis Inquiry
Commission (FCIC) Report (2011) noted that with respect to subprime mortgages:
”Overall, for 2005 to 2007 vintage tranches of mortgage-backed securities originally
rated triple-A, despite the mass downgrades, only about 10% of Alt-A and 4% of sub-
prime securities had been ’materially impaired’-meaning that losses were imminent
or had already been suffered-by the end of 2009” (p. 228-29). Park (2011) calculates
the realized principal losses on the $1.9 trillion of AAA/Aaa-rated subprime bonds
issued between 2004 and 2007 to be 17 basis points as of February 2011.1 The sub-
prime shock was not large. But, the crisis was large: the FCIC report goes on to quote
Ben Bernanke’s testimony that of ”13 of the most important financial institutions in
the United States, 12 were at risk of failure within a period of a week or two” (p. 354).
A small shock led to a systemic crisis. The challenge is to explain how a small shock
can sometimes have a very large, sudden, effect, while at other times the effect of the
same sized shock is small or nonexistent.

One link between small shocks and large crises is leverage. Financial crises are typ-
ically preceded by credit booms, and credit growth is the best predictor of the like-
lihood of a financial crisis.2 This suggests that a theory of crises should also explain
the origins of credit booms. But, since leverage per se is not enough for small shocks
to have large effects, it also remains to address what gives leverage its potential to
magnify shocks.

We develop a theory of financial crises, based on the dynamics of the production
and evolution of information in short-term debt markets, that is private money such
as demand deposits and money market instruments. We explain how credit booms
arise, leading to financial fragility where a small shock can have large consequences.
We build on the micro foundations provided by Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and
Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2011) who argue that short-term debt, in the form
    1
     Park (2011) examined the trustee reports from February 2011 for 88.6% of the notional amount of
AAA subprime bonds issued between 2004 and 2007.
   2
     See, for example, Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2011), Schularick and Taylor (2009), Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009), Borio and Drehmann (2009), Mendoza and Terrones (2008) and Collyns and Sen-
hadji (2002). Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011) (p. 1) study 14 developed countries over 140 years
(1870-2008): ”Our overall result is that credit growth emerges as the best single predictor of financial
instability.”

                                                   1
of bank liabilities or money market instruments, is designed to provide transactions
services by allowing trade between agents without fear of adverse selection. This is
accomplished by designing debt to be ”information-insensitive,” that is, such that it is
not profitable for any agent to produce private information about the assets backing
the debt, the collateral. Adverse selection is avoided in trade. But, in a financial
crisis there is a sudden loss of confidence in short-term debt in response to a shock; it
becomes information-sensitive, and agents may produce information, and determine
whether the backing collateral is good or not.

We build on these micro foundations to investigate the role of such information-
insensitive debt in the macro economy. We do not explicitly model the trading motive
for short-term information-insensitive debt. Nor do we explicitly include financial
intermediaries. We assume that households have a demand for such debt and we
assume that the short-term debt is issued directly by firms to households to obtain
funds and finance efficient projects. Information production about the backing collat-
eral is costly to produce, and agents do not find it optimal to produce information at
every date.

The key dynamic in the model concerns how the perceived quality of collateral evolves
if (costly) information is not produced. Collateral is subject to idiosyncratic shocks so
that over time, without information production, the perceived value of all collateral
tends to be the same because of mean reversion towards a ”perceived average qual-
ity,” such that some collateral is known to be bad, but it is not known which specific
collateral is bad. Agents endogenously select what to use as collateral. Desirable
characteristics of collateral include a high perceived quality and a high cost of infor-
mation production. In other words, optimal collateral would resemble a complicated,
structured, claim on housing or land, e.g., a mortgage-backed security.

When information is not produced and the perceived quality of collateral is high
enough, firms with good collateral can borrow, but in addition some firms with bad
collateral can borrow. In fact, consumption is highest if there is never information
production, because then all firms can borrow, regardless of their true collateral qual-
ity. The credit boom increases consumption because more and more firms receive
financing and produce output. In our setting opacity can dominate transparency and
the economy can enjoy a blissful ignorance. If there has been information-insensitive
lending for a long time, that is, information has not been produced for a long time,
there is a significant decay of information in the economy - all is grey, there is no black

                                            2
and white - and only a small fraction of collateral with known quality.
In this setting we introduce aggregate shocks that may decrease the perceived value
of collateral in the economy. A negative aggregate shock reduces the perceived qual-
ity of all collateral. The problem is that after a credit boom, in which more and more
firms borrow with debt backed by collateral of unknown type (but with high per-
ceived quality), a negative aggregate shock affects more collateral than the same ag-
gregate shock would affect when the credit boom was shorter or if the value of col-
lateral was known. Hence, the size of the downturn depends on how long debt has
been information-insensitive in the past.
A negative aggregate shock may or may not trigger information production. If, given
the shock, households have an incentive to learn the true quality of the collateral,
firms may prefer to cut back on the amount borrowed to avoid costly information
production, a credit constraint. Alternatively, information may be produced, in which
case only firms with good collateral can borrow. In either case, output declines be-
cause the short-term debt is not as effective as before the shock in providing funds to
firms.
In our theory, there is nothing irrational about the credit boom. It is not optimal to
produce information every period, and the credit boom increases output and con-
sumption. There is a problem, however, because private agents, using short-term
debt, do not care about the future, which is increasingly fragile. A social planner ar-
rives at a different solution because his cost of producing information is effectively
lower. For the planner, acquiring information today has benefits tomorrow, which
are not taken into account by private agents. When choosing an optimal policy to
manage the fragile economy, the planner weights the costs and benefits of fragility.
Fragility is an inherent outcome of using the short-term collateralized debt, and so
the planner chooses an optimal level of fragility. This is often discussed in terms of
whether the planner should ”take the punch bowl away” at the (credit boom) party.
The optimal policy may be interpreted as reducing the amount of punch in the bowl,
but not taking it away.
We are certainly not the first to explain crises based on a fragility mechanism. Allen
and Gale (2004) define fragility as the degree to which ”...small shocks have dispro-
portionately large effects.” Some literature shows how small shocks may have large
effects and some literature shows how the same shock may sometimes have large
effects and sometimes small effects. Our work tackles both aspects of fragility.

                                          3
Among papers that highlight magnification, Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) show that
leverage can have a large amplification effect. This amplification mechanism relies
on feedback effects to collateral value over time, while our mechanism is about a
sudden informational regime switch. In our setting, there is a sudden change in the
information environment; agents produce information and some collateral turns out
to be worthless, or firms cut back on their borrowing to prevent information produc-
tion. Furthermore, while their amplification mechanism works through the price of
collateral, our works through the volume of collateral available in the economy.

Papers that focus on potential different effects of the same shock are based on mul-
tiplicity. Diamond and Dybvig (1983), for example, show that banks are vulnerable
to random external events (sunspots) when beliefs about the solvency of banks are
self-fulfilling.3 Our work departs from this literature because fragility evolves en-
dogenously over time and it is not based on equilibria multiplicity but by switches
between uniquely determined information regimes.

Our paper is also related to the literature on leverage cycles developed by Geanakop-
los (1997, 2010) and Geanakoplos and Zame (2010), but highlights the role of informa-
tion production in fueling those cycles. Finally, there are a number of papers in which
agents choose not to produce information ex ante and then may regret this ex post.
Examples are the work of Hanson and Sunderam (2010), Pagano and Volpin (2010),
Andolfatto (2010) and Andolfatto, Berensten, and Waller (2011). Like us these models
have endogenous information production, but our work describes the endogenous
dynamics and real effects of such information.

In the next Section we present a single period setting and study the information prop-
erties of debt. In Section 3 we study the aggregate and dynamic implications of infor-
mation. We consider policy implications in Section 4. In Section 5 we present some
brief empirical evidence. In Section 6, we conclude.
  3
      Other examples include Lagunoff and Schreft (1999), Allen and Gale (2004) and Ordonez (2011).




                                                  4
2       A Single Period Model

2.1     Setting

There are two types of agents in the economy, each with mass 1 – firms and house-
holds – and two types of goods – numeraire and ”land”. Agents are risk neutral and
derive utility from consuming numeraire at the end of the period. While numeraire
is productive and reproducible – it can be used to produce more numeraire – land is
not. Since numeraire is also used as ”capital” we denote it by K.

Only firms have access to an inelastic fixed supply of non-transferrable managerial
skills, which we denote by L∗ . These skills can be combined with numeraire in a
stochastic Leontief technology to produce more numeraire, K 0 .

                          
                          A min{K, L∗ } with prob. q
                     K0 =
                               0        with prob. (1 − q)

We assume production is efficient, qA > 1. Then, the optimal scale of numeraire in
production is simply by K ∗ = L∗ .

Households and firms not only differ on their managerial skills, but also in their initial
endowment. On the one hand, households are born with an endowment of numeraire
K̄ > K ∗ , enough to sustain optimal production in the economy. On the other hand,
firms are born with land (one unit of land per firm), but no numeraire.4

Even when non-productive, land has a potential value. If land is ”good”, it delivers
C units of K at the end of the period. If land is ”bad”, it does not deliver anything.
Observing the quality of land costs γ units of numeraire. We assume a fraction p̂ of
land is good. At the beginning of the period, different units of land i can potentially
have different perceptions about being good. We denote these priors pi and assume
them commonly known by all agents. To fix ideas it is useful to think of an example.
Assume oil is the intrinsic value of land. Land is good if it has oil underneath, with
a market value C in terms of numeraire. Land is bad if it does not have any oil un-
derneath. Oil is non-observable at first sight, but there is a common perception about
    4
   This is just a normalization. We can alternatively assume firms also have an endowment of nu-
meraraire K̄f irms where K̄f irms < K ∗ < K̄ + K̄f irms .


                                               5
the probability each unit of land has oil underneath, which is possible to confirm by
drilling the land at a cost γ.

In this simple setting, resources are in the wrong hands. Households only have nu-
meraire while firms only have managerial skills, but production requires both inputs
in the same hands. Since production is efficient, if output were verifiable it would be
possible for households to lend the optimal amount of numeraire K ∗ to firms using
state contingent claims. In contrast, if output were non-verifiable, firms would never
repay and households would never be willing to lend.

We will focus in this later case in which firms can hide the numeraire. However,
we will assume firms cannot hide land, what renders land useful as collateral. Firms
can promise to transfer a fraction of land to households in the event of not repaying
numeraire, which relaxes the financial constraint from output non-verifiability.

The perception about the quality of collateral then becomes critical in facilitating
loans. To be precise, we will assume that C > K ∗ . This implies that all land that
is known to be good can sustain the optimal loan, K ∗ . Contrarily, all land that is
known to be bad is not able sustain any loan.5 But more generally, how much can a
firm with a piece of land that is good with probability p borrow? Is information about
the true value of the collateral generated or not?


2.2    Optimal loan for a single firm

In this section we study the optimal short-term collateralized debt for a single firm,
considering the possibility that lenders may want to produce information about col-
lateral. In this paper we study a single-sided information problem, since the bor-
rower does not having resources in terms of numeraire to learn about the collateral.
In a companion paper, Gorton and Ordonez (2012) extend the model to allow both
borrowers and lenders being able to learn the collateral value.

Since firms can compute the incentives of households to acquire information, they op-
timally choose between debt that triggers information production or not. Triggering
   5
     Since we assume C > K∗, the issue arises of whether the excess of good collateral could be sold
to finance optimal borrowing by another firm in the economy. We rule this out, implicitly assuming
that the original firm uniquely is needed to maintain the collateral value. Consequently, collateral’s
ownership is effectively indivisible in terms of maintaining its value. For example, in the real world if
the originator, sponsor, and servicer of a mortgage-backed security are the same firm, the collateral is
of high value, but collateral’s value deteriorates when these roles are separated.

                                                   6
information production (information-sensitive debt) is costly because it raises the cost
of borrowing to compensate for the monitoring cost γ. However, not triggering infor-
mation production (information-insensitive debt) may also be costly because it may
imply less borrowing to discourage lenders from producing information. This trade-
off determines the information-sensitiveness of the debt and, ultimately the volume
of information in the economy and the information dynamics.


2.2.1   Information-Sensitive Debt

Lenders can learn the true value of the borrower’s land by paying an amount γ of
numeraire. When information is generated, it becomes public at the end of the period,
but not immediately. This introduces incentives for households to obtain information
before lending and individually take advantage of such information before it becomes
common knowledge. Assume lenders are competitive.6 Then:

                                p(qRIS + (1 − q)xIS C − K) = γ.

where K is the size of the loan, RIS is the face value of the debt and xIS the fraction
of land posted by the firm as collateral.

In this setting debt is risk-free. It is clear the firm should pay the same in case of
success or failure. If RIS > xIS C, the firm would always default, handing in the
collateral rather than repaying the debt. But, if RIS < xIS C the firm would always
sell the collateral directly at a price C and repay lenders RIS . This condition pins
down the fraction of collateral posted by a firm, as a function of p :

                                                                 pK + γ
                      RIS = xIS C            ⇒           xIS =          ≤ 1.
                                                                   pC
                                                                                                ∗
This implies that it is feasible for firms to borrow the optimal scale K ∗ only if pKpC+γ ≤
                γ
1, or if p ≥ C−K  ∗ . If this condition is not fulfilled, the firm can only borrow K =
pC−γ       ∗
  p
      < K when posting the whole unit of good land as collateral. Finally, it is not
feasible to borrow at all if pC < γ.
   6
   It is simple to modify the model to sustain this assumption. For example if only a fraction of firms
have skills L∗ , there will be more lenders than borrowers.




                                                  7
Expected net profits (net of the land value pC) from information-sensitive debt, are

                             E(π|p, IS) = p(qAK − xIS C).

Plugging xIS , in equilibrium gives:

                            E(π|p, IS) = pK ∗ (qA − 1) − γ.

Intuitively, with probability p collateral is good and sustains K ∗ (qA − 1) numeraire
in expectation and with probability (1 − p) collateral is bad and does not sustain any
borrowing. The firm always has to compensate for the monitoring costs γ.

It is optimal for firms to borrow the optimal scale as long as pK ∗ (qA − 1) ≥ γ, or
          γ                                                                        γ
p ≥ K ∗ (qA−1) . Combining the conditions for optimality and feasibility, if K ∗ (qA−1) >
   γ                  ∗
C−K ∗
       (or qA < C/K ), whenever the firm wants to borrow, it is feasible to borrow the
optimal scale K ∗ if the land is found to be good. We will assume this condition holds,
simply to minimize the kinks in the following profit function.
                     
                      pK ∗ (qA − 1) − γ                                γ
                                                         if p ≥   K ∗ (qA−1)
        E(π|p, IS) =
                      0                                                γ
                                                         if p <   K ∗ (qA−1)
                                                                             .


2.2.2   Information-Insensitive Debt

Another possibility for firms is to borrow without triggering information acquisition.
Still it should be the case that lenders break even in equilibrium

                               qRII + (1 − q)pxII C = K.

subject to debt being risk-free, RII = xII pC. Then

                                               K
                                       xII =      ≤ 1.
                                               pC

For this contract to be information-insensitive, we have to guarantee that lenders do
not have incentives to deviate, to check the value of collateral and to lend at the con-
tract provisions only if the collateral is good. Lenders want to deviate if the expected
gains from acquiring information, evaluated at xII and RII , are greater than the losses

                                               8
γ from acquiring information. Lenders do not have incentives to deviate if

        p(qRII + (1 − q)xII C − K) < γ           ⇒           (1 − p)(1 − q)K < γ.

More specifically, by acquiring information the lender only lends if the collateral is
good, which happens with probability p. If there is default, which occurs with prob-
ability (1 − q), the lender can sell at xII C a collateral that was obtained at pxII C = K,
making a net gain of (1 − p)xII C = (1 − p) Kp .

It is clear from the previous condition that the firm can discourage information acqui-
sition by reducing borrowing. If the condition is not binding at K = K ∗ , then there
are no strong incentives for lenders to produce information. If the condition is bind-
ing, the firm will borrow as much as possible given the restrictions of not triggering
information acquisition,
                                               γ
                                  K=                   .
                                        (1 − p)(1 − q)
Even though the technology is linear, the constraint on borrowing has p in the de-
nominator, which induces convexity in expected profits.

Information-insensitive borrowing is characterized by the following debt size:
                                                               
                                                   γ
                       K(p|II) = min K ∗ ,                  , pC .                      (1)
                                             (1 − p)(1 − q)

Expected profits, net of the land value pC, from information-insensitive debt are

                               E(π|p, II) = qAK − xII pC,

and plugging xII in equilibrium gives:

                             E(π|p, II) = K(p|II)(qA − 1).                              (2)

Intuitively, in this case profits are certain and given by the additional numeraire gen-
erated by restricted borrowing. Explicitly considering the kinks, profits are:
             
                                                         γ
             
             
              K ∗ (qA − 1)               if K ∗ ≤   (1−p)(1−q)
                                                                  (no credit constraint)
             
                    γ                                    γ
E(π|p, II) =   (1−p)(1−q)
                          (qA − 1)        if K ∗ >   (1−p)(1−q)
                                                                  (credit constraint)
             
             
              pC(qA − 1)
                                                        γ
                                          if pC <    (1−p)(1−q)
                                                                  (collateral selling).

                                            9
The first kink is generated by the point at which the constraint to avoid information
production is binding when evaluated at the optimal loan size K ∗ ; this occurs when
financial constraints start binding more than technological constraints. The second
kink is generated by the constraint xII ≤ 1, below which the firm is able to borrow up
to the expected value of the collateral pC without triggering information production.


2.2.3   Borrowing Inducing Information or Not?

Figure 1 shows the ex-ante expected profits, net of the expected value of land, under
these two information regimes, for each possible p. From comparing these profits
we obtain the values of p for which the firm prefers to borrow with an information-
insensitive loan (II) or with an information-sensitive loan (IS).

                        Figure 1: A Single Period Expected Profits
                                                                     𝐾 ∗ (𝑞𝐴 − 1)

                                                 𝛾
                                                          (𝑞𝐴 − 1)
                                           (1 − 𝑝)(1 − 𝑞)




                              𝑝𝐾 ∗ (𝑞𝐴 − 1) − 𝛾




                   𝐿
                  𝑝𝐼𝐼     𝐿
                         𝑝𝐼𝑆         𝑝𝐶𝑙                    𝑝𝐶ℎ       𝑝𝐻


                         II                       IS                   II


The cutoffs highlighted in Figure 1 are determined in the following way:

   1. The cutoff pH is the belief that generates the first kink of information-insensitive
      profits, below which firms have to reduce borrowing to prevent information



                                                  10
       production:
                                                                γ
                                            pH = 1 −                   .                               (3)
                                                           K ∗ (1 − q)

   2. The cutoff pLII comes from the second kink of information-insensitive profits,7
                                                       s
                                                 1         1    γ
                                        pLII =     −         −        .                                (4)
                                                 2         4 C(1 − q)


   3. The cutoff pLIS comes from the kink of information-sensitive profits

                                                              γ
                                             pLIS =                      .                             (5)
                                                       K ∗ (qA    − 1)

   4. Cutoffs pCh and pCl are obtained from equalizing the profit functions of information-
      sensitive and insensitive loans and solving the quadratic equation
                                                        
                                            ∗   γ
                                 γ = pK −                  (qA − 1).                                   (6)
                                          (1 − p)(1 − q)

There are only three regions of financing. Information-insensitive loans are chosen
for collateral with high and low values of p. Information-sensitive loans are chosen
for collateral with intermediate values of p.

To understand how these regions depend on the information cost γ, the five arrows
in the figure show how the different cutoffs and functions move as we reduce γ. If
information is free (γ = 0), all collateral is information-sensitive (i.e., the IS region is
p ∈ [0, 1]). Contrarily, as γ increases, the two cutoffs pCh and pCl converge and the
IS region shrinks until it disappears (i.e., the II region is p ∈ [0, 1]) when γ is large
                                   ∗
enough (specifically, when γ > KC (C − K ∗ )).
   7
    The positive root for the solution of pC = γ/(1 − p)(1 − q) is irrelevant since it is greater than pH ,
and then it is not binding given all firms with a collateral that is good with probability p > pH can
borrow the optimal level of capital K ∗ without triggering information acquisition.




                                                    11
Then, borrowing for each belief p, conditional on γ is,
                             
                             
                             
                                     K∗                 if pH < p
                             
                             
                                       γ
                                                         if pCh < p < pH
                             
                             
                                   (1−p)(1−q)
                             
                             
                             
                                             γ
                 K(p|γ) =        pK ∗ −   (qA−1)
                                                         if pCl < p < pCh
                             
                             
                                       γ
                                                         if pLII < p < pCl
                             
                             
                                   (1−p)(1−q)
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                                                    p < pLII
                             
                                     pC                 if


2.3    The Choice of Collateral

Collateral is heterogenous in two dimensions, the expected value of land p and the
cost of information acquisition γ. If firms can freely choose the cost to monitoring
collateral γ, then it is helpful to think about which collateral is more likely to be used
when borrowing.

Above we derived borrowing for different p and fixed γ. Similarly, we can derive bor-
rowing for different γ and fixed p. The next Proposition summarizes their properties.


Proposition 1 Effects of p and γ on borrowing.

Consider collateral characterized by the pair (p, γ). The reaction of borrowers to these variables
depends on the financial constraint and information sensitiveness.

   1. Fix γ.

       (a) No financial constraint: Borrowing is independent of p.
       (b) Information-sensitive regime: Borrowing is increasing in p.
       (c) Information-insensitive regime: Borrowing is increasing in p.

   2. Fix p.

       (a) No financial constraint: Borrowing is independent of γ.
       (b) Information-sensitive regime: Borrowing is decreasing in γ.
       (c) Information-insensitive regime: Borrowing is increasing in γ if higher than pC
           and independent of γ if pC.


                                                   12
                  Figure 2: Borrowing for different types of collateral
         𝛾
                       𝒑𝑪                                    𝑲∗

                                        𝜸
                 𝛾2𝐻              (𝟏 − 𝒑)(𝟏 − 𝒒)           𝛾1𝐻



                                                   𝜸
                            𝛾𝐿         𝒑𝑲∗ −
                                                (𝒒𝑨 − 𝟏)

             0                              𝐾 ∗�                              𝑝
                                                                          1
                                                𝐶


The proof is in Appendix A.1. Figure 2 shows these regions and the borrowing pos-
sibilities for all combinations (p, γ).

If it were possible for borrowers to choose the difficulty for lenders to monitor collat-
eral with belief p, then they would set γ > γ1H (p) for that p, such that p > pH (γ) and
the borrowing is K ∗ , without information acquisition.

This analysis suggests that, endogenously, an economy would be biased towards us-
ing collateral with relatively high p and relatively high γ. Agents in an economy with
increasing needs for collateral will first start using collateral that is perceived to be
of high quality, and later move towards using collateral of worse quality but mak-
ing information acquisition difficult and expensive. Even when outside the scope
of our paper, this framework can shed light in rationalizing security design and the
complexity of modern financial instruments.



2.4   Aggregation

The expected consumption of a household that lends to a firm with land that is good
with probability p is K − K(p) + E(repay|p). The expected consumption of a firm that
borrows using land that is good with probability p is E(K 0 |p) − E(repay|p). Aggre-
gate consumption is the sum of the consumption of all households and firms. Since



                                           13
E(K 0 |p) = qAK(p)                     Z    1
                           Wt = K +             K(p)(qA − 1)f (p)dp
                                        0

where f (p) is the distribution of beliefs about collateral types in the economy and
K(p) is monotonically increasing in p.
In the unconstrained first best (the case of verifiable output, for example) all firms
borrow and operate with K ∗ , regardless of beliefs p about the collateral. This implies
that the unconstrained first best aggregate consumption is

                                 W ∗ = K + K ∗ (qA − 1).

Since collateral with relatively low p is not able to sustain loans of K ∗ , the deviation of
consumption from the unconstrained first best critically depends on the distribution
of beliefs p in the economy. When this distribution is biased towards low percep-
tions about collateral values, financial constraints hinder the productive capacity of
the economy. This distribution also introduces heterogeneity in production, purely
given by heterogeneity in collateral and financial constraints, not by heterogeneity in
technological possibilities.
In the next section we study how this distribution of p endogenously evolves over
time, and how that affects the dynamics of aggregate production and consumption.



3    Dynamics

In this section we nest the previous analysis for a single period in an overlapping
generations economy. The purpose is to study the evolution of the distribution of col-
lateral beliefs that determines the level of production in the economy at every period.
We assume that each unit of land changes quality over time, mean reverting towards
the average quality of collateral in the economy, and we study how endogenous in-
formation acquisition shapes the distribution of beliefs over time. First, we study the
case without aggregate shocks to collateral, in which the average quality of collateral
in the economy does not change, and discuss the effects of endogenous information
production on the dynamics of credit. Then, we introduce aggregate shocks that re-
duce the average quality of collateral in the economy and generate crises, and study
the effects of endogenous information on the size of crises and the speed of recoveries.

                                                 14
3.1    Extended Setting

We assume an overlapping generation structure, with a mass 1 of risk neutral indi-
viduals who live for two periods. These individuals are born as households (when
”young”), with endowment of numeraire K̄ but no managerial skills, and then become
firms when ”old”, with managerial skills L∗ , but no numeraire to use in production.

We assume the numeraire is non-storable and land is storable until the moment its
intrinsic value (either C or 0) is extracted. Since land can be transferred across genera-
tions, firms hold land. When young, individuals use their endowment of non-storable
numeraire to buy land, which is useful as collateral when old to borrow productive
numeraire.

This is reminiscent of the role of fiat money in overlapping generations, with the
critical difference being that land is intrinsically valuable, is subject to imperfect in-
formation about its quality, and is used as collateral. As in those models, we have
multiple equilibrium based on multiple paths of rational expectations of land prices.
In Appendix A.3 we discuss this multiplicity of prices.

We impose restrictions that simplify the price of a unit of land with belief p, to in-
clude just the expected intrinsic value pC, and not its potential role as collateral. This
equilibrium has the advantage of isolating the dynamics generated by information
acquisition from the better understood dynamics generated by beliefs about future
prices of collateral. Still, the information dynamics we focus on in this equilibrium
remains in other equilibria, when the price of land is increasing in p.

The first of these restrictions is that information can be produced only at the begin-
ning of the period, not at the end. This assumption simplifies the price of land and
also justifies that firms prefer to post land as collateral rather than sell land at the risk
of information production. The second assumption is that each seller of land (each
old individual at the end of the period) matches with a unique buyer who has the
bargaining power (makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer). This implies that sellers will be
indifferent between selling the unit of land at pC or consuming pC in expectation.8

Under these assumptions, the single period analysis repeats over time. The only
   8
   It is simple to modify the model to sustain this assumption. For example, if a small fraction of
households inherit an endowment of new land, there will be more firms selling land than households
buying land. Since sellers who do not sell just deplete their unsold land, the mass of land sustaining
production in the economy is invariant. In Appendix A.3 we relax this assumption.


                                                 15
changing state variable linking periods is the distribution of beliefs about collateral.
This evolving distribution may generate credit booms but also credit crises. Hence,
there is a critical difference with models where credit booms and crises arise from
bubbles in the price of each unit of collateral, and this paper in which the price of
each unit of collateral is its fundamental value, and credit booms and crashes arise
from the units of land that can be used as collateral in the economy.


3.2    No Aggregate Shocks

We impose a specific process of idiosyncratic mean reverting shocks that are useful in
characterizing analytically the dynamic effects of information production on aggre-
gate consumption. First, we assume idiosyncratic shocks are observable, but not their
realization, unless information is produced. Second, we assume that the probability
land faces an idiosyncratic shock is independent of its type. Finally, we assume the
probability that land becomes good, conditional on having an idiosyncratic shock,
is also independent of its type. These assumptions are just imposed to simplify the
exposition. The main results of the paper are robust to different processes, as long as
there is mean reversion of collateral in the economy.

Specifically, we assume that initially (at period 0) there is perfect information about
which collateral is good and which is bad. In every period, with probability λ the true
quality of each unit of land remains unchanged and with probability (1 − λ) there is
an idiosyncratic shock that changes its type. In this last case, land becomes good with
a probability p̂, independent of its current type. Even when the shock is observable,
the realization of the new quality is not, unless a certain amount of the numeraire
good γ is used to learn about it.9

In this simple stochastic process for idiosyncratic shocks, and in the absence of ag-
gregate shocks to p̂, this distribution has a three-point support: 0, p̂ and 1. The next
proposition shows the evolution of aggregate consumption depends on the borrow-
ing of p̂, which can be either in the information sensitive or insensitive region.

Proposition 2 Evolution of aggregate consumption in the absence of aggregate shocks.
   9
    To guarantee that all land is traded, buyers of good collateral should be willing to pay C for a good
land even when facing the probability that land may become bad next period, with probability (1 − λ).
The sufficient condition is given by enough persistence of collateral such that λK ∗ (qA − 1) > (1 − λ)C.
Furthermore they should have enough resources to buy good collateral, then K̄ > C.


                                                   16
Assume there is perfect information about land types in the initial period. If p̂ is in the
information-sensitive region (p̂ ∈ [pCl , pCh ]), consumption is constant over time and is lower
than the unconstrained first best. If p̂ is in the information-insensitive region, consumption
grows over time if p̂ > p̂∗h or p̂ < p̂∗l , where p̂∗l and p̂∗h are the solutions to the quadratic
equation (1−p̂∗γ)(1−q) = p̂∗ K ∗ .

Proof
1. p̂ is information-sensitive (p̂ ∈ [pCl , pCh ])
In this case, information about the fraction (1 − λ) of collateral that gets an idiosyn-
cratic shock is reacquired every period t. Then f (1) = λp̂, f (p̂) = (1 − λ) and
f (0) = λ(1 − p̂). Considering K(0) = 0,

                       WtIS = K̄ + [λp̂K(1) + (1 − λ)K(p̂)] (qA − 1).                         (7)


Aggregate consumption WtIS does not depend on t; it is constant at the level at which
information is reacquired every period.
2. p̂ is information-insensitive (p̂ > pCh or p̂ < pCl )
Information on collateral that suffers an idiosyncratic shock is not reacquired and at
period t, f (1) = λt p̂, f (p̂) = (1 − λt ) and f (0) = λt (1 − p̂). Since K(0) = 0,

                      WtII = K̄ + λt p̂K(1) + (1 − λt )K(p̂) (qA − 1).
                                                           
                                                                                              (8)


Since W0II = K̄ + p̂K(1)(qA − 1) and limt→∞ WtII = K̄ + K(p̂)(qA − 1), the evolu-
tion of aggregate consumption depends on p̂. A credit boom ensues and aggregate
consumption grows over time, whenever K(p̂) > p̂K(1), or

                                             γ
                                                            > p̂∗ K ∗ .
                                    (1 −   p̂∗ )(1   − q)

                                                                                         Q.E.D.


This result is particularly important if the economy has collateral such that p̂ > pH . In
this case consumption grows over time towards the unconstrained first best. When
p̂ is high enough, the economy has an average enough collateral to sustain on pro-
duction at the optimal scale. As information is lost in the economy good collateral
implicitly subsidizes bad collateral and with time all firms are able to produce.

                                                     17
3.3   Aggregate Shocks

Now we introduce negative aggregate shocks that transform a fraction (1−η) of good
collateral into bad collateral. As with idiosyncratic shocks, the aggregate shock is
observable, but which good collateral changes type is not. When the shock hits, there
is a downward revision of beliefs for all collateral. That is, after the shock, collateral
with belief p = 1, gets revised downwards to p0 = η and collateral with belief p = p̂
gets revised downwards to p0 = η p̂.

Based on the discussion about the endogenous choice of collateral, which justifies
that collateral would be constructed to maximize borrowing and prevent informa-
tion acquisition, we focus on the case where, prior to the negative aggregate shock,
the average quality of collateral is good enough such that there are no financial con-
straints (that is, p̂ > pH ).

In the next proposition we show that the longer the economy does not face a negative
aggregate shock, the larger the consumption loss when such a shock does occur.


Proposition 3 The larger the boom and the shock, the larger the crisis.

Assume p̂ > pH and a negative aggregate shock η in period t. The reduction in consumption
∆(t|η) ≡ Wt −Wt|η is non-decreasing in shock size η and non -decreasing in the time t elapsed
previously without a shock.


Proof Assume a negative aggregate shock of size η. Since we assume p̂ > pH , the
average collateral does not induce information. Aggregate consumption before the
shock is given by equation (8). Aggregate consumption after the shock is:

                    Wt|η = K̄ + λt p̂K(η) + (1 − λt )K(η p̂) (qA − 1).
                                                           


Defining the reduction in aggregate consumption as ∆(t|η) = Wt − Wt|η


            ∆(t|η) = [λt p̂[K(1) − K(η)] + (1 − λt )[K(p̂) − K(η p̂)]](qA − 1).

That ∆(t|η) is non-decreasing in η is straightforward. That ∆(t|η) is non-decreasing
in t follows from
                         p̂[K(1) − K(η)] ≤ [K(p̂) − K(η p̂)]

                                             18
which holds because K(p̂) = K(1) (by assumption p̂ > pH ) and K(p) is monotonically
decreasing in p.                                                            Q.E.D.


The intuition for this proposition is the following. Pooling implies that bad collateral
is confused with good collateral. This allows for a credit boom because firms with
bad collateral get credit that they would not obtain otherwise. Firms with good col-
lateral effectively subsidize firms with bad collateral since good collateral still gets
the optimal leverage, while bad collateral is able to leverage more.

However, pooling also implies that good collateral is confused with bad collateral.
This puts good collateral in a weaker position in the event of negative aggregate
shocks. Without pooling, a negative shock reduces the belief that collateral is good
from p = 1 to p0 = η. With pooling, a negative shock reduces the belief that collateral
is good from p = p̂ to p0 = η p̂. Good collateral gets the same credit regardless of
having beliefs p = 1 or p = p̂. However credit may be very different under p = η and
p = η p̂. Furthermore, after a negative shock to collateral, either a high amount of the
numeraire is used to produce information, or borrowing is excessively restricted to
avoid such information production.

If we define ”fragility” as the probability aggregate consumption declines more than
a certain value, then the next corollary immediately follows from Proposition 3.


Corollary 1 Given a structure of negative aggregate shocks, the fragility of an economy
increases with the number of periods the debt in the economy has been informationally-
insensitive, and hence increases with the fraction of collateral that is of unknown quality.


In the next proposition we show that information acquisition speeds up recoveries.


Proposition 4 Information and recoveries.

Assume p̂ > pH and a negative aggregate shock η in period t. q  The recovery is faster when
                                                                           γ
information is generated after the shock when η p̂ < η p̂ ≡ 12 + 14 − K ∗ (1−q) , where pCh <
η p̂ < pH . That is, Wt+1
                       IS     II
                          > Wt+1                           IS
                                 for all η p̂ < η p̂ and Wt+1     II
                                                              ≤ Wt+1 otherwise.


Proof If the negative shock happens in period t, the belief distribution is f (η) = λt p̂,
f (η p̂) = (1 − λt ) and f (0) = λt (1 − p̂).

                                              19
In period t + 1, if information is acquired (IS case), after idiosyncratic shocks are
realized, the belief distribution is fIS (1) = λη p̂(1−λt ), fIS (η) = λt+1 p̂, fIS (p̂) = (1−λ),
fIS (0) = λ[(1 − λt p̂) − η p̂(1 − λt )]. Hence, aggregate consumption at t + 1 in the IS
scenario is,

              IS
            Wt+1 = K + [λη p̂(1 − λt )K ∗ + λt+1 p̂K(η) + (1 − λ)K(p̂)](qA − 1).                (9)


In period t + 1, if information is not acquired (II case), after idiosyncratic shocks are
realized, the belief distribution is fII (η) = λt+1 p̂, fII (p̂) = (1 − λ), fII (η p̂) = λ(1 − λt ),
fII (0) = λt+1 (1 − p̂). Hence, aggregate consumption at t + 1 in the II scenario is,

             II
           Wt+1 = K + [λt+1 p̂K(η) + λ(1 − λt )K(η p̂) + (1 − λ)K(p̂)](qA − 1).                (10)


Taking the difference between aggregate consumption at t+1 between the two regimes

                       IS
                     Wt+1     II
                          − Wt+1 = λ(1 − λt )(qA − 1)[η p̂K ∗ − K(η p̂)].                      (11)

This expression
           q      is non-negative for all η p̂K ∗ ≥ K(η p̂), or alternatively, for all η p̂ <
                      γ
η p̂ ≡ 12 + 14 − K ∗ (1−q) . From equation (6), pCh < η p̂ < pH .                   Q.E.D.


The intuition for this proposition is the following. When information is acquired after
a negative shock, not only are a lot of resources spent in acquiring information but
also only a fraction η p̂ of collateral can sustain the maximum borrowing K ∗ . When
information is not acquired after a negative shock, collateral that remains with belief
η p̂ will restrict credit in the following periods, until beliefs move back to p̂. This is
equivalent to restricting credit proportional to monitoring costs in subsequent peri-
ods. Not producing information causes a kind of debt overhang going forward. The
proposition generates the following Corollary.


Corollary 2 There exists a range of negative aggregate shocks (η such that η p̂ ∈ [pCh , η p̂]) in
which agents do not acquire information, but recovery would be faster if they did.


The next Proposition describes the evolution of the standard deviation of beliefs in
the economy during a credit boom. This proposition will be the basis of the empirical
analysis in Section 5.

                                                20
Proposition 5 During a credit boom, the standard deviation of beliefs declines.

Proof Assume at period 0 that the belief distribution is f (0) = 1 − p̂ and f (1) = p̂. The
original variance of beliefs is

                         V ar0 (p) = p̂2 (1 − p̂) + (1 − p̂)2 p̂ = p̂(1 − p̂).

At period t, during a credit boom, the belief distribution is f (0) = λt (1 − p̂), f (p̂) =
1 − λt and f (1) = λt p̂. Then, at period t the variance of beliefs is

                    V art (p|II) = λt [p̂2 (1 − p̂) + (1 − p̂)2 p̂] = λt p̂(1 − p̂),

decreasing in the length of the boom t.                                                       Q.E.D.


Finally, the next Proposition describes the evolution of the standard deviation of be-
liefs in the economy during a crisis.

Proposition 6 The increase in the dispersion of beliefs after a crisis is larger after a longer
boom.

For a negative aggregate shock η that triggers information about collateral with belief η p̂, the
increase of the standard deviation of beliefs is increasing in the length of the credit boom t.

Proof Assume a shock η at period t that triggers information acquisition about collat-
eral with belief η p̂. If the shock is ”small” (η > pCh ), there is no information acquisition
about collateral known to be good before the shock. If the shock is ”large” (η < pCh ),
there is information acquisition about collateral known to be good before the shock.
Now we study these two cases when the shock arises after a credit boom of length t.

1. η > pCh . The distribution of beliefs in case information is generated is given by
f (0) = λt (1 − p̂) + (1 − λt )(1 − η p̂), f (η) = λt p̂ and f (1) = (1 − λt )η p̂. Then, at period t
the variance of beliefs with information production is

                      V art (p|IS) = λt p̂(1 − p̂)η 2 + (1 − λt )η p̂(1 − η p̂),

Then

           V art (p|IS) − V art (p|II) = (1 − λt )η p̂(1 − η p̂) − λt p̂(1 − p̂)(1 − η 2 ),

                                                  21
increasing in the length of the boom t.

2. η < pCh . The distribution of beliefs in case information is produced is given by
f (0) = λt (1 − p̂) + (1 − λt (1 − p̂))(1 − η p̂), and f (1) = (1 − λt (1 − p̂))η p̂. Then, at period
t the variance of beliefs with information production is

                  V art (p|IS) = λt p̂(1 − p̂)η 2 p̂ + (1 − λt (1 − p̂))η p̂(1 − η p̂),

Then

       V art (p|IS) − V art (p|II) = (1 − λt (1 − p̂))η p̂(1 − η p̂) − λt p̂(1 − p̂)(1 − η 2 p̂),

also increasing in the length of the boom t.

The change in the variance of beliefs also depends on the size of the shock. For very
large shocks (η → 0) the variance can decline. This decline is lower the larger is t.
Q.E.D.




3.4    Numerical Illustration

In this subsection we illustrate our dynamic results with a numerical example. We
assume idiosyncratic shocks happen with probability (1 − λ) = 0.1, in which case the
collateral becomes good with probability p̂ = 0.92. Other parameters are q = 0.6, A =
3 (investment is efficient and generates a return of 80%), K̄ = 10, L∗ = K ∗ = 7 (the
endowment is large enough to allow for optimal investment), C = 15 and γ = 0.35.

Given these parameters we can obtain the relevant cutoffs for our analysis. Specif-
ically, pH = 0.88, pLII = 0.06 and the region of beliefs p ∈ [0.22, 0.84] is information
sensitive. Figure 3 plots the ex-ante expected profits with information sensitive and
insensitive debt, and the respective cutoffs.

Using these cutoffs in each period, we simulate the model for 100 periods. At period
0 there is perfect information about the true quality of all collateral in the economy.
Over time, idiosyncratic shocks make information to vanish unless it is replenished.
The dynamics of consumption arises from the dynamics of belief distribution.

We introduce a negative aggregate shock that transforms a fraction (1−η) of good col-
lateral into bad collateral in periods 5 and 50. We also introduce a positive aggregate

                                                   22
                                            Figure 3: Expected Profits and Cutoffs
                                       6



                                       5



                                       4

                    Expected Profits                             E()IS
                                       3



                                       2                                        E()II



                                       1



                                       0
                                        0         0.2     0.4             0.6            0.8   1
                                                                Beliefs




shock that transforms a fraction 0.25 of bad collateral into good collateral in period 30.
We compute the dynamic reaction of consumption in the economy for different sizes
of negative aggregate shocks, η = 0.97, η = 0.91 and η = 0.90. We will see that small
differences in the size of a negative shock can have large dynamic consequences.

Figure 4 shows the evolution of the average quality of collateral for the three negative
and the positive aggregate shocks we assume. Aggregate shocks have a temporary
effect on the quality of collateral because mean reversion makes average quality con-
verge back to p̂ = 0.92. We choose the size of the negative aggregate shocks to guar-
antee that η p̂ is above pH when η = 0.97, is between pCh and pH when η = 0.91 and is
less than pCh when η = 0.90.

Figure 5 shows the evolution of aggregate consumption for the three negative aggre-
gate shocks. A couple of features are worth noting. First, if η = 0.97, the aggregate
shock is small enough such that it does not constrain borrowing and does not modify
the evolution of consumption. Second, the positive shock does not affect the evolu-
tion of consumption either. Since p̂ > pH a further improvement in average beliefs
does not further relax financial constraints.

As proved in Proposition 3, if η = 0.91 or η = 0.90, the reduction in consumption from
the shock in period 50, when the credit boom is mature and information is scarce, is
larger than the reduction in consumption when the shock happens in period 5. Fur-
thermore, consumption drops to a lower level in period 50 than in period 5. The

                                                                23
                                                                     Figure 4: Average Quality of Collateral
                                                   0.94

                                                                       =0.97                             =0.91
                                                   0.92




                  Average Quality of Collateral
                                                              0.9

                                                                                                                                                     pH
                                                   0.88



                                                   0.86

                                                                                                                    =0.90
                                                   0.84
                                                                                                                                                     pCh


                                                   0.82
                                                       0                        20         40                  60                80                100

                                                                                                    Periods




reason is that the shock reduces financing for a larger fraction of collateral when in-
formation has vanished over time. As proved in Proposition 4, a shock η = 0.91 does
not trigger information production, but a shock η = 0.90 does. Even when these two
shocks generate consumption crashes of similar magnitude, recovery is faster when
the shock is slightly larger and information is replenished.

                                                                                      Figure 5: Welfare
                                                              15.8
                                                                      =0.97
                                                              15.6

                                                              15.4

                                                              15.2
                                      Aggregate Consumption




                                                               15
                                                                                                                             Always produce
                                                                                                                             information
                                                              14.8                                                           about idiosyncratic
                                                                                      =0.90                                 shocks
                                                              14.6

                                                              14.4

                                                              14.2                                                  =0.91

                                                               14

                                                              13.8
                                                                  0              20            40               60                 80               100
                                                                                                     Periods



Finally, Figure 6 shows the evolution of the dispersion of beliefs about the collateral,
a measure of available information in the economy. As proved in Proposition 5, a

                                                                                                    24
credit boom is correlated with a reduction in the dispersion of beliefs. As proved in
Proposition 6, given that after many periods without a shock most collateral looks
the same, the information acquisition triggered by a shock η = 0.90 generates a larger
increase in dispersion in period 50 than in period 5.


               Figure 6: Standard Deviation of Distribution of Beliefs
                                                   0.4


                                                  0.35


                                                   0.3
                  Standard Deviation of Beliefs




                                                                                           =0.90
                                                  0.25


                                                   0.2


                                                  0.15


                                                   0.1                           =0.91
                                                         =0.97
                                                  0.05


                                                    0
                                                     0            20   40             60            80   100
                                                                            Periods




3.5   Discussion

Here we briefly discuss some issues that may have occurred to the reader. We have
motivated the model’s structure based on appealing to the micro foundations of
Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2011), where the best transaction medium is short-
term debt. In our model, as it stands, the land could simply be sold by the old gen-
eration (the borrowers) to the young generation (the lenders). This is because we did
not include a need for the young to have a transactions medium to use to shop during
their first period, and before the output is realized. If there was such a market, the
young would need to use the collateralized claims on the firm as ”money.” That is the
idea of short-term debt as money. For simplicity we did not include such a market.

In the model the firms are also uninformed about their own collateral quality. Like
the households they do not produce information every period because it is costly. We
view this as realistic. There may be other reasons to think that firms could differ in
ways which are unobservable to the households, so that there are firm types. This


                                                                            25
is a well-studied setting and we do not include it here. The main reason for this
omission is that we have abstracted from the financial intermediaries, which would
be screening firms and issuing liabilities to the households for use as money. This is
a subject for future research.

What about other reasons for producing information? We have eliminated all other
possible model embellishments and complications in order to focus attention on the
endogenous dynamics of information production in the economy with regard to short-
term debt. Clearly, however, there are other reasons why information should be pro-
duced. For example, firms might want to produce information in order to learn their
best investment opportunities. The interaction of such information production with
the possible production of information about the firm’s collateral potentially raises
interesting issues. For example, producing information about firms not only induces
more efficient investment but also leads to less borrowing in expectation. This is also
a subject of future research.

Finally, it is worth noting the differences between our model and a recent literature
in which credit constraints or other frictions generate ”over borrowing.” In some of
these settings private agents do not internalize the effects of their own leverage in
depressing collateral prices in case of shocks that trigger fire sales. Since a shock is
an exogenous unlucky event, the policy implications are clear: there should be less
borrowing. Examples of this literature would include Lorenzoni (2008), Mendoza
(2010) and Bianchi (2011). In contrast to these settings, there is nothing necessarily
bad about leverage in our model, compared to these models. First, leverage always
relaxes endogenous credit constraints. Second, fire sales are not an issue. In our
setting the efficient outcome may be fragility.



4    Policy Implications

In this section we discuss optimal information production when a planner cares about
the discounted consumption of all generations and faces the same information restric-
tions and costs that households and firms. Welfare is measured by
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                  Ut = Et          β τ −t Wt .
                                            τ =t



                                            26
First, we study the economy without aggregate shocks, and show that a planner
would like to produce information for a wider range of collateral p than short-lived
agents. Then, we study the economy with negative aggregate shocks, and show that
a planner is more likely to trigger information acquisition than decentralized agents.
However, when expected shocks are not very large or likely, it may be optimal for the
planner to avoid information production, riding the credit boom even when facing
the possibility of collapses.



4.1   Ex-Ante Policies in the Absence of Aggregate Shocks

The next Proposition shows that, when β > 0, the planner wants to acquire informa-
tion for a wider range of beliefs p.


Proposition 7 The planner’s optimal range of information-sensitive beliefs is wider than the
the decentralized range of information-sensitive beliefs.


Proof Denote the expected discounted consumption sustained by a unit of collateral
with belief p if producing information (IS) as

      V IS (p) = pK ∗ (qA − 1) − γ + β[λ(pV (1) + (1 − p)V (0)) + (1 − λ)V (p̂)] + pC

and expected discounted consumption if not producing information (II) as

                V II (p) = K(p)(qA − 1) + β[λV (p) + (1 − λ)V (p̂)] + pC


We can solve for
                                       pK ∗ (qA − 1)
                          V IS (p) =                 − γ + Z(p, p̂)
                                         1 − βλ
and
                                      K(p)(qA − 1)
                            V II (p) =               + Z(p, p̂),
                                         1 − βλ
                  h                    i
where Z(p, p̂) = β λ β(1−λ)
                      1−βλ
                              + (1 − λ) V (p̂) + pC.

The planner decides to acquire information if V IS (p) > V II (p), or

                           γ(1 − βλ) < [pK ∗ − K(p)](qA − 1),

                                              27
while, as shown in equation (6), individuals decide to acquire information when

                                γ < [pK ∗ − K(p)](qA − 1),

which effectively means the decision rule for the planner is the same that the decision
rule for decentralized agents, but with β > 0 for the planner and β = 0 for agents.
Q.E.D.


The cost of information is effectively lower for the planner, since acquiring informa-
tion has the additional gain of enjoying more borrowing in the future if the collateral
is found to be good. The difference between the planner and the agents widens with
the government discounting (β) and with the probability that the collateral remains
unchanged (λ).
The planner can align incentives easily by subsidizing information production by an
fraction βλ from lump sum taxes on individuals, such that, after the subsidy, the cost
of information production agents face is effectively γ(1 − βλ).


4.2   Ex-Ante Policies in the Presence of Aggregate Shocks

In this section we assume that the planner assigns a probability µ that a negative
shock occurs next period. The next two propositions summarize how the incentives
to acquire information change with the probability and the size of aggregate shocks.

Proposition 8 Incentives to acquire information in the presence of aggregate shocks increases
with the probability of the shock µ if p[K ∗ −K(η)] ≤ [K(p)−K(ηp)], and decreases otherwise.

Proof Without loss of generality we assume the negative shock can happen only once.
Expected discounted consumption sustained by a unit of collateral with belief p if
information is produced (IS) is

      V IS (p) = pK ∗ (qA − 1) + β[(1 − µ)[λ(pV (1) + (1 − p)V (0)) + (1 − λ)V (p̂)
                   +µ[λ(pV (η) + (1 − p)V (0)) + (1 − λ)V (η p̂)] + pC,

and if information is not produced (II) is

V II (p) = K(p)(qA − 1) + β[(1 − µ)[λV (p) + (1 − λ)V (p̂) + µ[λV (ηp) + (1 − λ)V (η p̂)] + pC.

                                              28
We can solve for

                        pK ∗ (qA − 1)    βλµ
           V IS (p) =                 −        p[K ∗ − K(η)](qA − 1) + Z(p, p̂)
                          1 − βλ        1 − βλ

and

                    K(p)(qA − 1)      βλµ
       V II (p) =                −γ−        [K(p) − K(ηp)](qA − 1) + Z(p, p̂).
                      1 − βλ         1 − βλ

Naturally, the expectation of aggregate shocks reduces expected consumption in both
situations. The effect on information production depends on which one drops more.
The Proposition arises straightforwardly from comparing V IS (p) and V II (p). Q . E . D .

To build intuition, assume η is such that K(ηp) < K(p) and K(η) = K ∗ , for exam-
ple if the shock is small and p = pH . In this case, the aggregate shock, regardless
of its probability, does not affect the expected discounted consumption of acquiring
information, but reduces the expected discounted consumption of not acquiring in-
formation. In this case, producing information relaxes the borrowing constraint in
case of a future negative shock, and when that shock is more likely, there are more
incentives to acquire information.

Proposition 9 Incentives to acquire information in the presence of aggregate shocks increases
with the size of the shock (decreases with η) if ∂K(ηp)
                                                   ∂η
                                                        ≤ p ∂K(η)
                                                             ∂η
                                                                  , and decreases otherwise.

Proof Define DV (p) = V IS (p) − V II (p), which measures the incentives to acquire
information. Taking derivatives with respect to η, incentives to acquire information
increase with the size of the shock (decrease with η) is
                                                      
                      ∂DV (η|p)    βλµ ∂K(ηp)    ∂K(η)
                                =             −p         ≤ 0.
                        ∂η        1 − βλ   ∂η     ∂η

                                                                                     Q.E.D.


The effect is clearly non-monotonic in the size of the shock. For example, at the ex-
treme of very large shocks (η = 0), in which all collateral becomes bad, the incentives
to produce information in fact decline, since the condition in that case becomes

                                      1 − βλ
                                 γ           < pK ∗ − K(p),
                                     1 − βλµ

                                              29
increasing the effective cost of acquiring information. In this extreme case, the plan-
ner still wants to acquire more information than decentralized agents, but less than
                                                         1−βλ
in the absence of an aggregate shock (since (1 − βλ) ≤ 1−βλµ   ≤ 1).

The previous two propositions show there are levels of p for which, even in the pres-
ence of a potential future negative shock the planner prefers not producing infor-
mation, maintaining a high level of current output rather than avoiding a potential
reduction in future output. This result is summarized in the following Corollary.


Corollary 3 The possibility of a negative aggregate shock does not necessarily justify acquir-
ing information, and reducing current output to insure against potential future crises.


This corollary suggests that there are conditions under which it is efficient to accept
potential reductions in future consumption in order to obtain guaranteed increases
in current consumption. This result is consistent with the findings of Ranciere, Tor-
nell, and Westermann (2008) who show that ”high growth paths are associated with the
undertaking of systemic risk and with the occurrence of occasional crises.”



4.3   Ex-Post Policies

Now we study ex-post policies, conditional on a realized aggregate shock. Naturally
these policies affect the results in the previous section, since if they are effective in
helping the economy recover, they render ex-ante information acquisition to relax
borrowing constraints less important in the presence of aggregate shocks.

We consider policies that are intended to boost the expected quality of collateral after
a negative aggregate shock. The effectiveness of such a policy depends on how fast
the government is able to react to the negative shock, for example guaranteeing the
quality of the collateral. This policy manifests itself as a positive aggregate shock
in which a fraction α of bad collateral becomes good one period after the negative
aggregate shock, for example collateral guarantees by the government.

The next Proposition shows that, if there is a positive aggregate shock after a negative
aggregate shock that takes the average collateral η p̂ to a new higher level above pH ,
the recovery from the negative shock is faster if at the same time the government
prevents information production as a response to the negative shock.

                                             30
Proposition 10 Ex-post policies are more effective if information acquisition is avoided.

Assume a negative aggregate shock η that induces information acquisition (this is η p̂ ∈
[pCl , pCh ]), immediately followed by a positive policy of size α that makes firms able to borrow
K ∗ (this is p0 = η p̂ + α(1 − η p̂) > pH ). This policy is more effective in speeding up recovery
if information were not acquired. More specifically ∆II > ∆IS (where ∆II ≡ Wt+1|α     II        II
                                                                                           − Wt+1
and ∆IS ≡ Wt+1|α IS        IS
                      − Wt+1   ).

The proof is in Appendix A.2. The intuition relies on the speed of information re-
covery. Assume all collateral has the same belief and an aggregate negative shock
induces information that sorts out the quality of collateral. In this case, a successful
policy that improves average quality does not have a big impact. It does not increase
borrowing for the good collateral and only helps marginally the bad collateral. But,
if the aggregate negative shock does not induce information production, then a suc-
cessful policy that improves average quality increases the borrowing both of the good
and the bad collateral types.

Figure 7 introduces a policy that boosts the average quality of collateral in the numer-
ical illustration of the previous section. Specifically it assumes a policy α = 0.25 in
period 51, right after a negative shock. As can be seen, this policy is more effective in
speeding up recovery when the negative shock did not induce information.

                                              Figure 7: Effectiveness of Collateral Policy
                                             15.8
                                                     =0.97
                                             15.6

                                             15.4                                               =0.91

                                             15.2
                     Aggregate Consumption




                                              15
                                                                                                Always produce
                                                                                                information
                                             14.8                                               about idiosyncratic
                                                                   =0.90                       shocks
                                             14.6

                                             14.4

                                             14.2

                                              14

                                             13.8
                                                 0            20            40             60         80              100
                                                                                 Periods



This implies that, if the planner has access to a policy to deal with a crises, such as
guaranteeing collateral use, that policy is more effective if the original shock does not

                                                                                 31
induce information acquisition in the economy. How can the government prevent in-
formation acquisition after a crisis? Possibly introducing a lending facility, financed
through household taxation, that covers the difference between the optimal borrow-
ing and the level of borrowing that in equilibrium would induce information.



5    Some Empirical Evidence

In this section we briefly examine the central prediction of the model, using U.S. his-
torical data. The prediction from Proposition 5 is that during a credit boom the stan-
dard deviation of beliefs declines. If information about collateral decays because no
information is produced, then the standard deviation of beliefs is shrinking and lend-
ing is increasing, leading to higher output. The empirical strategy is to examine the
correlation between the growth in credit creation (or output growth) and the change
in the standard deviation of beliefs from the trough of a business cycle to the next
business cycle peak.

There are a number of complications in implementing a test. We need to measure
credit creation and beliefs. With regard to credit creation, there are no consistent time
series that span a long period of U.S. history for credit creation, so we are forced to
examine sub-periods and use less precise measures. We will look at banks’ total assets
for most of the period, but to include the pre-Civil War period we will also look at
industrial output. In the model, credit creation and output grow one-for-one. The
bank total assets data are five or six times year from 1863-1923 and four times a year
thereafter. The output data, however, are annual.

As for beliefs, we need a proxy for the distribution of perceived collateral quality. For
simplicity the model is one in which firms have a constant expected marginal prod-
uct of capital, but in terms of the empirical work, we want to imagine that firms have
concave production technologies. In this case, expected returns can vary depending
on the perceived quality of collateral. We proxy for beliefs with the standard devia-
tion of the cross section of stock returns. The idea is that at each date we calculate
the stock return over a given period (annual or monthly) and then for that date we
calculate the standard deviation of the cross section of stock returns. We then have a
time series of the cross section of stock returns. Over time, as information is decaying,
the standard deviation of the cross section of stock returns should be shrinking.

                                           32
The focus of our empirical analysis is on the period leading up to a crisis, the credit
boom prior to a negative shock. So, we examine the trough-to-peak phase of business
cycles. In the period prior to the U.S. Civil War, Davis (2006) presents annual data in
a different business cycle chronology than that of the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER). For the period prior to the Civil War we focus on Davis’ chronology,
as it is the most current, and we use the NBER chronology after the Civil War.10

Because of data limitations we look at the following five periods: (1) 1823-1914, using
annual data on output; (2) 1837-1914, using annual data on output; (3) 1863-1914, the
National Banking Era, using National banks’ total assets; (4) the Federal Reserve pe-
riod, 1914-2010, using banks’ total assets; and (5) the whole period from 1863-2010.11
Banks’ total assets data are four, five, or six times a year.12

We examine the pre-Fed period using three measures of credit growth. First, we will
use the annual real index of American industrial production, 1790-1915, produced
by Davis (2004). We use the industrial production index through the year 1914, after
which the Federal Reserve System is in existence. This series has the advantage that
it extends back to 1790, but has the disadvantages that it is annual and it is a measure
of output, rather than credit. However, in the model credit growth translates into
output.13

The second measure of credit growth is based on banks’ total assets.14 Data on Na-
tional Banks’ total assets from October 1863 until 1976 are from the Reports of the
Comptroller of the Currency. From 1976 to 2011 the total assets data are from the
Comptroller of the Currency Reports of Income and Condition (the ”Call Reports”),
which covers all federally insured banks. The set of federally insured banks is larger
than the set of National Banks (which excludes state banks), so the two series are not
consistent. This requires us to determine when to splice them together. We chose
  10
      We omit wartime cycles. Davis (2004) says of the wartime cycles: ”Two Civil War cycles (1861 and
1865 troughs) are omitted. Although their inclusion would not meaningfully affect calculations.” (p.
1203)
   11
      The Davis data is an index of real industrial production. We do not deflate the nominal asset
values for lack of data, which is only annual. But, since we are calculating the change in total assets
over short periods this should not be a problem.
   12
      Until the 1920s the bank regulators examined the banks at random times, usually five times a year.
In 1921 and 1922 they examined the banks six times a year, and thereafter four times a year, eventually
at regular quarterly dates.
   13
      It is also hard to match precisely with trough dates as those may occur in the middle of the year.
   14
      One reason for this choice is that the detail on the individual balance sheet items changes over the
period 1863 to the present.


                                                   33
1976, which means that we lose one business cycle, January 1980 peak to July 1980
trough; July 1981 was the next peak. That is, we picked a very short cycle to omit.

The third measure of credit growth is simply the number of years or months from
trough to peak. We use this as a supplement to Davis’ measure.

As discussed above, we will proxy for agents’ beliefs about collateral quality using the
standard deviation of the cross section of stock returns. The idea is that the standard
deviation of the cross section of stock returns should decline during the credit boom,
as more and more firms are borrowing based on collateral with a perceived value of
p̂. That is, the firms are increasingly viewed as being of the same quality. For the
period 1815-1925, we use New York Stock Exchange stock price data, collected by
Goetzmann, Ibbotson, and Peng (2001). Because Davis’ data are annual, we convert
the monthly standard deviations to annual by simple averaging.15 The year 1837,
following President Andrew Jackson’s veto of the re-charter of the Second Bank of
the United States, marks the beginning of the Free Banking Era, during which some
states allowed free entry into banking.16 We will look at two periods, 1823-1914 and
1837-1914. For the period 1926-2011, we use data from the Center for Research in
Security Prices. For each period we look at the cumulative change in the standard
deviation of the cross section of stock returns.

We now turn to examining the main hypothesis, the prediction that the cumulative
change in the standard deviation of cross section of stock returns (called ”∆Beliefs”)
is negatively correlated with the credit boom. As the boom grows, the standard devi-
ation of the cross section of stock returns should fall, as more firms are perceived to
be of quality p̂. We examine five periods, as shown in Table 1. In the first two rows
we measure the credit boom as the cumulative change in the Davis Index (”Davis
Boom”). After the Civil War, the bottom three rows, the data are finer. We present
two measures of the standard deviation of the cross section of stock returns, one is
the raw measure and the other is a Kydland-Prescott filtered version of the series,
using a smoothing parameter of 1400.

The correlations in all periods are as predicted, regardless of how Beliefs are mea-
sured.17 The evidence suggests that the cross section of volatility is related to the
  15
     When monthly values are missing, the annual average is the average over the remaining months.
The entire year 1867 is missing; its annual value was interpolated.
  16
     Also, the early part of the stock series has very few companies.
  17
     Instead of treating the cumulative trough to peak variables as observations we could look at the


                                                 34
                                                                                                                        3


    first two rows we measure the credit boom as the cumulative change in the Davis Index (“Davis Boom”).
    After the Civil War, the bottom three rows, the data are finer. We present two measures of the
    standard deviation of the cross section of stock returns, one is the raw measure and the other is a
    Kydland-Prescott filtered version of the series, using a smoothing parameter of 1400.

                         Table Table
                               1: Credit   Booms
                                     1: Credit Boomsand  theDecay
                                                     and the Decay    of Information
                                                                  of Information
                                                                                 Correlations
                Period                  Number of Cycles         Number of Years and       Davis Boom and
                                        (Trough-to-Peak)              ΔBeliefs                ΔBeliefs
    1823-1914                                  13                      -0.16                     -0.19
    1837-1914                                  10                      -0.27                     -0.10
                                                                    ΔBeliefs and           ΔH-P Beliefs and
                                                                   ΔTotal Assets            ΔTotal Assets
    National Banking Era, 1863-                  12                    -0.37                    -0.330
    1914
    Federal Reserve Era, 1914-                   17                       -0.09                        -0.002
    2010
    Whole Period: 1863-2010                      29                       -0.23                        -0.050


    The correlations in all periods are as predicted, regardless of how Beliefs are measured. 8 The evidence
unobservable       choice of whether to produce information in the economy. The endo-
  suggests that the cross section of volatility is related to the unobservable choice of whether to produce
  information
geneity        in the
          of the       economy.ofThe
                    amount            endogeneity ofin
                                   information         thethe
                                                            amount   of information
                                                                economy       appearsin thetoeconomy appears
                                                                                               be linked  totothe
  be linked to the  growth of credit and output.  There  is clearly more
growth of credit and output. There is clearly more research to be done.   research to be  done.




6      Conclusions

What determines the amount of credit (leverage) in an economy? What is the role
of information in determining that credit? We argued that leverage and information
are linked, and this link is the basis for financial fragility, which is defined as the
susceptibility of the economy to small shocks having large effects.

What determines the information in an economy? It is not optimal for lenders to pro-
duce information every period about the borrowers because it is costly. In that case,
the8 information about the collateral degrades over time. Instead of knowing which
     Instead of treating the cumulative trough to peak variables as observations we could look at the change in each
   variable, total
borrowers          assets,
                have       beliefs
                        good       or H-P filtered
                                 collateral    andbeliefs,
                                                    which  during
                                                               bad, theall
                                                                         trough  to peak, in
                                                                            collateral       a panel.
                                                                                           starts      In thatalike.
                                                                                                   to look      case weThese
                                                                                                                         are
   analyzing 29 cycles with 359 observations, 330 if we look at one lag. We examined the panel regression of the
dynamics       oftotal
   change in the   information         result inperiod
                        assets, each observation    a credit     boom
                                                         (four, five or six in  which
                                                                            times          firms with
                                                                                   a year, depending       bad
                                                                                                      on the      collateral
                                                                                                              period, on the
start to borrow. During the credit boom, output and consumption rise, but thebeliefs
   change   in one  of  the measures    of beliefs.  In both   cases  the   results are  a  negative coefficient  on    econ-
   (contemporaneous or lagged), but it is not statistically significant.
omy becomes increasingly fragile. The economy becomes more susceptible to small
shocks. If information is produced after such a shock, firms with bad collateral cannot
access credit. Alternatively, if information is not produced, firms are endogenously
credit constrained to avoid information production.
change in each variable, total assets, beliefs or H-P filtered beliefs, during the trough to peak, in a
panel. In that case we are analyzing 29 cycles with 359 observations, 330 if we look at one lag. In both
cases correlations between total assets and beliefs are negative.


                                                            35
Why did complex securities play a leading role in the recent financial crisis? Agents
choose (and construct) collateral that has a high perceived quality when information
is not produced and collateral that has a high cost of producing information. For
example, to maximize borrowing firms will tend to use complex securities linked to
land, such as mortgage-backed securities. This increases fragility over time.

We focus on exogenous shocks to the expected value of collateral to trigger crises.
However in Gorton and Ordonez (2012) we show not only that crises can also be
triggered by exogenous shocks to productivity but also that they may even arise en-
dogenously as the credit boom grows, without the need for any exogenous shock.

We cannot measure the amount of information in the economy, or whether informa-
tion has been produced. But, our empirical work shows that the standard deviation of
the cross section of stock returns seems to be a reasonable proxy for the time-varying
distribution of perceived collateral value in the model. We presented evidence for
the predicted link between the beliefs and credit booms, looking at almost two hun-
dred years of U.S. business cycles. The evidence, while preliminary, suggests that it
is possible to test models driven by unobservable beliefs. This is a subject for further
research.



References
 Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 2004. “Financial Fragility, Liquidity, and Asset
    Prices.” Journal of the European Economic Association 2:1015–1048.
 Andolfatto, David. 2010. “On the Social Cost of Transparency in Monetary
   Ecoomics.” Working Paper 2010-001A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
 Andolfatto, David, Aleksander Berensten, and Christopher Waller. 2011. “Undue
   Diligence.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
 Bianchi, Javier. 2011. “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business
    Cycle.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
 Borio, Claudio, and Mathias Drehmann. 2009. “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises
    - Revisited.” BIS Quarterly Review, March, 29–46.
 Claessens, Stijn, M Ayhan Kose, and Marco Terrones. 2011. “Financial Cycles: What?
    How? When?” IMF Working Paper No WP/11/76.
 Collyns, Charles, and Abdelhak Senhadji. 2002. “Lending Booms, Real State Bub-
    bles, and the Asian Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper No WP/02/20.



                                          36
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2011. “Ignorance and the Opti-
  mality of Debt for Liquidity Provision.” Working Paper , Yale University.
Davis, Joseph. 2004. “An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790-1915.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1177–1215.
      . 2006. “An Improved Annual Chronology of U.S. Business Cycles since the
   1790s.” Journal of Economic History 6:103–121.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,
   and Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (3): 401–19.
Geanakoplos, John. 1997. “Promises, Promises.” Edited by W.B. Arthur, S. Durlauf,
  and D. Lane, The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, II. Reading, MA:
  Addison-Wesley, 285–320.
      . 2010. “The Leverage Cycle.” Edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff,
   and Michael Woodford, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 24. 1–65.
Geanakoplos, John, and William Zame. 2010. “Collateral Equilibrium.” Working
  Paper , Yale University.
Goetzmann, William, Roger Ibbotson, and Liang Peng. 2001. “A New Historical
  Database for the NYSE 1815 to 1925: Performance and Predictability.” Journal of
  Financial Markets 4:1–32.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2012. “Information Cycles.” Working Paper,
  Yale University.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990. “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
  Creation.” Journal of Finance 45 (1): 49–72.
Hanson, Samuel, and Adi Sunderam. 2010. “Are There Too Many Safe Securities?
  Securitization and the Incentives for Information Production.” Working Paper ,
  Harvard University.
Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit
   Booms, and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review,
   forthcoming.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political
   Economy 105 (2): 211–248.
Lagunoff, Roger, and Stacey Schreft. 1999. “Financial Fragility with Rational and
   Irrational Exuberance.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 31:531–560.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Review of Economics Studies, no.
   75:809–833.
Mendoza, Enrique. 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage.” American
  Economic Review, no. 100:1941–1966.
Mendoza, Enrique, and Marco Terrones. 2008. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms:
  Evidence from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data.” NBER Working Paper 14049.

                                        37
 Ordonez, Guillermo. 2011. “Fragility of Reputation and Clustering in Risk-Taking.”
    Working Paper, Yale University.
 Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2010. “Securitization, Transparency and Liquid-
    ity.” Centre for Studies in Economics and Finance, WP 210.
 Park, Sunyoung. 2011. “The Size of the Subprime Shock.” Working Paper, Korea
    Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
 Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann. 2008. Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 123:359–406.
 Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries
    of Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Schularick, Moritz, and Alan Taylor. 2009. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
    Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Cycles, 1870-2008.” American Economic
    Review, forthcoming.




A     Appendix

A.1    Proof of Proposition 1

Point 1 is a direct consequence of K(p|γ) being monotonically increasing in p for p <
pH and independent of p for p > pH .
To prove point 2 we derive the function K(γ|p),
                                          e      which is the inverse of the K(p|γ),and
analyze its properties. Consider first the extreme in which information acquisition is
not possible (or γ = ∞). In this case the limit to financial constraints is the point at
which K ∗ = pC; lenders will not acquire information but will not lend more than the
expected value of collateral, pC. Then, the function K(γ|p)
                                                       e        has two parts. One for
    K∗                        K∗
p ≥ C and the other for p < C .

             K∗
    1. p ≥   C
                :
                               
                               
                                    K∗               if γ1H ≤ γ
                                      γ
                    K(γ|p)
                    e      =      (1−p)(1−q)
                                                      if γ L ≤ γ < γ1H
                                           γ
                               
                                ∗
                                 pK − (qA−1)          if γ < γ L
      where γ1H comes from equation 3. Then

                                   γ1H = K ∗ (1 − p)(1 − q)                         (12)



                                          38
         and γ L comes from equation 6. Then

                                                  (1 − p)(1 − q)(qA − 1)
                                    γ L = pK ∗                                            (13)
                                                 (1 − p)(1 − q) + (qA − 1)

              K∗
   2. p <     C
                 :
                                      
                                      
                                            pC                   if γ2H ≤ γ
                                             γ
                          K(γ|p)
                          e      =       (1−p)(1−q)
                                                                  if γ L ≤ γ < γ2H
                                                  γ
                                      
                                       ∗
                                        pK − (qA−1)               if γ < γ L
         where γ2H in this region comes from equation 4. Then

                                            γ2H = p(1 − p)(1 − q)C                        (14)

         and γ L is the same as above.

It is clear from the function K(γ|p)
                               e       that, for a given p, borrowing is independent of γ in
the first region, it is increasing in the second region (information-insensitive regime)
and it is decreasing in the last region (information-sensitive regime).


A.2        Proof Proposition 10

As in Proposition 4, if the negative shock happens in period t, the distribution in
period t is: f (η) = λt p̂, f (η p̂) = (1 − λt ) and f (0) = λt (1 − p̂).
1. Without information, in period t + 1 the distribution of beliefs is fII (η) = λt+1 p̂,
fII (η p̂) = λ(1 − λt ), fII (p̂) = (1 − λ) and fII (0) = λt+1 (1 − p̂).
A policy α introduced at t+1 change beliefs from η to α+η(1−α), from p̂ to α+p̂(1−α),
from η p̂ to α + η p̂(1 − α) and from 0 to α.18 The distribution of beliefs then becomes:
fII (α + η(1 − α)) = λt+1 p̂, fII (α + η p̂(1 − α)) = λ(1 − λt ), fII (α + p̂(1 − α)) = (1 − λ)
and fII (α) = λt+1 (1 − p̂).
Since we assume p̂ > pH and η > pH , the positive shock does not affect borrowing for
those beliefs. Since we assume α + η p̂(1 − α) > pH , borrowing increases from K(η p̂)
to K ∗ . Similarly, borrowing of known bad collateral increases from 0 to K(α).
Only individual beliefs change, not their distribution. Then, using equation (10), we
can compare the aggregate consumption with and without policy,

       ∆II ≡ Wt+1|α
               II       II
                    − Wt+1 = λ(qA − 1)[(1 − λt )(K ∗ − K(η p̂)) + λt (1 − p̂)K(α)].       (15)
  18
       The same results hold if the policy is introduced in subsequent periods.


                                                    39
2. With information production, in period t + 1 the distribution of beliefs is fIS (1) =
λη p̂(1 − λt ), fIS (η) = λt+1 p̂, fIS (p̂) = (1 − λ), fIS (0) = λ[(1 − λt p̂) − η p̂(1 − λt )].
After the policy, beliefs change from η to α+η(1−α), from p̂ to α+ p̂(1−α), and from 0
to α. Also, beliefs 1 remain 1. Since we assume p̂ > pH and η > pH , the positive shock
does not affect the borrowing for those beliefs. Borrowing for bad collateral increase
from 0 to K(α). Again, we can compare the aggregate consumption with and without
policy,
            ∆IS ≡ Wt+1|α
                       IS       IS
                            − Wt+1 = λ(qA − 1)[(1 − λt p̂) − η p̂(1 − λt )]K(α).    (16)

Taking the difference between equations (15) and (16),

 ∆II − ∆IS = λ (1 − λt )[K ∗ − K(η p̂)] + [λt (1 − p̂) − (1 − λt p̂) + η p̂(1 − λt )]K(α)
                                                                                         

             = λ(1 − λt ) [K ∗ − K(η p̂) − (1 − η p̂)K(α)] .

In the range of interest, where η p̂ < pCh and there are incentives for information
                                                                                  γ
production, avoiding information production would imply K(η p̂) ≤ η p̂K ∗ − (qA−1)   .
Using this upper bound to evaluate the expression above, we obtain that the increase
in borrowing at t + 1 induced by the policy is larger when no information is acquired
than when information is acquired.
                                                                            
         II     IS             t     ∗         ∗     γ
        ∆ −∆        ≥ λ(1 − λ ) K − η p̂K +                − (1 − η p̂)K(α)
                                                  (qA − 1)
                                                                 γ
                    ≥ λ(1 − λt )(1 − η p̂) [K ∗ − K(α)] +                    > 0.
                                                          (qA − 1)(1 − η p̂)




                                              40
A.3        Land Prices that Include the Value of Land as Collateral
           (Not for Publication)

In the main text the price of land just reflects its outside option, or fundamental value,
since we assumed buyers have all the negotiation power and make take-it or leave-it
offers. In this extension we generalize the results assuming Nash bargaining between
buyers and sellers, where the sellers’ negotiation power θ ∈ [0, 1] determines how
much they can extract from the surplus of buyers (in the main text we assumed θ =
0). To simplify the exposition in the main text we also assumed no discounting (i.e.,
β = 1). In this extension we assume a generic discount factor β ∈ [0, 1]
First we assume the case without aggregate shocks and then we discuss how the
introduction of aggregate shocks just enter into prices as a an expectation. We denote
the price of a unit of land with perceptions p as Q(p).19
The surplus of land for the seller is just its outside option

                                               JS (p) = pC.

The surplus of land for the buyer is the expected profit from a firm plus the expected
price of the land. If p is such that debt is information-sensitive, the surplus is

                JB (p|IS) = E(π|p, IS) + λ[pQ(1) + (1 − p)Q(0)] + (1 − λ)Q(p̂),

where E(π|p, IS) = [pK(1) + (1 − p)K(0)](qA − 1) − γ.
If p is such that debt is information-insensitive, the surplus is

                           JB (p|II) = E(π|p, II) + λQ(p) + (1 − λ)Q(p̂),

where E(π|p, II) = K(p)(qA − 1).
Then
                                   Q(p) = β[θJB (p) + (1 − θ)JS (p)]                              (17)
since Q(p) = JS (p) + θ(JB (p) − JS (p)).

1. Borrowing as a function of land price
Firms can compute the possible borrowing with both information-sensitive and in-
sensitive debt and determine which one is higher. In the main text we impose the
price of land as the sellers’ outside option and we determine the optimal borrow-
ing as a function of that price. Now the price of land also depends on the optimal
borrowing, and then they should be determined simultaneously.
  19
       In the main text we did not need an explicit name since the price of land p was just pC.



                                                     41
In the case of information-sensitive debt, RIS (1) = xIS (1)Q(1) and RIS (0) = xIS (0)Q(0)
because debt is risk-free. Lenders break even when,

                  p[x(1)Q(1) − K(1)] + (1 − p)[x(0)Q(0) − K(0)] = γ

where x(1)Q(1) ≥ K(1) and x(0)Q(0) ≥ K(0).
In the case of information sensitive debt, RII (p) = xII (p)Q(p) because debt is risk-free.
Lenders break even when,
                                   x(p)Q(p) = K(p).
with the constraint that

                        p[x(p)(qQ(p) + (1 − q)Q(1)) − K(p)] ≤ γ

or, which is the same as
                                                    γ
                               K(p) ≤       Q(1)
                                                                 .                                   (18)
                                         (p Q(p)   − p)(1 − q)
                                                                                          γ
In the main text, where θ = 0, Q(1) = C, Q(p) = pC and then K(p) ≤                    (1−p)(1−q)
                                                                                                 .

2. Solving Borrowing and Land Price Simultaneously
We now show how to solve simultaneously for optimal borrowing and the land price.

  1. When γ > 0, firms with collateral p = 0 and p = 1 prefer to borrow without
     producing information.
     This is clear because knowing the type of the collateral (which is the case with
     p = 0 and p = 1), it does not make sense for the borrower to pay γ.

  2. K(1) = K ∗
     Since K(1) is not financially constrained in the information-insensitive case,
     then K(1) = K ∗ .

  3. Determination of K(p̂), Q(p̂) and Q(1).
                                                                   γ
       (a) p̂ is information-insensitive and K ∗ ≤           Q(1)            :   This implies K(p̂) =
                                                         (p̂ Q(p̂) −p̂)(1−q)
           K ∗ and
                                         β(1 − θ)p̂C + βθK ∗ (qA − 1)
                               Q(p̂) =                                .
                                                    1 − βθ
                                                                   γ
       (b) p̂ is information-insensitive and K ∗ >           Q(1)            :   Since Q(p̂) and Q(1)
                                                         (p̂ Q(p̂) −p̂)(1−q)
           just depend on K(p̂), it is obtained from equation 18.




                                             42
   (c) p̂ is information-sensitive: When information reveals the collateral is bad,
       and assuming the firm maximizes borrowing xIS (0) = 1. The following
       two equations jointly determine K(0) and K(p̂):
                                                  γ
                    K(p̂) = p̂K ∗ + (1 − p̂)K(0) −     ,                          (19)
                                              (qA − 1)
                                  βθ[K(0)(qA − 1) + (1 − λ)Q(p̂)]
                    K(0) = Q(0) =                                 ,               (20)
                                            1 − βθλ

        where Q(p̂) just depends on K(p̂).

  In these three cases K(p̂) is solvable, and the prices

                                  β(1 − θ)p̂C + βθK(p̂)(qA − 1)
                        Q(p̂) =                                 ,
                                              1 − βθ

  and
                          β(1 − θ)C + βθ[K ∗ (qA − 1) + (1 − λ)Q(p̂)]
                 Q(1) =                                               ,
                                          1 − βθλ
  are well-defined. Similarly, expected profits for p̂ in both the cases of information-
  sensitive and insensitive can be computed such that firms choose the highest
  possible amount of borrowing.

4. Determination of K(0) and Q(0).
  These are determined by

                                     βθ[K(0)(qA − 1) + (1 − λ)Q(p̂)]
                  K(0) = Q(0) =                                      .
                                               1 − βθλ

5. Determination of K(p) and Q(p).
  There are two cases, from which the firm chooses the highest possible borrow-
  ing:

   (a) p is information-insensitive:
                                                      γ
                                  K(p) =      Q(1)
                                                                   .
                                           (p Q(p)   − p)(1 − q)

   (b) p is information-sensitive:
                                                                γ
                          K(p) = pK ∗ + (1 − p)K(0) −                 .
                                                             (qA − 1)




                                         43
     where in both cases Q(p) only depends on K(p),

                            β(1 − θ)pC + βθ[K(p)(qA − 1) + (1 − λ)Q(p̂)]
                   Q(p) =                                                .
                                             1 − βθλ

The determination of which regions are information-sensitive and insensitive is sim-
ilar to the case in the main text. Expected profits with information-sensitive debt is
linear while expected profits with information-insensitive debt depend on the shape
of the land prices.

3. Potential Multiplicity
In the previous steps we show how to solve the optimal borrowing when land prices
are endogenous. However these steps do not guarantee uniqueness of the solu-
tion (for example under information-insensitiveness, equation (18) does not imply
uniqueness). The intuition is the following: If there is no confidence that in the future
low quality collateral can be used to sustain borrowing, this will reduce the price of
the collateral, reinforcing the fact that it will not be able to sustain such a borrowing.
This “complementarity” between the price of collateral and borrowing capabilities is
what creates potential multiplicity.
An interesting example is the extreme opposite to the one assumed in the main text,
this is θ = 1. In this extreme case, the potential multiplicity takes a very clear form.
Assume an equilibrium where all collateral sustain borrowing of K ∗ without produc-
ing information, regardless of the perception p that land is good. If this is the case,
the price for all collateral is independent of p,

                                           βK ∗ (qA − 1)
                                  Q(p) =                 .
                                              1−β

Given these prices, borrowing without information acquisition is not binding because
                                   γ
Q(1) = Q(p) and then K ∗ < (p−p)(1−q)     = ∞. As conjectured, all collateral can borrow
  ∗
K regardless of p. In general, a larger θ allows for the existence of an equilibrium
that sustains a lot of credit without information acquisition, but fragile to beliefs about
whether land with low p can sustain high credit.




                                            44
