                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 IS LABOR SUPPLY IMPORTANT FOR BUSINESS CYCLES?

                                             Per Krusell
                                        Toshihiko Mukoyama
                                         Richard Rogerson
                                           Ayşegül Şahin

                                         Working Paper 17779
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17779


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We thank Marcelo Veracierto and seminar participants as well as conference participants at the Asian
Meeting of the Econometric Society (2011), Chicago Fed, HEC Montreal, Hitotsubashi Macro Econometrics
Conference, National University of Singapore, Search and Matching Network Conference (2011),
NBER Summer Institute (2011), NBER Conference on Macroeconomics Across Time and Space (2011),
SED (2011), Oslo University, Norges Bank, European University Institute, Bank of Korea, St. Louis
Fed, San Francisco Fed, NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth Meeting (2011), and University
of Pennsylvania for useful comments. We thank Joe Song for excellent research assistance. Krusell
thanks the NSF for financial support, Mukoyama thanks the Bankard Fund for Political Economy for
financial support, and Rogerson thanks the NSF and the Korean Science Foundation (WCU-R33-10005)
for financial support. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Ayşegül Şahin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Labor Supply Important for Business Cycles?
Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Ayúegül ùahin
NBER Working Paper No. 17779
January 2012
JEL No. E24,J22,J64

                                             ABSTRACT

We build a general equilibrium model that features uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks, search frictions
and an operative labor supply choice along the extensive margin. The model is calibrated to match
the average levels of gross flows across the three labor market states: employment, unemployment,
and non-participation. We use it to study the implications of two kinds of aggregate shocks for the
cyclical behavior of labor market aggregates and flows: shocks to search frictions (the rates of job
finding and job loss) and shocks to the return on the market activity (any factors affecting aggregate
productivity). We find that both kinds of shocks are needed to explain the labor market data, and that
an active labor supply channel is key. A model with friction shocks only, calibrated to match unemployment
fluctuations, accounts for only a small fraction of employment fluctuations and has counterfactual
cyclical predictions for participation.


Per Krusell                                         Richard Rogerson
Institute for International Economic Studies        Woodrow Wilson School of
Stockholm University                                 Public and International Affairs
106 91 STOCKHOLM                                    323 Bendheim Hall
SWEDEN                                              Princeton University
and NBER                                            Princeton, NJ 08544
per.krusell@iies.su.se                              and NBER
                                                    rdr@princeton.edu
Toshihiko Mukoyama
Department of Economics                             Ayúegül ùahin
University of Virginia                              Federal Reserve Bank of New York
P.O. Box 400182                                     Research & Statistics Group
Charlottesville VA 22904                            33 Liberty Street
tm5hs@virginia.edu                                  New York, NY 10045
                                                    Aysegul.Sahin@ny.frb.org
1    Introduction

The idea that labor supply plays a key role in business cycle fluctuations has been controver-

sial ever since it was put forth by Lucas and Rapping (1969). One recurring challenge—the

explicit consideration of unemployment—was recently revived by Hall (2008) in the context

of modern unemployment theory. He argues that although aggregate models with indivisible

labor (e.g., Hansen (1985)) can generate large fluctuations in employment via labor supply

responses, they are inconsistent with the US evidence that roughly 80% of business cycle fluc-

tuations in employment show up as offsetting changes in unemployment rather than changes

in participation. Hall (2009) consequently proposes a model of the macroeconomy in which

the labor supply margin for employment is not operative by assumption: participation is

exogenously fixed and employment is completely determined by search frictions (job-finding

and job-loss rates).

    In this paper we critically examine the view that empirical evidence on unemployment and

participation implies a minimal role for labor supply in the determination of employment. We

develop a macroeconomic model with a detailed description of the labor market, along with

descriptions of individuals’ saving and working opportunities that are in line with applied

work in consumption and labor studies. We demand of this model to match the main labor-

market facts—the gross flows of workers across the three labor market states (employment,

unemployment, and non-participation)—on average over time.

    In order to generate aggregate volatility, we then subject this economy to two types of

aggregate shocks: shocks to search frictions (the rates of job finding and job loss) and shocks

to the return on the market activity (any factors affecting aggregate productivity). Our

central findings are threefold: (i) this model provides an excellent account of the business

cycle fluctuations in employment, unemployment and participation, as well as in labor market


                                              2
flows; (ii) a model with only shocks to frictions cannot account for the labor market data;

and (iii) the fluctuations in employment are chiefly a result of an operative labor supply.

       One broad conclusion of our paper, thus, is that it is important to explicitly model par-

ticipation in order to understand the underlying forces that shape labor market fluctuations.

Beyond the specific findings that we offer, several other arguments suggest that the par-

ticipation decision ought to be taken seriously. First, even if participation did not change

at all over the business cycle, it is surely important to understand why. The gross flows

are large: many individuals move between participation and non-participation each month,

suggesting that this is surely an operative margin for many individuals. Additionally, there

are many examples in the data of large responses in participation over time at the aggregate

level.1 Second, as we detail later in the paper, the relative constancy of the aggregate par-

ticipation rate hides the fact there are large changes in the flows between participation and

non-participation over the business cycle that turn out to mostly offset each other. Third,

although participation fluctuates relatively little in the US, this is much less true for some

other OECD economies.2 Similarly, the importance of participation fluctuations varies across

demographic groups within the US. To us, these three reasons suggest that it is more reason-

able to consider participation as endogenous, and responsive to economic incentives, rather

than to treat it is exogenously fixed.

       There is widespread agreement that a good theory of labor market fluctuations should

have solid microfoundations. Following more than forty years of applied research on labor

market dynamics, we believe that the appropriate microfoundations in this context should

include a theory of gross worker flows among the three labor market states of employment,
   1
     An obvious example is the large secular increase in female participation rates. Other examples include
large declines in participation rates for low-skilled males and for older males (the latter occuring prior to
1995).
   2
     See, for example, Rogerson and Shimer (2010).



                                                     3
unemployment and non-participation. A key building block of our model of gross flows is a

theory of individual labor supply in the presence of idiosyncratic shocks, trading frictions and

incomplete markets in which preferences embody empirically reasonable income and substitu-

tion effects. Each of these features plays an important role. Idiosyncratic shocks are essential

in accounting for the empirical features of the gross flows data. Trading frictions allow us

to distinguish between the unemployed and the nonparticipants. Incomplete markets rule

out trade in employment lotteries and insurance against idiosyncratic shocks, thereby forcing

individuals to self insure by accumulating assets. While this sort of market incompleteness

has been found to not matter much for some business cycle properties, it is evident from

Galı́ et al. (2011) that this feature is important for the cyclical properties of participation.

Many models of unemployment assume linear utility, and hence rule out income effects. It

is well known in the applied business cycle literature that income effects, which are needed

for understanding saving as well as insurance, play an important quantitative role.

   The calibration of the basic parameters of our model—preferences, technology, and fric-

tions—so as to be consistent with the average behavior of the US economy follows standard

practice in the modern business cycle literature. The calibration of our aggregate shocks is

designed to “give the model a chance”, as in Kydland and Prescott (1982): the shocks to the

return to market activity and to search frictions are set to generate realistic movements in a

subset of the labor market aggregates. This calibration results in shocks that are in line with

existing literatures. We then examine the economy’s behavior for all of the macroeconomic

variables, including all labor market flows.

   Our results imply that Hall’s reasoning is misleading. That is, even if the fluctuations

in search frictions in our model are assumed large enough so as to account for observed

fluctuations in unemployment, labor supply responses significantly dampen their effect on



                                               4
employment. When it is hard to find a job, those workers with a job stay on longer. Thus,

aggregate employment does not fall much at all, participation becomes countercyclical, and

the cyclical fluctuations in participation become large—three features that all are at odds

with the data. The key message is that the presence of an empirically plausible labor supply

response along the extensive margin—plausible in that it can account for average flows—

has important implications for evaluating theories in which labor supply is not necessarily

assigned a large role. Put somewhat differently, exogenously shutting down the participa-

tion margin hides the fact that such a model contains quantitatively important forces with

counterfactual predictions.

   Our finding that a specification with shocks to both the return to market activity and job-

finding and job-loss rates gives a very reasonable account for all of the cyclical labor market

facts, i.e., for stocks as well as flows, is non-trivial and quite surprising. When we decompose

the resulting fluctuations into the contribution attributed to each shock we find that the

dominant source of employment fluctuations is the shock to the return to overall market

activity, whereas the dominant source of unemployment fluctuations is the shock to the job

offer arrival rate. Shocks to the job-loss rate play only a minor role overall. Moreover, shocks

to the job-finding rate account for much of the fluctuations in measured transition rates from

employment to unemployment. In short, the relative constancy of the participation rate over

the business cycle is not evidence against the importance of labor supply as a driving force

behind aggregate fluctuations.

   Given its focus on business cycle fluctuations in an aggregate three state model of the

labor market, our analysis is closely related to recent similar analyses by Tripier (2004),

Veracierto (2008), Galı́ et al. (2011), Christiano et al. (2010), Shimer (2011) and Haefke and




                                               5
Reiter (2011).3 Relative to these authors, one key distinction of our analysis is its focus on

gross flows. Each of these papers focuses exclusively on the fluctuations in the levels of E,

U and N and pays no attention to the properties of the underlying flows, either in steady

state or over the cycle. Our setting also places stronger emphasis on individual heterogeneity

and the uninsurability of idiosyncratic shocks. Relative to Tripier and Veracierto, we allow

for shocks to labor market frictions. Relative to Shimer (2011), the job-finding frictions are

assumed exogenous here; thus, we focus on the economy’s response to cyclical variations in

job-finding and job-loss rates as opposed to on their origins.

        An outline of the paper follows. In the next section we document the key business

cycle facts for gross worker flows among the three labor market states for the US over the

period 1968-2009. Section 3 describes our theoretical framework. Section 4 presents our

quantitative results on the effects of different aggregate shocks on gross worker flows and

Section 5 concludes.


2        Business Cycle Fluctuations in the Labor Market

The early real business cycle literature focused on a small set of second moments that were

thought to represent first order properties of business cycle fluctuations, including the relative

volatility and comovement between aggregate series such as output (Y ), consumption, invest-

ment, and employment. While this has been useful for focusing and organizing quantitative

research on business cycles, we expand the set of labor market statistics considered along two

dimensions in order to better understand and distinguish between the forces that shape labor

market fluctuations. First, as in recent work noted in the introduction, we include informa-

tion on how non-employed workers are categorized between the states of unemployment and
    3
    Alternatively, our model can be viewed as adding search frictions to the model of Chang and Kim (2006),
that features idiosyncratic shocks, indivisible labor and incomplete markets.



                                                    6
out of the labor force. Second, and differently than the studies just mentioned, we explicitly

consider the gross flows of workers between states.4 These flows have long been recognized

as important; see, e.g., Blanchard and Diamond (1990). From the perspective of connecting

an aggregate model of the labor market to micro data, we believe the behavior of individual

labor market flows is of first order importance.

       Table 1 presents data for average monthly transition rates among the three labor mar-

ket states: employment (E), unemployment (U ), and not in the labor force (N ). Details

regarding data sources and construction are provided in Appendix A.1.

                                                  Table 1
                                    US Transition Rates 1968-2009
                                    FROM             TO
                                              E      U       N
                                      E     0.954 0.016 0.030
                                      U     0.270 0.508 0.222
                                      N     0.048 0.027 0.925

       The transition rates among all three states are very large. While a large literature has

previously emphasized the high transition rates between E and U , we want to highlight the

large transition rates into and out of the labor force. Each month, more than 7% of the

workers who are out of the labor force will enter the labor force in the subsequent month.

We detail later in the paper that part of the measured transition rates between N and U

may be the result of classification error, but even if we focus only on the flow of workers from

N to E, the rate is still almost five percent per month. The key point is that the decision

to move between participation and non-participation seems an operative margin for a large

number of individuals.

       Table 2 presents the richer set of labor market business cycle statistics that we study. Note
   4
    Garibaldi and Wasmer (2005) is a recent paper that studies gross flows in a three state model. Differently
from us, they assume linear utility and do not consider business cycle fluctuations.



                                                      7
that u denotes the unemployment rate, U/(E + U ), and lf pr is the labor force participation

rate, (E + U )/(E + U + N ).

                                                 Table 2
                        Cyclical Properties of US Labor Market Statistics
                              E     u     lf pr fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E                       fN U
           std(x)/std(Y )    .68 7.6       .21    5.4   2.0  4.9     3.8  2.7                 4.0
           corrcoef (x, Y ) .84 −.87 .46 −.82 .33            .78     .78  .64                −.70
          corrcoef (x, x−1 ) .95 .92       .72    .73   .20  .84     .73  .41                 .75

       Our notational convention is that fij denotes the fraction of workers that moved from

state i in the previous period to state j in the current period. Note that although labor

market data are available at monthly frequency, NIPA data is available only at quarterly

frequency. In order to evaluate the correlation of labor market flows with output we have

generated labor market transition rates at quarterly frequency by setting the quarterly value

equal to the average of the three monthly values within the quarter. To produce business

cycle statistics we then log and HP filter the data.

       Several features are worth noting. First, the transition rates between E and U exhibit

roughly equal volatility, are very persistent and are strongly correlated with the cycle, with

fEU being strongly countercyclical and fU E being strongly procyclical. Second, fluctuations

in the unemployment rate are more than an order of magnitude larger than fluctuations in

the participation rate. The former is strongly countercyclical whereas the latter is weakly

procyclical. It follows that most of the cyclical fluctuations in employment show up as

offsetting changes in unemployment as opposed to changes in participation.

       We next turn to some patterns that are less well known.5 Although the stock of non-

participants does not vary that much over the business cycle, the flows between non-participation
   5
     Note that there are some differences between the statistics that we report here and those that are used
in several studies. For example, Shimer (2005) focuses on the flows into and out of unemployment without
distinguishing whether the workers that enter unemployment come from employment or out of the labor force,
or whether the workers that leave unemployment leave to employment or out of the labor force.


                                                     8
and the other states exhibit pronounced movements at business cycle frequencies. For ex-

ample, whereas the fluctuations in the participation rate are an order of magnitude smaller

than the fluctuations in the unemployment rate, the fluctuations in the transition rates into

and out of non-participation are of roughly the same order of magnitude as the those in the

much-studied flows between E and U . The cyclicality of the flows between U and N also

exhibits an interesting pattern. Specifically, the transition rate from U to N has the same

cyclical correlation as the transition rate from U into E, and the transition rate from N into

U has the same cyclical pattern as the transition rate from E into U . That is, both flows

into U have the same cyclical properties, as do both flows out of U .

    The transition rate from N into E is strongly procyclical, just as is the transition rate

from U into E, though it is somewhat less volatile. Looking only at these two flows, one

would not be led to infer that the participation rate plays only a minor role in accounting

for employment fluctuations. The reason that the stock of participation does not move more

over the cycle is because of the offsetting effect of an increased U to N transition rate during

good times.


3     Theory

As is standard in the business cycle literature, we consider business cycles as resulting from

aggregate shocks that cause the economy to fluctuate around the steady state equilibrium

that would result in the absence of aggregate shocks. We first describe our model.

3.1   Economy

In addition to developing a framework appropriate for the issue at hand, our broader aim

is to provide a realistic description of the main economic events for a household as it goes

through time. We thus formulate a model that arguably captures the key income-relevant


                                               9
events for a household and its main vehicles for dealing with these events: it can hold an asset,

although restrictedly, thus being able to insure itself but only to some extent. Importantly,

our specification of preferences allows for empirically reasonable income and substitution

effects. One advantage of this approach is that it allows us to build a solid connection with

micro data and the rich set of studies on individuals; we will use this in the calibration of

our model. We believe that our model is the first macroeconomic model with these features.

While the model is somewhat minimalist, our earlier work Krusell et al. (2011) shows that

it is capable of accounting for the average behavior of labor market flows, therefore making

it a natural benchmark for an initial quantitative assessment of how frictions interact with

labor supply in the business cycle context.

       The economy is populated by a continuum of workers with total mass equal to one. All

workers have identical preferences over streams of consumption and time devoted to work

given by:
                                             ∞
                                             X
                                        Et         β t [log(ct ) − αet ]
                                             t=0

where ct ≥ 0 is consumption in period t, et ∈ {0, 1} is time devoted to work in period t,

0 < β < 1 is the discount factor and α > 0 is the disutility of work. Individuals are subject

to idiosyncratic shocks that affect the static payoffs of working in the market relative to not

working. While many distinct shocks may have this feature, including, for example, shocks

to market opportunities, shocks to home production opportunities, health shocks, family

shocks, preference shocks, etc..., we represent the net effect of all of these shocks as a single

shock, and model it as a shock to the return to market work.6 In particular, letting zt denote

the quantity of labor services that an individual contributes if working, we assume an AR(1)
   6
     Alternatively, we could assume that the only shock is to the disutility of working. Either way, the key
economic mechanism is that the shock serves to change the relative return to working versus not working. In
fact, Garibaldi and Wasmer (2005) model home productivity shocks as the driving force.



                                                       10
stochastic process in logs:

                                  log zt+1 = ρz log zt + εt+1

where the innovation εt is a mean zero normally distributed random variable with standard

deviation σε . This process is the same for all workers, but realizations are iid across them.

   Frictions in the labor market are captured by two exogenous variables: λt and σt , where λ

is the employment opportunity arrival rate and σ is the employment separation rate. These

values are common to all individuals but may fluctuate randomly over time. To understand

how the frictions impact the economy it is useful to think that the economy consists of two

islands: a production island and a non-production island. An individual begins period t on

the production island if et−1 = 1, and otherwise begins on the non-production island. Each

individual on the production island observes the realization of an iid separation shock: with

probability σ the individual is relocated to the non-production island. And each individual

who is now on the non-production island, either because they started the period there or

were relocated there by the separation shock, observes the realization of an iid employment

opportunity shock that with probability λ relocates them to the production island. Given

our timing assumption, an individual who suffers the σ shock will not necessarily spend a

period in nonemployment but can be reemployed “instantaneously”.

   Once these and the other shocks have been realized, individuals make their labor supply

and consumption decisions, though only individuals on the production island can choose e

equal to 1. An individual on the production island who chooses not to work will then be

relocated to the leisure island at the end of period t and will therefore not have the opportu-

nity to return to the production island until receiving a favorable employment opportunity

shock.




                                              11
       The production technology is described by a Cobb-Douglas aggregate production function:


                                            Yt = Zt Ktθ L1−θ
                                                         t   .

                R                                                                 R
where Kt =          kit di is aggregate input of capital services and Lt =            eit zit di is aggregate

input of labor services. Zt is a standard technology shock. Output can be used either as

consumption or investment, and capital depreciates at rate δ.

       Our setting thus leaves open what underlying factors cause the frictions in job finding

and job loss, as well as what the underlying sources of productivity fluctuations may be—and

whether there is a connection between these. One way to view our approach is that while

we recognize the difficulty for workers of finding and retaining jobs, and hence accept the

notion of involuntary unemployment, we are for the present purpose— i.e., the evaluation

of the role of labor supply over the cycle—agnostic as to the exact model generating these

frictions.

3.2      Equilibrium

We formulate equilibrium recursively. An individual’s state consists of his or her location at

the time that the labor supply decision needs to be made, the level of asset holdings, and

productivity. The aggregate state will include any information that individuals have and is

useful in forecasting prices. We denote this information by Ω. In this model, Ω includes both

exogenous aggregate shocks (Z, λ, and σ) and the distribution of wealth and labor-market

status across all individuals. Since the notion of recursive competitive equilibrium that we

employ is standard we do not include a formal definition of the consistency conditions, in

particular for how Ω evolves over time.7 We use the notation Ω′ (Ω) to denote this evolu-
   7
    In all essential respects we follow Krusell and Smith (1998). Note that because firms make zero profits
here, one does not need to consider firm equity, as in Krusell, Mukoyama, and Şahin (2010), where consumers
consequently have a more demanding portfolio problem.



                                                    12
tion. We do, however, present detailed information on the Bellman equations for individual

workers.

    Let W (k, z, Ω) and N (k, z, Ω) be the maximum values for an individual who works and

does not work, respectively, given that he or she has individual values of (z, k) and the

aggregate state is Ω. Define V (k, z, Ω) by:


                             V (k, z, Ω) = max{W (k, z, Ω), N (k, z, Ω)}.


The Bellman equations for W and N are given by:


W (k, z, Ω) = max
                ′
                  {log(c)−α+βEz ′ ,Ω′ [(1−σ(1−λ))V (k′ , z ′ , Ω′ (Ω))+σ(1−λ)N (k′ , z ′ , Ω′ (Ω))]}
               c,k




             s.t. c + k′ = r(Ω)k + (1 − τ )w(Ω)z + (1 − δ)k + T (Ω), c ≥ 0, k′ ≥ 0

    and


       N (k, z, Ω) = max
                       ′
                         {log(c) + βEz ′ ,Ω′ [λV (k′ , z ′ , Ω′ (Ω)) + (1 − λ)N (k′ , z ′ , Ω′ (Ω))]}
                       c,k




                      s.t. c + k′ = r(Ω)k + (1 − δ)k + T (Ω), c ≥ 0, k′ ≥ 0.

    In these expressions, the expectation with respect to Ω′ refers to the stochastic aggregate

components in Ω next period: next period’s values for Z, λ, and σ. Note that the constraint

k′ ≥ 0 reflects that there is no borrowing.


4    Quantitative Analysis

We now begin the quantitative analysis of our model economy, starting with the calibration.

The calibration is of two sorts: we need to select the driving processes for our main business

cycle shocks, Z, λ, and σ, and we need to select the rest of the model parameters. We begin

                                                    13
with the latter part, which is accomplished by looking at the model’s steady state. Thus,

the basic parameters here are selected to match long run aggregate facts and average labor

market facts: stocks and flows across the three states.

4.1      Steady State Calibration

A key aspect of the steady state calibration procedure is to choose parameters so that the

distribution of workers across the three labor market states and the flows of workers between

states in the steady state equilibrium are similar to their average values over time in the

US economy, that is, to ensure that the calibrated model has the requisite microfoundations.

Official statistics divide non-employed workers into the two categories of unemployed and out

of the labor force based primarily on how they answer a question regarding active search in

the previous four weeks. Although our model does not feature a search decision, it can be

mapped into this definition. Specifically, if active search is a discrete decision and the cost

of search is very small, the decision to search amounts to asking an individual if he or she

would prefer working to not working.8 Among those individuals in our model who are not

employed in period t , we will label anyone who would prefer to be employed “unemployed”

and anyone who would prefer to not work “out of the labor force”.9

       Because the calibration is effectively identical to that in Krusell et al. (2010, 2011),

details are provided in Appendix A.2. Table 3 summarizes the calibrated values and the
   8
      Given evidence from time use data on the amount of time devoted to search, we think it is reasonable to
assume that the cost of active search is very small. An extension of this model to incorporate search costs
is feasible, though it would require significantly more computer time. As discussed later in the paper, we
conjecture that if search costs of the size estimated in the literature are allowed, the model would deliver very
similar results to those obtained here.
    9
      In our earlier work we argued that a more natural way to connect the model to the data was to adopt a
more inclusive definition of unemployment in the data, based on the desire to work rather than active search.
Nonetheless, we found that the broader definition was not substantively important either in terms of the
features in the data or the ability of the model to account for the data. We revert to the standard definition
of unemployment in this paper because of the difficulty in getting a longer time series for flows between the
states with the broader measure.



                                                       14
various targets used in the calibration.
                                              Table 3
                                       Benchmark Calibration
                                              Targets
         I
         Y   = .20, rK       E
                     Y = .3, P
                                          U
                                 = .610, E+U = .061, 1 + r − δ = 1.041/12 , E → E = .954
                                          Parameter Values
                θ        δ         β      α      ρz     σε         λ        σ        τ
               .30    .0067      .9967   .61   .9931 .1017        .44     .013      .30

   One issue that was not explicitly considered in our earlier work that we want to discuss

here concerns classification error. There is strong evidence in the literature (see, e.g., Poterba

and Summers (1986)) that classification errors lead to spurious flows, especially between

unemployment and not in the labor force. One strategy for addressing this would be to

try to purge the official data of measurement error. Unfortunately, this is not feasible.

The survey that Poterba and Summers used to estimate the extent of classification error

on transition rates was discontinued shortly thereafter. Instead, we deal with this issue by

adding some measurement error to the data generated by our model. We provide details

on this procedure in Appendix A.3 and show that with an empirically plausible amount of

measurement error the model does a much better job of matching the flows between U and

N . While classification error is important in matching the average behavior of flows in the

data, we show in Appendix A.3 that it is not important for our key findings about business

cycle fluctuations.

   While our calibrated model is able to reproduce the key features of both aggregate facts

and labor market flows in the US economy, we think it is also relevant to note the minimalist

nature of the model. At the aggregate level, the basic structure is that of the standard

one-sector neoclassical growth model. We have not included features such as adjustment

costs that are common in current medium scale DSGE models. At the micro level we have

abstracted from empirically reasonable features such as an interaction between individual

                                                 15
market productivity and employment status, or interaction between individual productivity

and the two frictional parameters. We have also abstracted from the choice of search intensity.

Note also that we only model frictions as they explicitly influence movements between non-

employment and employment. That is, we do not explicitly model the process of job-to-job

transitions. To the extent that these occur, they are subsumed into the evolution of the

idiosyncratic shocks to z.

   While all of these features could be added to the framework, we have instead opted for

parsimony. Our simple model is able to capture the key features of the average flow data, and

therefore seems a natural starting point for the analysis of aggregate fluctuations in a model

that explicitly models the flows. Incorporating the additional features mentioned above is

something that we leave for future work.

4.2   Business Cycle Analysis

In this section we subject the calibrated steady state model of the previous section to aggre-

gate shocks. While we could subject the model to various sorts of aggregate shocks we will

limit our attention to two types of aggregate shocks. In our steady state model we found

that idiosyncratic shocks to employment opportunities and the benefit of working relative to

not working were sufficient to capture average movements of workers across the three labor

market states. Here we will focus on aggregate shocks to these same two factors. We capture

aggregate shocks to the relative value of working versus not working by our TFP shock Zt .

This is obviously a simple way to generate a common increase in the benefit of working rel-

ative to not working. However, to the extent that there are other mechanisms for achieving

this same outcome (e.g., informational shocks coupled with some form of increasing returns

to scale) we do not necessarily insist on the interpretation of this driving force as a true

technological shock. We capture aggregate shocks to frictions through stochastic movements

                                              16
in λ and σ. Note that we take the changes in these frictional parameters to be exogenous.

Our goal at this point is to assess the ability of various types of shocks to generate outcomes

that match those found in the data, rather than the analysis of how these shocks arise.

   We proceed by considering a sequence of different assumptions about the aggregate

shocks. We first consider the special case in which labor market frictions are random but

aggregate productivity is not. That section makes precise how the labor supply margin plays

an important role in this economy and how the equilibrium outcome involves counterfactual

behavior for participation. We next shut down the shocks to frictions and instead look at

TFP shocks only. Here as well, the model’s predictions are far from the data in a number

of respects, particularly for both unemployment and worker flows. Finally, we present our

“benchmark”, which is a model with shocks to both frictions and TFP.

   The details of how the aggregate shocks are chosen are presented in each section. Prior

to describing our findings, we also briefly summarize how the model is solved. The present

model is similar in spirit to that in Krusell and Smith (1998), where there is no participation

decision. As a result, here the consumer’s problem is considerably more nonlinear, as there are

always consumers (i) deeply in the non-participation region, (ii) deeply in the participation

region, and (iii) near indifference between participating and not participating in the labor

market.

   The model is computed using Krusell and Smith’s (1998) limited information approach—

we restrict Ω to a few variables that can easily be kept track of, let the consumers make

decisions based on this limited information and simple forecasting rules that are based on

this information, and check whether their forecast is consistent with what actually happens

in the economy that consists of these consumers. We describe the procedure, and document

that it works very well, in Appendix A.3.



                                              17
4.2.1   Results 1: The Model With Friction Shocks Only

In this subsection we argue that use of two-state models that completely abstract from

labor supply considerations along the extensive margin can deliver misleading conclusions

regarding the kinds of shocks that account for labor market fluctuations. Consider, for

example, the simple two-state model that Shimer (2005) used in his analysis. By construction,

fluctuations in E and U are mirror images of each other. Since in the data there is relatively

little movement in the participation rate, it follows that if one takes the flow rates between

E and U as measured in the data and exogenously feeds them into the model, one will

approximately reproduce the fluctuations in E and U found in the data. Researchers who

view the world through the lens of such a two-state model will conclude that a sufficient

condition for understanding the key features of labor market fluctuations is to understand

movements in the two flow rates between E and U . In this section we examine this conclusion

in the context of our three state model and show that it no longer holds.


Calibration of the Shocks       To proceed we assume that both λ and σ follow symmetric

two-state Markov processes with persistence parameters ρλ and ρσ respectively. Specifically,

if we let λ̄ and σ̄ denote the calibrated steady state values of the two frictions, we assume

that λ takes values in the set {λG , λB } where λG = λ̄ + ελ and λB = λ̄ − ελ , and similarly

that σ takes values in the set {σG , σB } where σG = σ̄ − εσ and σB = σ̄ + εσ . For simplicity,

we assume that the two shocks are perfectly (negatively) correlated, so that the aggregate

realizations are either both good or both bad. We therefore assume that ρλ = ρσ = ρ,

and consistent with much of the real business cycle literature assume that ρ = .983. The

values of ελ and εσ are then set so that in the simulated equilibrium, we match the volatility

of fEU and fU E reported in Table 3. The calibrated values are (λG , λB ) = (0.51, 0.37),



                                              18
(σG , σB ) = (0.01254, 0.01346).


Cyclical Properties of Stocks         By construction, the model accounts perfectly for the

cyclical movements in the two rates fEU and fU E . But how will it perform along other

dimensions? As a first step in answering this question Table 4 examines the cyclical properties

of the three stocks: E, U and N as well as output.

                                            Table 4
                        Behavior of Stocks with Friction Shocks Only
                           Volatilities: std(x) Correlations: corrcoef (x, Y )
                            u     lf pr      E      u      lf pr       E
               Data        .12     .003    .011   −.87      .46       .84
               Frictions .11       .007    .002   −.91     −.80       .48

   Note first that this model accounts for almost all of the fluctuations in unemployment

that are found in the data, and that they are strongly negatively correlated with output

fluctuations. Based on this, one could conclude that the model with only shocks to frictions

does a good job of accounting for unemployment fluctuations. However, Table 4 also reveals

that the model accounts for less than 20% of the movements in employment. The failure

to account for employment fluctuations is mirrored in some counterfactual predictions for

participation: participation rate fluctuations in the model are more than two times as large

as in the data, and are strongly countercyclical instead of mildly procyclical.

   The fact that employment fluctuations are not a mirror image of unemployment fluctua-

tions reflects the presence of an operative labor supply margin, i.e., a participation decision,

that provides individuals with the opportunity to make choices that partially offset the direct

effect of changes in frictions. As a first step in exploring the underlying economic mechanism,

consider how the participation region changes as the economy moves from the bad aggregate

state to the good aggregate state. Figure 1 illustrates this by plotting the optimal decision

rules for the two different realizations of the aggregate friction shocks, evaluated at the mean

                                              19
level of the other aggregate states. Specifically, the figure partitions the space of individual

state variables into participation and non-participation regions.

  Figure 1: Cut-off wealth and productivity levels for the model with frictions shocks only
                                    1400    G state
                                            B state
                                    1200

                                    1000
                           Wealth
                                    800
                                           Not Participate              Participate
                                    600

                                    400

                                    200

                                      0
                                            0.5       1        1.5        2     2.5   3
                                                             Productivity



       Because the other aggregate state variables (the capital stock and the lagged capital to

labor ratio in our solution method) will also change over the cycle, this figure does not capture

the changes in decision rules associated with the change in these variables. However, to the

extent that the other aggregate state variables are not that volatile and change slowly over

time, the figure does capture the relevant first order changes in decision rules over the cycle.

       The important message from Figure 1 is that when frictions become more severe, thereby

making it more difficult to obtain employment, individuals respond by enlarging the set of

individual states in which they will work.10 Note that this manifests itself in two ways:

individuals who are employed will be less likely to move out of employment in response

to idiosyncratic shocks, and some individuals who are not employed will decide to accept

employment opportunities under conditions that they previously would not. Also note that

both the heterogeneity in wealth and idiosyncratic productivity play active roles: the curve
  10
    In Krusell et al. (2010) we demonstrated that this effect was quantitatively important in terms of steady
state outcomes. Here we see that the effect is quantitatively significant in a business cycle context as well.




                                                             20
describing indifference is neither vertical nor horizontal.

       This effect is intuitive. A key desire for individuals in this economy is to arrange the

timing of work to coincide with periods of high individual productivity. Frictions interfere

with an individual’s ability to achieve the desired timing. When frictions become more severe,

individuals respond by expanding the set of conditions under which they will work if given

the opportunity, i.e., by becoming less choosy. The implication is that participation will be

countercyclical. While the magnitude of this effect will depend on the density of individuals

around the boundary of the two regions, this figure illustrates the main economic mechanism

at work. It is also important to emphasize that the magnitude of this effect depends critically

on the size of income and substitution effects in labor supply. In particular, a model with

linear utility and hence no income effects will underestimate the desire of individuals to work

more in response to changes that lower income.


Transition Dynamics            To gain additional insight into the workings of the model it is

instructive to examine how the transition rates between the various labor market states

respond when the aggregate state changes from the bad state to the good state. Specifically,

we simulate the economy for a large number of periods and individuals and pick a specific

time interval where the economy moves from a bad state to a good state.11 We then calculate

the log deviation of individual transition rates. The results are shown in Figure 2.

       The patterns found in Figure 2 are all intuitive. We begin with the flows between E and

U , which are the simplest. To move from E to U across adjacent periods three things must

happen: a worker must suffer a separation, not receive a new employment opportunity, and

not suffer an idiosyncratic shock that changes their desire to work. The probability of the
  11
    We simulate the economy for 5,000 periods and discard the initial 1,000 periods. The interval we selected
corresponds to a period where the economy moves from a B state in period 20 to a G state that lasts for 200
periods.


                                                     21
  Figure 2: Response of flows to a positive shock for the model with frictions shocks only
                      0.2                                             0.3
                                    EU        0.4           UN
                      0.1
                                              0.2
                       0                                               0

                     −0.1                      0
                                                                                    NE
                     −0.2                    −0.2                    −0.3
                            50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200


                      0.2                     0.6
                                                                      0.4

                                                                      0.2
                       0                       0

                                                                       0
                                    UE                      NU                      EN
                     −0.2                    −0.6                    −0.2
                            50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200



first two events is σ(1 − λ), which is clearly higher in the good state. We discuss the third

event in more detail below, and argue that it moves in the opposite direction. However,

its effect is second order compared to the change in λ. Similarly, to move from U to E

across adjacent periods requires that two things happen: the individual must receive a work

opportunity, and not suffer an idiosyncratic shock that changes their desire to work. Once

again, the dominant factor is the increase in λ, and hence this flow also increases.

   The movements between N and the other states are slightly more subtle. To gain in-

tuition into these movements we consider a simple heuristic example. In the example, the

participation decision depends only on the idiosyncratic shock and takes the form of a thresh-

old rule. To the extent that aggregate states and individual assets are slowly evolving in the

true model, dynamics in idiosyncratic shocks dominate the movement of individuals between

participation and non-participation, and this heuristic example offers some insight into the

flows in Figure 2.

   To examine the flows in the heuristic example, Consider Figure 3, which plots a single-

peaked density that we take to represent the invariant distribution of the idiosyncratic shocks.

The two lines indicated on the figure represent the optimal decision rules in the good and

                                                      22
bad states.

                    Figure 3: to Optimal decision rules in the heuristic example




                                                    Participate




                                       zB zG

      Consistent with Figure 1, the threshold for participation becomes higher when frictions

are less severe. Mapping out the response of the various transition rates in this example

following a switch in the aggregate state from bad to good can shed light on the patterns in

Figure 2. Note that in Figure 2 there is a distinction between the long run effect and the effect

in the initial period. This distinction is also present in the example. In the period in which

the state changes from bad to good, all of the workers with idiosyncratic shocks between the

two thresholds will move from in the labor force to out of the labor force. However, after

the initial period, all movements into and out of the labor force are dictated solely by the

movement of individuals across the threshold productivity.

      We begin by focusing on the longer run changes. Loosely speaking, the movement of

individuals across the boundary—in both directions—will be dictated by the mass of workers

around the boundary. For the configuration shown in Figure 3, the density is increasing as

we move from the lower threshold to the higher threshold, suggesting that these flows will

increase.12 If we had placed the thresholds on the other side of the peak in the density
 12
      In the model there is also a “liquidity effect” at work—in recessions there are more nonemployed workers


                                                      23
function, the implication would be reversed, but since in the true model the participation

rate always exceeds fifty percent, the configuration shown in Figure 3 is the empirically

relevant one.

    If more individuals are crossing the boundary between participation and non-participation,

both E to N and U to N flows will increase since this effect is at work independently of

whether the individual is in E or U . This long run effect is evident in Figure 2.13 The flow

from out of the labor force into the labor force also increases, but now the change in λ also

influences the separate flows into the E and U destinations. Transitions from N to E oc-

cur when an individual both crosses the threshold and receives an employment opportunity.

Since the probability of each of these increases as we move from the bad shock to the good

shock, the N to E flow necessarily increases. For the N to U flow, these two effects move in

opposite directions. It turns out that the effect due to the change in λ is substantially larger

than the change in the hazard of crossing the threshold, and as a result, the long run change

in this flow is negative. Again, these effects are found in Figure 2.

    Now we turn to analyzing the effects in the initial period in which the aggregate shock

changes. In the initial period, the above effects will be augmented with a large one time

flow out of the labor force that is associated with those individuals who lie in between the

two thresholds. This induces an increase in both E to N and U to N , which shows up in

Figure 2 as a greater increase in both of these flows in the initial period relative to later

periods. Because entry into the labor force in the initial period requires crossing a much
that are close to the borrowing constraint, thus increasing their desire to work. As discussed below, the
responses in Figure 2 suggest that this effect is relatively small.
  13
     In fact, there is an additional, reinforcing effect. Although the change in the average productivity of
the labor force is determined solely by the threshold productivity, a change in λ influences the distribution of
productivity within the employed and unemployed groups. Intuitively, as λ increases, unemployment durations
decrease and the unemployment pool is more heavily represented by the newly unemployed, who tend to be
of lower productivity. The net effect is that the unemployment pool has a greater share of its workers close
to the threshold, further increasing the U to N transition rate.



                                                      24
higher threshold than in the previous period, there is a negative effect on the flows from out

of the labor force in the initial period. Hence, the initial drop in the N to U flow is even

more negative than the long run response. For the N to E flow, Figure 2 is consistent with

the initial effect dominating the long run effect by a small amount, so that the net effect

is a small decrease in the initial period, followed by a large increase thereafter. Note that

for the most part the magnitudes of the flows change very little beyond the second period,

suggesting that our heuristic device of ignoring the effects of changes in assets over time is

not of first order importance.


Cyclical Properties of Flows Having analyzed the transition dynamics in detail, it is

instructive to examine the business cycle statistics for the flows. They are reported in Table

5.
                                            Table 5
          Cyclical Properties of Transition Rates: Model with Friction Shocks Only
                     Volatilities: std(x)                 Correlations: corr(x, Y )
           fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E fN U fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E fN U
     Data  .085 .032 .077 .060 .043 .064 −.82 .33                 .78   .78   .64 −.70
     Model .085 .044 .077 .043 .087 .066 −.72 .43                 .76   .43   .84 −.53

      By construction, the model matches the volatility of the transition rates fEU and fU E .

However, the model also seems to do a reasonable job of capturing the behavior of many of

the other flows as well, both in terms of magnitude and correlation with output. Interestingly,

although the participation rate in the model had the wrong correlation with output relative to

the data, all of the underlying flows in the model have the same correlation with output as is

found in the data. The reason that the participation rate ends up with the wrong correlation

is apparently due to more subtle differences between the model and the data involving the

relative magnitudes and correlations of the various flows. For example, the flow from E to

N is both more volatile and displays a slightly higher correlation with output in the model

                                               25
than in the data.


Summary In summary, although the model with shocks only to frictions can generate

substantial movements in unemployment, and captures many features of the transition rates,

it generates changes in employment that are far too small, and changes in participation that

are too large and of the wrong correlation with output. While the appeal of this type of

specification is derived from the fact that researchers have examined it in settings with the

participation rate exogenously fixed, we find that this assumption of constant participation

is in fact inconsistent with the other features of the model when embedded into a setting

that allows for an empirically reasonable labor supply response along the extensive margin.

4.2.2   Results II: The Model With TFP Shocks Only

In this subsection we consider the case in which the only shock is a shock to aggregate TFP.

It is well known in the business cycle literature that this type of shock is capable of generating

fluctuations in employment and the components of aggregate output that capture the key

patterns found in the data. Our main objective here is to assess the ability of this case to

match the additional facts that we documented in Section 2. While there is no presumption

that this type of shock will work, we carry out this exercise because it is informative to

understand the successes and failures of this model vis-a-vis the data.


Calibration of Shocks       To proceed we consider a symmetric two-state Markov process on

Z with persistence parameter ρZ and Z taking values in the set {ZG , ZB }, where ZG = 1+εZ

and ZB = 1 − εZ . To illustrate the effects of this type of shock we choose ρZ = 0.983 to

be consistent with much of the real business cycle literature. We choose εZ to match the

standard deviation of employment in the data. The resulting value is εZ = 0.0290.



                                               26
Cyclical Properties of Stocks        Panel B in Table 6 displays the cyclical properties for

model generated data. For completeness, we include values from the data in Panel A.
                                           Table 6
                       Cyclical Properties of Labor   Market Variables
                                          A. Data
                          E      u    lf pr fEU       fEN     fU E   fU N    fN E   fN U
          std(x)        .011 .12      .003 .085       .032    .077   .060    .043   .064
      corrcoef (x, Y )   .84 −.87 .46 −.82             .33     .78    .78     .64   −.70
     corrcoef (x, x−1 ) .92     .92    .72     .73     .20     .84    .73     .41    .75
                                          B. Model
                          E      u    lf pr fEU       fEN    fU E    fU N   fN E    fN U
          std(x)        .011 .03      .010 .028       .053   .012    .051   .034    .034
      corrcoef (x, Y )   .95 −.55 .93          .06    −.28    .01     .04   −.17    −.19
     corrcoef (x, x−1 ) .76     .39    .72 −.03        .07   −.11    −.02   −.13    −.13

   By construction, the model accounts for all of the fluctuations in employment in the data.

However, it fares poorly on the behavior of the two other stocks. First, although the model

does capture the fact that the participation rate is procyclical and the unemployment rate is

countercyclical, it misses on the relative volatility of the two by an order of magnitude. In

fact, the standard deviation of the employment-to-population ratio is only slightly larger than

that of the labor force participation rate, implying that virtually all of the fluctuations in

employment are due to fluctuations in participation. One critique of standard real business

cycle models with an operative extensive margin (e.g., Hansen (1985)) was that although

they could generate substantial fluctuations in employment, they were silent on the issue of

unemployment. By including frictions, our model does allow one to connect with data on

unemployment, and perhaps not surprisingly, shows that when the only shocks to the model

are to aggregate TFP, virtually none of the employment fluctuations show up as offsetting

fluctuations in unemployment.

   To gain more insight into the underlying economics, it is again instructive to examine how

decision rules and flows are affected by the aggregate productivity shock. Figure 4 plots the

                                              27
behavior of the decision rule for participation that is equivalent to Figure 1 in the previous

subsection.

   Figure 4: Cut-off wealth and productivity levels for the model with TFP shocks only
                                1400    G state
                                        B state
                                1200

                                1000

                       Wealth
                                800
                                       Not Participate                    Participate
                                600

                                400

                                200

                                  0
                                       0.5        1        1.5        2         2.5     3
                                                         Productivity




   This figure illustrates the standard intertemporal substitution effects present in standard

real business cycle models: when productivity is high individuals choose to work more, which

corresponds to expanding the set of individual states in which they desire to work. This is

the effect that leads to procyclical employment and participation. To the extent that the

employment responses reflect standard intertemporal substitution, it may seem a curiosity

that unemployment in this exercise does fluctuate countercyclically. We will be able to offer

an explanation for this after we study transition dynamics in more detail.


Transition Dynamics              Figure 5 shows how transition rates respond when the economy

moves from a low aggregate productivity shock to a high one, and is computed in an analogous

fashion to Figure 2.

   Having analyzed the transition dynamics in the previous exercise in some detail, it is

relatively easy to explain the patterns in Figure 5 with similar arguments. We start with

the flows between E and U . The figure shows that there is effectively no change in the E


                                                         28
       Figure 5: Response of flows to a positive shock for the model with TFP shocks only
                        0.2                                             0.6
                                      EU        0.4           UN                      NE
                        0.1                                             0.4
                                                0.2
                         0                                              0.2
                                                 0
                       −0.1                    −0.2                      0

                       −0.2                    −0.4                    −0.2
                              50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200


                        0.2                     0.6
                                                              NU
                        0.1                                              0
                                                0.4

                         0
                                                0.2                    −0.2
                       −0.1
                                      UE         0                                    EN
                       −0.2                                            −0.4
                              50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200



to U and U to E transition rates. Consistent with our earlier analysis, these transitions are

dominated by the frictional parameters λ and σ, and since they are constant there is virtually

no change in the transition rates.

       Our previous heuristic example is again useful to understand the flows between N and

the other states. However, whereas a decrease in frictions led to a rightward movement of the

threshold for participation, an increase in aggregate productivity leads to a leftward shift of

the threshold, thereby reversing the implications. That is, there will now be fewer individuals

who cross the threshold between participation and non-participation.

       Again it is important to distinguish between changes in the period of the initial change in

productivity versus the longer run change. By analogy with our earlier arguments, we now

expect both the E to N and U to N flows to decrease in the long run. This is consistent

with Figure 5, though note that the changes are quite small.14 Because the value of λ is

unchanged, we expect to see this same pattern for both the N to U and N to E flows, and

this is indeed evident in Figure 5.
  14
    In particular, note that the change in the U to N transition rate is much smaller in this case than in the
case with friction shocks. As noted there, the threshold effect was augmented by an additional effect due to
how changes in λ affect the productivity distribution within the unemployment pool.



                                                        29
   Next consider the changes in transition rates during the initial period in which the aggre-

gate productivity shock changes. Because the threshold moves to the left there will be a one

time increase in participation associated with the entry of all those individuals with idiosyn-

cratic shocks between the two threshold values. As a result, we expect to see an increase in

both N to U and N to E transition rates on impact, and a decrease in both E to N and U

to N transition rates. These patterns are also found in Figure 5.

   Note that there is a slight bump in the U to E transition rate in the initial period. The

movement in the threshold causes fewer unemployed people to leave the labor force in the

initial period, increasing the overall rate at which these individuals transit into employment.

Whereas this effect is also present beyond the initial period, the size of this effect is much

larger in the initial period because it reflects the mass of workers in between the two thresholds

and not just the movement of individuals across the threshold.

   Having studied the behavior of the flows we are now in a position to address the coun-

tercyclical movement of the unemployment rate that was documented in Table 6. Given

that frictions are constant, it may seem surprising that unemployment is countercyclical.

The reason lies in the fact that there are now fewer flows into and out of the labor force,

which therefore decreases the flow into the unemployment pool. Specifically, if employed

individuals leave the labor force and later re-enter, they will typically experience a spell of

unemployment. By decreasing the flow of individuals out of the labor force, this return flow

is also reduced, thereby reducing one source of unemployment.

   It is of interest to compare our findings from this exercise with the results in Veracierto

(2008). Although Veracierto’s model has predictions for the stocks of workers in the three

labor market states, the gross flows are not uniquely determined due to the fact that in equi-

librium many workers are necessarily indifferent between two transitions. However, we can



                                               30
compare predictions about the number of workers in each of the three states. While there are

some differences in details regarding model specification, he also considers aggregate TFP

shocks, and similar to us, he finds that although the model can generate substantial fluctu-

ations in employment, it fares very poorly in accounting for the behavior of unemployment

and participation. In particular, he finds that unemployment becomes procyclical. Veracierto

ascribes the procyclical unemployment rate to the fact that when a high TFP shock occurs,

individuals move from not-participating to participating, thereby increasing unemployment

because it takes time to find a job. Figure 6 shows the dynamics in our model following an

increase in Z from ZB to ZG assuming that Z remains at this level. The figure shows that

our model has the same initial response to an increase in TFP as in Veracierto’s model; that

is, there is an immediate jump in the size of the labor force and an increase in unemployment.

However, over time these individuals will become employed, and in our model the unemploy-

ment rate approaches a lower level than attained prior to the shock. This asymptotic response

turns out to dominate the immediate effect in terms of its effect on the correlation between

the unemployment rate and output. Hence, while our model does not match the volatility of

the unemployment rate, it does produce a countercyclical unemployment rate. Despite this

difference with the results in Veracierto, our model displays quantitative responses that are

quite similar to his.

       One difference between Veracierto’s model and ours is that he assumes search is costly.

Here we argue that this difference is not likely to be important. Consider an extension of our

model in which a worker who is nonemployed has to exert some (indivisible) search effort in

order to receive a job offer. If this search effort is costly, only some of the workers that we

classify as being in U would choose to exert job search effort.15 In the limit as the search
  15
    Workers whom we identify as being in N do not exert any effort since they prefer to stay nonemployed
even without any search cost.



                                                  31
Figure 6: Response of labor market stocks to a positive shock for the model with TFP shocks
only
                        0.06
                                                           0.02
                        0.03
                                                             0
                          0
                                                          −0.02
                       −0.03
                                                Z         −0.04                    E
                       −0.06
                               50   100   150       200           50   100   150       200


                        0.05                                0.4
                                                N                                  U

                                                            0.2
                          0
                                                             0


                       −0.05                               −0.2
                               50   100   150       200           50   100   150       200



cost approaches zero, all workers that we categorize as being in U would choose to exert job

search effort. To the extent that search costs are relatively low, we therefore do not believe

that adding search costs would overturn our findings.

   More generally, another piece of intuition in the literature is that if search effort and

the ease of finding a job are complements, and if unemployment is the activity of search,

then unemployment should be procyclical. Shimer (2004) questions the assumption that

search effort and the ease of finding a job are complements. Moreover, assuming a small

but strictly positive search cost, our analysis in this and the previous subsection suggests

that search effort among the non-employed can either increase or decrease over the cycle,

depending upon the nature of the shock causing the cycle. We believe that one reason for

the presumption that search effort is complementary with the ease of finding a job is that

much of the search literature assumes linear utility and hence no income efffects. The fact

that search intensity can be countercylical in our model is related to income effects: holding

search intensity fixed, if it is harder to find a job then expected income decreases, leading to




                                                      32
greater search effort to maintain consumption.16

       Whether nonemployed workers search harder during recessions is ultimately an empirical

issue. Recent work suggests that if anything, search intensity may be countercyclical. For

example, Shimer (2004) examines several indicators of aggregate search intensity over time.

One of his indicators, the number of search methods used by attached workers, increased

during 2001 (his Figure 4). A similar pattern holds even when the sample is limited to active

job searchers (see his Figure 7). For earlier periods this measure of search intensity does not

exhibit a strong cyclical pattern, but it does always increase during recessionary periods (see

his Figure 8).

       In summary, we think our main findings are robust to the incorporation of small search

costs. While we think it is of interest to extend our analysis to allow for endogenous search

intensity, we also think additional empirical work on search intensity is required in order to

guide the development of these theories.


Cyclical Properties of Flows Having looked at how the transition rates respond, we now

return to the cyclical behavior of the transition rates in Table 6. If one were to only look

at the standard deviations one might conclude that the model is doing a reasonable job in

capturing some of the fluctuations. But when one looks at the correlations with output and

the autocorrelations it is apparent that the model is capturing virtually none of the dynamics

that is present in the flows in the data. The reason for the failure along this dimension is that

productivity shocks lead to almost no persistent change in transition rates. That is, almost

all of the fluctuations in transition rates are due to the effects that take place in the period
  16
    Shimer (2004) questions the assumption that search effort and the ease of finding a job are complements
and he argues that it is plausible to have a modified view of job search effort where some workers respond to
deterioriating labor market conditions by increasing their search intensity. He then constructs a model where
search intensity can be countercyclical.




                                                     33
of the impact. This is in contrast to the case with friction shocks only, where we found much

larger and persistent changes in the EU , U E, N U , and N E flows.

4.3   Results III: Shocks to TFP and Frictions—The Benchmark

A very simple characterization of the findings from our first two exercises is that a model with

shocks to frictions can do a reasonable job of accounting for the behavior of unemployment

and many of the transition rates, whereas a model with shocks to TFP can do a reasonable of

accounting for the behavior of employment. Neither model seems capable of accounting for

the behavior of participation, since in both cases participation seems to fluctuate too much.

However, it is interesting to note that although in both cases the participation rate fluctuates

too much, in the case of TFP shocks it is procyclical whereas in the case of friction shocks it

is countercyclical. Noting these results, it seems possible that a model that features shocks

to both frictions and TFP could do a reasonable job of accounting for a large set of the labor

market facts. In this section we show this to be the case.


Calibration of Shocks       As before, we assume that Z, λ, and σ all follow symmetric two-

state Markov processes, and we keep the same notation in terms of denoting good and bad

states. Once again, for ease of exposition, we focus on the case in which the shocks are

all perfectly correlated, so that only two realizations can occur: either all values are good

or all values are bad. Our main goal is to show that this type of specification can capture

many of the facts from Section 2. We set ρZ = 0.983 similar to above. εZ is calibrated to

0.0287 to match the standard deviation of employment in the data. We choose the volatility

of the two transition rates between employment and unemployment so that their standard

deviations are the same as in the data. The calibrated values for the shock processes are

(λG , λB ) = (0.509, 0.371) and (σG , σB ) = (0.01249, 0.01351).


                                                34
Cyclical Properties of Stocks Table 7 shows the results for the cyclical behavior of

employment, the unemployment rate and the participation rate.

                                                      Table 7
                    Behavior of Stocks with TFP and Friction Shocks
                          Volatilities: std(x) Correlations: corr(x, Y )
                           u lf pr        E     u     lf pr       E
                   Data   .12 .003       .011  −.87 .46          .84
                   Model .13 .004        .011  −.98 .56          .97

   While the volatility of employment in the model is the same as that in the data by

construction, the model also does a good job of accounting for the size of fluctuations in

both unemployment and participation. Additionally, it also correctly accounts for the fact

that employment is strongly procyclical, the unemployment rate is strongly countercyclical,

and the labor force participation rate is weakly procyclical. We noted previously that in

each of the first two exercises, the participation rate fluctuated too much. However, because

the two shocks move participation in opposite directions, when both shocks are present the

overall effect on participation is much smaller than the individual effects. The cyclicality of

the participation rate is dependent on the relative magnitudes of the shocks. Figure 7 once

again shows the behavior of the decision rule for participation in the good and bad states.

         Figure 7: Cut-off wealth and productivity levels for the benchmark model
                                1400    G state
                                        B state
                                1200

                                1000
                       Wealth




                                800
                                       Not Participate              Participate
                                600

                                400

                                200

                                  0
                                       0.5        1        1.5        2     2.5   3
                                                         Productivity



                                                         35
   This figure indicates that for the parameterization in this exercise, individuals increase

their desire to participate in good times, though the increase is smaller than what was

observed for the case of aggregate productivity shocks only, as shown in Figure 4. While

the sign of the net effect on participation is obviously dependent on parameter values, we do

want to emphasize that a robust feature of this specification is that the participation rate

will exhibit much less cyclicality than either employment or the unemployment rate.

   In addition to making predictions about the cyclicality of the number of individuals un-

employed, our model also has interesting implications for the mix of individuals that are

unemployed and how it varies over the cycle. An issue that has recently received attention

is how the average quality of unemployed workers changes over the business cycle. Mueller

(2010), for example, finds that the average quality of the unemployed is countercyclical and

suggests that this is a useful diagnostic for evaluating theories of unemployment. The average

value for idiosyncratic productivity among unemployed workers in our model is countercycli-

cal, consistent with the evidence in Mueller.


Transition Dynamics        Figure 8 again shows the responses of the transition rates as the

economy moves from bad times to good times, analogously to what we previously showed in

Figures 2 and 5.

   We will not discuss these responses in detail, but note that they are effectively a convex

combination of the results previously shown for the two shocks individually and hence do not

present any novel effects relative to the earlier analysis.


Cyclical Properties of Flows Table 8 shows the results for the transition probabilities.

This table shows that the model does a good job of accounting for the key patterns. The

model captures the countercyclicality of unemployment inflows (EU and N U flow rates),


                                                36
         Figure 8: Response of flows to a positive shock for the benchmark model
                    0.2                     0.2                     0.4
                                  EU                      UN
                    0.1

                      0                      0                       0

                   −0.1
                                                                                    NE
                   −0.2                    −0.2                    −0.4
                          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200


                    0.2                     0.3                     0.1



                      0                      0                       0


                                  UE                      NU                        EN
                   −0.2                    −0.3                    −0.1
                          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200          50 100 150 200



procylicality of unemployment outflows (U E and N U flow rates) and mild procyclicality of

the EN flow rate. The model delivers a volatility and correlation (with output) for fN E that

are somewhat too high.

                                                  Table 8
                 Flows in the Model with TFP Shocks                and Friction Shocks
                                         A. Data
                                    fEU fEN fU E                     fU N    fN E        fN U
                      std(x)        .085 .032 .077                   .060    .043        .064
                  corrcoef (x, Y )  −.82 .33     .78                  .78     .64        −.70
                 corrcoef (x, x−1 ) .73    .20   .84                  .73     .41         .75
                                         B. Model
                                    fEU fEN fU E                     fU N    fN E        fN U
                      std(x)        .085 .031 .077                   .051    .080        .066
                    corr(x, Y )     −.90 .35     .92                  .56     .89        −.92
                   corr(x, x−1 )     .68   .09   .72                  .30     .70         .68

Decompositions       Given that the above specification does a reasonable job of accounting

for the cyclical fluctuations of the labor market variables, it is of interest to decompose the

fluctuations in various series into the parts attributable to each of the three shocks: Z, λ,

and σ. To do this we simply recompute the model assuming that two of the three shocks are

shut down. Table 9 does this for the three aggregates. It also reports the correlations of the

                                                    37
variables with output for each specification.

                                           Table 9
                             Contribution of the Shocks: Stocks
                           Volatilities: std(x)   Correlations: corr(x, Y )
                          Y     u lf pr       E     u    lf pr       E
                 Data    .016 .12 .003 .011 −.87 .46                .84
                 All     .020 .13 .004 .011 −.98 .56                .95
                 Z       .018 .03 .010 .011 −.55 .93                .95
                 λ       .001 .10 .007 .002 −.89 −.77               .42
                 σ       .000 .01 .001 .001 −.33 −.16               .07

   Several results are notable. First, consistently with our earlier results, the shocks to λ

are the quantitatively most important ones for the fluctuations in the unemployment rate

whereas the fluctuations in Z are the most important ones for the fluctuations in employment.

Note that allowing for fluctuations in frictions does not diminish the role that TFP shocks

play in accounting for fluctuations in employment. From the perspective of employment

fluctuations the model looks very much like the model that has only TFP shocks. The key

effect of frictions vis-a-vis employment fluctuations is that they change the participation

dynamics so that unemployment fluctuations are now much closer to being the mirror image

of employment fluctuations.

   Fluctuations in σ are relatively unimportant for all three stocks. It may seem somewhat

surprising that shocks to σ are so unimportant given that the transition rates between E and

U fluctuate by roughly the same amount. To obtain some insight into this Table 10 carries

out the same exercise for the two transition rates between E and U .




                                                38
                                                 Table 10
                                 Contribution of the Shocks: Flows
                                             std(x)        corrcoef (x, Y )
                                          fEU     fU E     fEU      fU E
                                 Data     .085    .077     −.82      .78
                                 All      .085    .077     −.90      .92
                                 z        .027    .012     .04      −.01
                                 λ        .069    .076     −.67      .74
                                 σ        .033    .011     −.49     −.05

       An interesting result here is that even when there are only shocks to λ so that σ is

constant, the model accounts for roughly 80% of the volatility in fEU . This is because

we allow individuals to receive an employment opportunity in the same period that they

experience an employment separation shock. It follows that the likelihood of an E to U flow

is affected by the value of λ. To see why this is, note that when λ is low it is more likely

that a worker who experiences an employment separation will remain in the unemployment

state. This phenomenon in the model captures an important feature that is present in the

actual data. That is, in the household survey, an individual who transits from employment

to unemployment after an interview date, but who receives a job offer and starts to work

prior to the next interview date will be recorded as an E to E flow. The higher is the job

offer arrival rate, the greater is the chance that this worker will be recorded as an E to E

transition.17

       Note that in the model with only shocks to σ there is also an effect on the transition

rate from U to E. This may at first seem somewhat surprising. However, this effect is due

to a one-time effect associated with changes in the value of σ. The nature of the effect is

that during good times (i.e., when σ decreases), some people move from participation to

non-participation due to the fact that as it becomes easier to work when one desires, one
  17
    As an alternative exercise we could ask what types of fluctuations result if we assumed that there were
only shocks to σ but that the size of these shocks were sufficient to match the volatility in fEU .



                                                      39
becomes more particular about timing periods of work with high values of the idiosyncratic

shocks. As a result, during the period in which σ changes from high to low, some of the

previously unemployed move to non-participation and hence even though they receive em-

ployment opportunities they choose not to work. This causes a one-time reduction in fU E .

The fact that it is a one-time reduction is evident in the very low correlation between fU E

and output in the case of shocks only to σ.


5    Conclusion

We have developed a general equilibrium model of gross worker flows and used it to study

the role of various shocks in accounting for business cycle fluctuations in the labor market.

A key message from our analysis is that our model offers important insights into the forces

that drive business cycle fluctuations in the labor market. In contrast to the implications

of standard two-state models that stress matching frictions, we find that fluctuations in

employment loss and employment offer rates are unable to account for the key patterns in

labor market variables over the business cycle unless they are combined with a cyclical shock

to the return to market activity. We find that a model that features both these drivers of

fluctuations is able to account for the main features not only of labor market aggregates but

also of gross worker flows.

    Our model offers a rich description of individual labor supply in a setting with heterogene-

ity, search frictions and an empirically reasonable market structure. It is the first paper to

consider the effects of aggregate shocks on individual labor market transitions in this setting.

However, it is also simplistic in some dimensions relevant for the microeconomic data. One of

these dimensions regards our model of the household as an infinitely-lived unit. Clearly, an

extension that distinguishes different members of the households would be relevant, as would



                                              40
an age dimension. Also, we have left out details of job experiences, including any specifics of

what influences individual productivity (such as learning on the job and on-the-job search).

Similarly, we abstract from an explicit consideration of search costs. We do believe that our

framework is a very useful starting point for extensions in all these directions. Related, we

also believe that it is useful for assessing a variety of further issues, such as the heterogeneous

effects of business cycles on various subgroups of the population. While we have focused on

aggregate shocks to frictions and the return to market activity, we can also study other

aggregate shocks, including various candidates for demand shocks.

   Finally, as pointed out above, in contrast with much of the literature—in particular the

recent studies of Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005)—we leave open what the deeper explanations

for the fluctuations in labor market frictions might be, as we leave open what drives the

returns to market activity and any connections between these shocks. The good performance

of the model of course makes it all the more important to further isolate and study these

drivers. One view in the literature is that a search/matching model with rigid wage formation

and frictions that are entirely driven by productivity fluctuations can explain the data well.

From the present perspective, such a model will likely be hard to square with labor market

flows, since we have found the movements in the return to market activity necessary for

understanding them.




                                                41
References

[1] Blanchard, O., and P. Diamond, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S.

      Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1990, 85-155.


[2] Chang, Y., and S. Kim., “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply: A Quantita-

      tive Analysis Based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,” International Economic

      Review 47 (2006), 1-27.


[3] Christiano, L.J., M. Trabandt, and K. Walentin, “Involuntary Unemployment and the

      Business Cycle,” (2010), mimeo.


[4] Galı́, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters, “Unemployment in an Estimated New Keynesian

      Model,” mimeo, 2011.


[5] Garibaldi, P. and E. Wasmer, “Equilibrium Search Unemployment, Endogenous Partici-

      pation, and Labor Market Flows,” Journal of European Economic Association 3 (2005),

      851-882.


[6] Haefke, C., and M. Reiter, “What Do Participation Fluctuations Tell Us About Labor

      Supply Elasticities?,” Mimeo, IZA, 2011.


[7] Hall, R., “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Eco-

      nomic Review 95 (2005), 50-65.


[8]        , “Cyclical Movements along the Labor Supply Function,” in K. Bradbury, C. L.

      Foote, R. K. Triest, (eds.) Labor Supply in the New Century, Federal Reserve Bank of

      Boston, (2008), 241-278.




                                             42
 [9]         , “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal

       Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy 117 (2009), 282-323.


[10] Hansen, G.D., “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Eco-

       nomics 16, (1985), 309–337.


[11] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, R. Rogerson, and A. Şahin, “Aggregate Labor Market Out-

       comes: The Role of Choice and Chance,” Quantitative Economics 1 (2010), 97-128.


[12]                                      , “A Three State Model of Worker Flows in General

       Equilibrium,” Journal of Economic Theory 146 (2011), 1107-1133.


[13] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, and A. Şahin, “Labor-Market Matching with Precautionary

       Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Studies 77:4, pp. 1477–1507.


[14] Krusell, P., and A. Smith Jr., “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,”

       Journal of Political Economy 106 (1998), 867-896.


[15] Kydland, F., and E. Prescott, “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Economet-

       rica 50 (1982), 1345-70.


[16] Lucas, R.E., and L. Rapping, “Intertemporal Substitution of Leisure in the Theory of

       Labor Supply,” Journal of Political Economy 77 (1969), 721-754.


[17] Mueller, A., “Separations, Sorting and Cyclical Unemployment,” mimeo, Columbia Uni-

       versity, 2010.


[18] Poterba, J., and L. Summers, “Reporting Errors and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econo-

       metrica 54 (1986), 1319-1338.




                                              43
[19] Rogerson, R. and R. Shimer, “Search in Macroeconomic Models of the Labor Market,”

    Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4A, edited by Orley Ashelfelter and David Card,

    (2010), 619-700.


[20] Shimer, R., “Search Intensity,” (2004), mimeo, University of Chicago.


[21] Shimer, R., “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”

    American Economic Review, 95:1 (2005), pp. 25–49.


[22] Shimer, R., “Job Search, Labor Force Participation, and Wage Rigidities,” (2011),

    mimeo, University of Chicago.


[23] Tripier, F., “Can the Labor Market Search Model Explain the Fluctuations of Allocations

    of Time?,” Economic Modelling 21 (2004), 131-146.


[24] Veracierto, M., “On the Cyclical Behavior of Employment, Unemployment and Labor

    Force Participation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55 (2008), 1143-1157.




                                            44
   Appendix

   A.1 Data

   The Current Population Survey (CPS) reports the labor market status of the respondents

each month that allows the BLS to compute important labor market statistics like the unem-

ployment rate. In particular, in any given month a civilian can be in one of three labor force

states: employed (E), unemployed (U ), and not in the labor force (N ). The BLS definitions

for the three labor market states are as follows:


   • An individual is counted as employed if he or she did any work at all for pay or profit

     during the survey month. This includes part-time or temporary work as well as full-time

     year-round employment.


   • An individual is considered unemployed if he or she does not have a job, has actively

     looked for employment in the past 4 weeks and is currently available to work.


   • An individual is classified as not in the labor force if he or she is included in the labor

     force population universe (older than 16 years old, non-military, noninstitutionalized)

     but are neither employed nor unemployed.


   Households are interviewed for four consecutive months, rotate out for eight months and

then rotate in for another four months. The panel feature of the CPS makes it possible to

calculate transitions by individual workers between these three labor market states. However,

not all the respondents stay in the sample for consecutive months; the rotating feature of the

panel implies that only 75 percent are reinterviewed according to the CPS sampling design.

Moreover, many other respondents cannot be found in the consecutive month due to various

reasons and are reported as missing. The failure to match individuals in consecutive months

is known as margin error and it causes biased estimates of the flow rates as discussed by

                                              45
Abowd and Zellner (1985), Fujita and Ramey (2009), and Poterba and Summers (1986). The

simplest correction for margin error is to simply drop the missing observations and reweight

the transitions that are measured, a procedure that is known as the missing-at-random

(MAR) method. However, this procedure could lead to biases if missing observations are not

missing at random. To deal with this problem, Abowd and Zellner (1985) and Poterba and

Summers (1986) proposed alternative corrections for margin error which use information on

labor market stocks. Their correction reweights the unadjusted flows in order to minimizes

the distance between the reported labor market stocks and the stocks that are imputed

from the labor market transitions. We follow the algorithm proposed by Elsby, Hobijn, and

Şahin (2011), which is similar in spirit to Poterba and Summers’ method, but differs in

implementation. We use the basic monthly CPS files from January 1976 to December 2009

and data from January 1968 to December 1975 based on tabulations by Joe Ritter using data

that was made available by Hoyt Bleakley. All transition probabilities are calculated for the

population older than 16 years old and are seasonally adjusted.


References

[1] Abowd, J., and A. Zellner, “Estimating Gross Labor-Force Flows,” Journal of Business

  and Economic Statistics 3 (1985), 254-283.


[2] Elsby, M., Hobijn B. and A. Şahin, “The Participation Margin and Cyclical Unemploy-

  ment Fluctuations,” mimeo.


[3] Fujita, S., and G. Ramey, “The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding Rates,” Inter-

  national Economic Review 2 (2009), 415-430.




                                             46
       A.2 Calibration of the Steady State

       There is strong evidence in the literature (see, e.g., Poterba and Summers (1986)) that

classification errors lead to spurious flows, especially between unemployment and not in the

labor force. To capture this we will also add a measurement equation to our model. To

facilitate exposition we will calibrate the model assuming no classification error and then

show how the model’s implications are affected when we add this type of error.

       The steady state model has nine parameters that need to be assigned: preference param-

eters β and α, production parameters θ and δ, idiosyncratic shock parameters ρz and σεz ,

frictional parameters σ and λ, and the tax rate τ . Because data on labor market transitions

are available monthly, we set the length of a period to be one month. We set τ = .30.18 Be-

cause our model is a variation of the standard growth model, we can assign some parameter

values following standard procedures used to calibrate versions of the growth model. Because

of incomplete markets and idiosyncratic uncertainty, we cannot derive analytic expressions

for the steady state, and so cannot isolate the connection between certain parameters and

target values. Nonetheless, it is still useful and intuitive to associate particular targets and

parameter values. Specifically, given values for λ, σ, ρz , and σεz , we choose θ = .3 to target

a capital share of .3, δ to achieve an investment to output ratio equal to .2, and the discount

factor β to target an annual real rate of return on capital equal to 4%. The other preference

parameter α, which captures the disutility of working, is set so that the steady state value

of the employment to population ratio is equal to .61. This is the value of the employment

to population ratio for the population aged 16 and older for the period 1968 − 2009.19
  18
     Following the work of Mendoza et al. (1994) there are several papers which produce estimates of the
average effective tax rate on labor income across countries. Minor variations in methods across these studies
produce small differences in the estimates, but .30 is representative of these estimates.
  19
     We calibrate to values for the period 1968-2009 because this is the period for which we have consistent
measures of labor market flows.




                                                     47
       It remains to choose values for λ, σ, ρz and σεz . Recall that our idiosyncratic shock process

should be viewed as a composite of all idiosyncratic shocks that affect the static return

to working versus not working. Shocks to wages are of course only one such component.

However, since these are the shocks that we have the best measures of, our benchmark

specification calibrates the shock process based on estimates of idiosyncratic wage shocks.

Specifically, we choose values for ρz and σε based on Floden and Linde (2001), who estimated

ρz = .92 and σε = .21 expressed on an annual basis.20 There is an intimate connection

between λ and the unemployment rate in the model. If λ = 1 then unemployment will be

zero, since everyone always has the opportunity to work. We therefore choose λ so that the

steady state unemployment rate matches the average value for the unemployment rate in the

US data for the period 1968 − 2009, which is .061. We choose σ to target the average flow

rate out of employment over our sample period, which is 3.6%. We target this rate based on

our belief that the employment state is the one subject to the least amount of measurement

error.

       The labor market flows in our calibrated model and the data are displayed in Table A1.

                                                   Table A.1
                             Flows in           the Data and the Model
                       US 1968-2009                                 Model
                  FROM          TO                      FROM             TO
                          E      U                 N               E      U                 N
                    E   0.954 0.016              0.030    E      0.954 0.007              0.039
                    U   0.270 0.508              0.222    U      0.396 0.505              0.099
                    N   0.048 0.027              0.925    N      0.035 0.044              0.921

       Overall the model does a reasonable job of capturing the salient features of the data.
  20
     Krusell et al. (2011) showed that the ability of the model to account for the flows between states remains
relatively unchanged over a wide range of values of ρ and σε . What mattered most was that ρ was reasonably
persistent (at least .5), but not too close to being a unit root (say less than .97), and that σε was not too
small. An issue for our quantitative exercises is the extent to which different specifications of the shock process
influence our results, despite having little impact on worker flows. We carry out sensitivity analysis to assess
this.


                                                        48
Specifically, it does a good job of capturing the degree of persistence in each of the three

states. One major discrepancy is that the model does not generate enough flows from U to

N . Given our strategy of targeting the stock of workers in U , this necessarily implies that

the other flow out of U (i.e., the flow from U to E) must also be off. Classification error is

discussed in Appendix A.3.


References

[1] Floden, M., and J. Linde, “Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There

  a Role for Government Insurance?,” Review of Economic Dynamics 4 (2001), 406-437.


[2] Mendoza, E., A. Razin, and L. Tesar, “Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics: Cross-

  Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and Consumption,” Journal of Mone-

  tary Economics 34 (1994), 297-323.


       A.3 Classification Error

       As discussed in Section 4.1, there is strong evidence that classification errors lead to

spurious flows. In this section, we allow classification errors to induce spurious transitions

between U and N and examine how our results are affected. In particular, following the

estimates of Poterba and Summers (1986), we assume that a consumer with true state U

state misreports it as N with probability 0.1146 and that a consumer with true state N state

misreports it as U state with probability 0.0064.21 We recalibrate the model, setting α, λ,

and σ in order to match the observed employment population ratio of .61, the average value

of unemployment rate of .061, and the average flow rate out of employment of 3.6%. The

new parameter values are α = 0.606, λ = 0.423, σ = 0.0135.
  21
    Although Poterba and Summers (1981) also describe the classification errors for other combinations of
the states, here we focus only on U and N .



                                                   49
                                           Table A.2
                Flows in the Data and the Model with     Classification Error
                      US 1968-2009                          Model
               FROM            TO           FROM                   TO
                         E      U      N                   E        U      N
                 E     0.954 0.016 0.030       E         0.954 0.007 0.039
                 U     0.270 0.508 0.222       U         0.363 0.439 0.199
                 N     0.048 0.027 0.925       N         0.038 0.052 0.910

   Steady state flows are presented in Table A.2. Comparing with Table A.1, the U E

transition rate goes down slightly, resulting in a slightly better match with data. The U N

transition rate increases substantially and is almost as high as in the data. The match of the

U U transition rate somewhat worsens.

   With this new set of parameter values, we repeat the exercise for our benchmark model,

recalibrating the parameters of the driving forces to match the same targets as in the main

text (the standard deviation of employment, the standard deviation of the EU flow rate,

the standard deviation of the U E flow rate). The new parameter values are: εZ = 0.02895,

(λG , λB ) = (0.4937, 0.3523), and (σG , σB ) = (0.01289, 0.01411). Table A.3 presents the

results.
                                           Table A.3
                    Behavior of Stocks with TFP and     Friction Shocks
                                 Volatilities: std(x)   Correlations: corr(x, Y )
                                  u lf pr        E        u     lf pr      E
            Data                 .12 .003       .011    −.87 .46          .84
            Model (Benchmark) .13 .004          .011    −.98 .56          .97
            Model (CE)           .13 .004       .011    −.98 .38          .97

   The row labelled Model (Benchmark) simply repeats Table 7 from the paper. The row

labelled Model (CE) is the model that incorporates classification error. The results from the

new exercise are almost identical to the benchmark result, except that the cyclicality of the

labor force participation rate is slightly weaker.

   Table A.4 describes the cyclical properties of the flows.

                                               50
                                            Table A.4
                         Flows in the Benchmark and CE Models
                                          A. Data
                                     fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E           fN U
                      std(x)         .085 .032 .077 .060 .043         .064
                  corrcoef (x, Y )  −.82 .33       .78    .78  .64    −.70
                 corrcoef (x, x−1 ) .73     .20    .84    .73  .41     .75
                                   B. Model (Benchmark)
                                     fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E           fN U
                      std(x)         .085 .031 .077 .051 .080         .066
                    corr(x, Y )     −.90 .36       .92    .56  .89    −.92
                   corr(x, x−1 )      .68   .09    .72    .30  .70     .68
                               B. Model (Classification Error)
                                     fEU fEN fU E fU N fN E           fN U
                      std(x)         .088 .030 .083 .049 .087         .065
                    corr(x, Y )     −.91 .49       .92    .59  .90    −.91
                   corr(x, x−1 )      .68   .17    .73    .32  .73     .68

   The two sets of model results are almost identical, except that the EN and N E transition

rates are slightly more cyclical and persistent. Note that in this exercise we have assumed

that classification errors do not have a cyclical component. This is consistent with recent

work of Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2011).

   A.4 Computation

   The computation follows the algorithm which is briefly summarized below and described

in more detail later subsequently.


  1. Replace Ω by more limited information that can easily be kept track of. Here, we

     choose the current aggregate capital stock K and the aggregate capital-labor ratio in

     the previous period, M−1 ≡ K−1 /L−1 , as the information that the consumers use when

     they make decisions.


  2. The consumers have to forecast tomorrow’s aggregate capital K ′ and also need to

     calculate today’s aggregate capital-labor ratio M = K/L (to know the prices today).

                                               51
     We use the following simple forecasting rules:


                         log(K ′ ) = a0 + a1 log(K) + a2 log(z) + a3 log(M−1 )


     and

                         log(M ) = b0 + b1 log(K) + b2 log(z) + b3 log(M−1 ).

     At the first iteration, make a guess for the values of a0 , a1 , a2 , b0 , b1 , and b2 .


  3. Obtain the prices r and w from z and the forecasted M . Obtain T from w, K, and the

     forecasted M . Solve the optimization problem of the consumers.


  4. Simulate the economy using the decision rules of the consumers obtained above. In

     particular, we can obtain the time series of K and M . Check whether the law of

     motion for K ′ and the forecasting rule for M guessed above are consistent with the

     simulated values. That is, run a regression using the simulated data to see if the

     coefficients conjectured above are identical to the ones obtained from the regression

     (also check the fit of the regression). If they are different, modify the coefficients and

     go back to the previous step. Repeat until the coefficients have converged.


   We find that this procedure works well in our model, and the resulting forecasting rules are

remarkably accurate. This means that even if we add more information to each consumer’s

information set, the consumer cannot forecast much better.

   In detail, the steps are as follows.


  1. The aggregate information set Ω is restricted to a limited set of information. In par-

     ticular, we limit the information to the current aggregate state Z, the current ag-

     gregate capital stock K, and the aggregate capital-labor ratio in the previous period



                                                 52
  M−1 ≡ K−1 /L−1 . Then, the value functions can be rewritten as V (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ),

  W (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ), and N (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ), where


            V (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ) = max{W (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ), N (k, z, Z, K, M−1 )},                          (1)


  and the Bellman equations for W and N are given by:

              W (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ) =
                  maxc,k′ {log(c) − α                                                                        (2)
                  +βEz ′ ,Z ′′ ,M [(1 − σ(1 − λ))V (k′ , z ′ , Z ′ , K ′′ , z ′ , Z ′ , K ′ , M )]




      s.t. c + k′ = r(Z, K, M−1 )k + (1 − τ )w(Z, K, M−1 )z + (1 − δ)k + T (Z, K, M−1 )




                                                  c ≥ 0, k′ ≥ 0

  and
            N (k, z, Z, K, M−1 ) =
                                                                                                             (3)
                 maxc,k′ {log(c) + βEz ′ ,Z ′ ,K ′ ,M [λV (k′ , z ′ , Z ′ , K ′′ , z ′ , Z ′ , K ′ , M )]}



                    s.t. c + k′ = r(Z, K, M−1 )k + (1 − δ)k + T (Z, K, M−1 )




                                                 c ≥ 0, k′ ≥ 0.


2. In order to calculate the right hand sides of the Bellman equations (2) and (3), the

  consumer has to be able to see the prices today and form an expectations on the future

  aggregate state variables. We adopt a log-linear forecasting rules:


                      log(K ′ ) = a0 + a1 log(K) + a2 log(Z) + a3 log(M−1 )                                  (4)


                                                     53
  and

                     log(M ) = b0 + b1 log(K) + b2 log(Z) + b3 log(M−1 ).                       (5)

  At the first iteration, we make a guess for the values of a0 , a1 , a2 , b0 , b1 , and b2 .


3. We discretize the state space. For the aggregate shocks, the vector (Z, λ, σ) can take

  two possible sets of values—these values vary with experiments, and are detailed in the

  main text. z is discretized into 20 points. The grids are equally spaced in terms of

  log(z), from the minimum of two standard deviations below the mean and the maximum

  of two standard deviations above the mean. The individual asset has 48 grids for the

  purpose of the individual optimization, ranging from 0 to 1440 (the average capital

  holding is 183.7). The grids are (smoothly but) unequally spaced so that there are

  more grids on the smaller side of k (this is because there is more curvature in the value

  functions around the smaller values of k). We set 5 equally spaced grids on K (ranging

  from 160 to 200 for the benchmark) and 5 equally spaced grids on M−1 (ranging from

  145 to 185 for the benchmark).

  For each aggregate state (and using (5), the prices and the transfer can be calculated

  as

                                           r = θZM θ−1 ,

                                        w = (1 − θ)ZM θ ,

  and
                                                     K
                                            T = τw     .
                                                     M

  Then we perform the optimization at each grid point and iterate over the value functions

  in order to solve the Bellman equations (2) and (3). Along K ′ and M directions, the

  value functions are interpolated using a polynomial interpolation where necessary. A

                                              54
  linear interpolation is used in k′ direction. We start from the guesses on V and N

  functions, then obtain the new W function and the new N function from the right

  hand sides of (2) and (3), and then obtain the new V function from (1). We search

  for optimal asset decision globally using golden section search. We use global method

  without differentiation (with linear interpolation) because of potential nonconcavity

  and nondifferentiability due to the discrete labor-leisure choice.

4. Once the Bellman equations are solved (and we have the value functions and the policy

  functions for the asset choice), we simulate the economy. In particular, we draw 5000

  periods of the aggregate shocks, start from the stationary distribution of (asset, produc-

  tivity, employment) in the steady state model, and iterate over the density functions.

  For this simulation, we increase the number of grids in k direction to 12001. (The

  policy functions are linearly interpolated in k direction. For K and M−1 directions,

  polynomial interpolations are used where necessary.)

  The detail of the simulation is as follows. We have a mass of consumers on a partic-

  ular grid of (asset, productivity, employment). Given the current aggregate state, we

  know how this mass is divided and moved into the next period (asset, productivity,

  employment) grids, given the policy functions and the transition probabilities.

  Two details to note here—for the asset direction, since the decision rules are continuous,

  most likely k′ won’t fall on the exact grid point. We divide the mass linearly in that

  case—if the decision rule says that k′ for a particular (asset, productivity, employment)

  combination would be 0.3kn + 0.7kn+1 (where n is the index of the grid point), then

  we allocate 30% of people on kn and 70% of people on kn+1 in the next period. For the

  employment direction, we have to decide whether the people who moved to a particular

  (asset, productivity, employment) would work or not in the next period in the cases

                                          55
         where they have a choice. This can simply be done by comparing W and N next period

         at each grid points, given the next period aggregate state. One drawback of this simple

         method is that the employment distribution will be the same between the case where

         (Wn > Nn , Wn+1 ≪ Nn+1 ) and (Wn ≫ Nn , Wn+1 < Nn+1 ) (where the subscript is

         the grid index of k′ where the value function is evaluated), and the labor supply can

         potentially jump with a small change in environment if the threshold value crosses a

         grid point. In order to “smooth out” this effect, we linearly interpolate the employment

         decision based on the distances of the value functions at each grid points. In effect, we

         are supposing that consumers are distributed uniformly between kn+1 and kn instead

         of having a mass at kn (except at the maximum grid point) and approximating the

         value function by linear interpolation in between these grids.22

         Once the simulation is done, we have a time series of (Z, K, M−1 ). Using this time series

         (discarding the first 1000 periods), we run OLS regressions (4) and (5). We repeat the

         same steps until the coefficients converge.


       The converged forecasting equations are


log(K ′ ) = 0.050234 + 1.004265 log(K) + 0.000514 log(Z) − 0.014181 log(M−1 ), R2 = 0.999998


and


log(M ) = −0.147328+0.280710 log(K)−0.070561 log(Z)+0.742800 log(M−1 ), R2 = 0.990492


for the experiment with only frictions (ZG = 1.016 and ZB = 0.984 are used for the purpose
  22
    This smoothing method introduces a small downward bias in the level of labor supply, but this effect
is negligible given the large number of grids. We cross-checked with the simulation with a large number of
individuals and the behavior of aggregate variables is almost identical. Clearly one can use a more elaborated
method of adjustment, but we choose this method due to its simplicity.




                                                     56
of these forecasting rules),


log(K ′ ) = 0.064087 + 0.991358 log(K) + 0.027667 log(Z) − 0.003739 log(M−1 ), R2 = 1.000000


and


log(M ) = −0.658345+0.828787 log(K)−0.276471 log(Z)+0.284357 log(M−1 ), R2 = 0.998948


for the case of Z only, and


log(K ′ ) = 0.061413 + 0.993660 log(K) + 0.028053 log(Z) − 0.005560 log(M−1 ), R2 = 1.000000


and


log(M ) = −0.558708+0.745101 log(K)−0.326600 log(Z)+0.350141 log(M−1 ), R2 = 0.999771


for the benchmark case.

   Once all above is done, we simulate many consumers to obtain the statistics of interest.

(In this simulation, we do not need any interpolation for the next period employment—we

simply compare the value function.) We simulate 100,000 people to obtain the statistics of

the tables. For the “impulse response” diagrams, we simulate 10,000,000 people.




                                            57
