NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECENT RESEARCH ON THE ECONOMICS OF PATENTS
Bronwyn H. Hall
Dietmar Harhoff
Working Paper 17773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17773
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080511-111008.
No outside sources of research support were received during the writing of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Dietmar Harhoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Recent Research on the Economics of Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall and Dietmar Harhoff
NBER Working Paper No. 17773
January 2012
JEL No. K11,L20,O34
ABSTRACT
Recent research on the economics of patents is surveyed. The topics covered include theoretical and
empirical evidence on patents as an incentive for innovation, the effectiveness of patents for invention
disclosure, patent valuation, and what we know about the design of patent systems. We also look at
what is known about some current policy areas, including software and business method patents, university
patenting, and the growth in patent litigation.
Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Dietmar Harhoff
Institute for Innovation Research
Munich School of Management
University of Munich
Kaulbachstrasse 45
D-80539 Munich, Germany
harhoff@bwl.uni-muenchen.de

Contents
Recent Research on the Economics of Patents ...................................................................... 3
1.

Introduction.......................................................................................................................... 3

2.

A brief patent primer ........................................................................................................ 5

3.

Are patents effective in inducing innovation? ....................................................... 8
Theoretical evidence ............................................................................................................... 9
Empirical evidence ................................................................................................................. 12

4.

Are patents effective at inducing disclosure? ...................................................... 16

5.

Valuing patents and their use in the market place ............................................ 18
Using patents to secure financing .................................................................................... 21

6.

Current policy topics ...................................................................................................... 23
Software and business method patents ........................................................................ 23
University patenting .............................................................................................................. 24
Patent litigation ....................................................................................................................... 27

7.

Design of the system ....................................................................................................... 29
Fees ............................................................................................................................................... 29
Timing .......................................................................................................................................... 31
Post‐grant review.................................................................................................................... 33
Patent office governance and human resource management ............................. 34

8.

Concluding thoughts ....................................................................................................... 35

9.

Literature cited ................................................................................................................. 36

2

Recent Research on the Economics of Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall1 and Dietmar Harhoff2
August 2011

“If national patent laws did not exist, it would be difficult to make a
conclusive case for introducing them; but the fact that they do exist shifts
the burden of proof and it is equally difficult to make a really conclusive
case for abolishing them.” 3

1. Introduction
The rise of the knowledge economy has been accompanied, inter alia, by a large
increase in the volume of research devoted to the economics of patents and the patent
system. The growth in research reflects the increased economic importance of the
property rights attached to the production and commercialization of new ideas. This
article provides an entry point into that research by describing the basic features of a
patent and patent systems and then reviewing the wide range of research on the topic,
with an emphasis on more recent work.4
Simply stated, when the government grants a patent, it trades off short term
exclusive (monopoly) rights to the use of an invention in return for two things: 1) an
incentive to create the invention in the first place and 2) early publication of the
invention rather than the use of secrecy to protect its misappropriation. But with the
increasing importance of investment in knowledge and the accompanying increase in
the use of the patent system, it has become apparent that things are far more complex
than that simple tradeoff would suggest.
The first observation is that invention is cumulative, with each discovery today
building on discoveries in the past. Therefore the incentive created for one invention or
innovation via the patent right can act to slow down or increase the cost of a subsequent
invention that builds on the first. This fact suggests that the overall effect on innovation
1

University of Maastricht and University of California at Berkeley. NBER and IFS London.

2

Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München and CEPR.

3

Penrose (1951), p. 40.

4

Although we have included work based on data from other countries, the work surveyed here is
inevitably somewhat U.S.-focused, because the majority of the research in this area to date has either used U.S.
data or has been instigated by questions of U.S. patent policy.

3

may not be as strong as would be suggested by the tradeoff given above. The second
observation is that firms and individuals that are endowed with such a rather complex
legal instrument will learn to use it strategically in ways that may not serve the intent of
the legislation that created the instrument. For example, the benefits of publication may
be limited by careful drafting of the patent or the omission of essential (tacit) know‐
how. Or a patent may be taken out and then kept “sleeping” solely to disadvantage a
competitor and to preserve a (temporary) monopoly in a particular market.
A final observation is that knowledge‐intensive firms face a number of problems
associated with the fact that their assets are largely intangible and patents can help to
mitigate these problems. In particular, clear title to at least some of these assets
facilitates obtaining financing, at least from those willing to provide risk capital such as
venture capitalists. In principle, the existence of secondary markets for patent assets,
which are still in their infancy (Ocean Tomo, Yet2, Intellectual Ventures, etc.), should
facilitate entry into knowledge‐intensive sectors, by increasing the salvage value of a
firm that ultimately fails. Patents can also serve as a focusing device for the trading of
expertise and know‐how between firms. They have the advantage that they are legal
documents which define the boundaries of the covered technology and are therefore
easily incorporated into other legal documents such as licensing contracts.5
Recent research on the economics of patents has concentrated on the topics
suggested by the foregoing observations and on topics related to current “hot‐button”
policy questions. These latter include the expansion of patentable subject matter
(specifically, software, business methods, and genomic material), the apparent increase
in litigation and patent holdup, increased patenting activity by universities following the
Bayh‐Dole Act of 1980 and its equivalents in other countries, and various questions
related to patent system reform, especially in the light of the worldwide increase in
patent applications that we have experienced during the past 20 years (Fink et al.
2011).
We begin with a brief introduction to patent systems and their rationale. This is
followed by a review of the theoretical and empirical evidence on the effectiveness of
patents in encouraging invention. We then discuss the disclosure aspect of patenting
and recent research that attempts to assess how well patents serve the purpose of
revealing technological information to others. This is followed by a brief review of the
recent research related to current policy questions. Finally, we spend some time on
research addressed to the design of patent systems: how can they be improved, and
what is the evidence that such improvements might be effective?

5
However, see Bessen and Meurer (2009) for an extensive discussion of the limitations of some
patents as a well-defined property right.

4

In a survey of this length on such a large topic, it has not been possible to cover
every subarea of interest. Fortunately, there are other excellent surveys available on
some of the topics we have omitted. We mention two of the most important here. The
first is the role of patents in technology transfer and economic development, a topic
which has taken on increased importance with the adoption of TRIPS (Trade‐Related
aspects of Intellectual Property rights) in a large number of countries. Here we can
point the reader to several useful surveys: Branstetter (2004), Hall and Helmers (2010),
Maskus (2004), and a summary report by ICSTD and UNCTAD (2003).
The second topic we have overlooked is that of the use of patents in economic
research as indicators or proxies for the underlying knowledge creation. Here it is hard
to replace the excellent survey by Griliches (1990), which although it was written over
two decades ago, covers the area very well. If we have learned anything since about
using patents as indicators, it is that correct interpretation of the results of such use
requires a good understanding of the changes in patent law, firm strategy, and the
heterogeneity of industries and technologies, something to which we hope the current
survey will contribute.

2. A brief patent primer6
Patents have a long history, although some of the earliest patents are simply the
grant of a legal monopoly in a particular good rather than protection of an invention
from imitation. Early examples of technology‐related patents are Brunelleschi’s patent
on a boat designed to carry marble up the Arno River, issued by the Florentine
government in 1421 (Prager 1946), the Venetian patent law of 1474, and various patent
monopolies granted by the English crown between the 15th and 17th centuries. The
modern patent, which requires a working model or written description of an invention,
dates from the 18th century, first in Britain (1718) and then in the United States (1790),
followed closely by France (in both the latter two cases one of the consequences of a
revolution).7 Many other Continental European countries introduced patents during the
19th century, as did Japan (JPO, 2006) and India (James, 2007). During the 20th century,
the use of patent systems became almost universal and the signing of the TRIPS
agreement has ensured that all countries who are members of the World Trade
Organization will have at least a minimal level of patent protection.
In 1883 the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
guaranteed national treatment of patent applicants from any country that was a party to
it. Its most important provision gave applicants who were nationals or residents of one
member state the right to file an application in their own country and then, as long as an
6

Some of the material in this section is drawn from Hall (2007).

7

Ladas and Parry (2003). See also the EPO and USPTO websites (EPO, 2007a and USPTO, 2007).

5

application was filed in another country that was a member of the treaty within a
specified time (now 12 months) to have the date of filing in the home country count as
the effective filing date in that other country (the ‘priority date’). This is an important
feature of the patent system, as it enables worldwide priority to be obtained for an
invention originating in any one country, in addition to ensuring that in principle all
inventors are treated equally by the system, regardless of the country from which they
come.
Although the process for granting a patent varies slightly according to the
jurisdiction for which protection is desired, the adoption of the TRIPS agreement in
1995 ensures that it is approximately the same everywhere in the world. This
agreement requires its member countries to make patent protection available for any
product or process invention in any field of technology with only a few specified
exceptions. It also requires them to make the term of protection available for not less
than a period of 20 years from the date of filing the patent application. As of July 2011,
148 countries are signatories to this agreement and 31 countries (mostly members of
the former USSR) are designated as “observers.”
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has almost 200 member
states and lists an equivalent number of national patent offices and industrial property
offices on its website. In general, the patent right extends only within the border of the
jurisdiction that has granted it (usually but not always a country). An important
exception to this rule is the European system, where it is possible to file a patent
application at the European Patent Office (EPO) that will become a set of national patent
rights in several European countries at the time of issue (EPO, 2006). A similar situation
exists with respect to the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO).
The exact number and choice of countries is under control of the applicant. Patents
granted by the EPO have the same legal status as patents granted by the various
national offices that are party to the European Patent Convention (EPC).
The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) came into existence in 1978, and now has
145 countries as contracting signatories. Any resident or national of a contracting state
of the PCT may file an international application under the PCT that specifies the office
which should conduct the search. The PCT application serves as an application filed in
each designated contracting state. However, in order to obtain patent protection in a
particular state, a patent needs to be granted by that state to the claimed invention
contained in the international application. The advantage of a PCT application is that
fewer searches need to be conducted and the process is therefore less expensive. Thus,
although application and search are to some extent standardized across offices, grants
are not. In fact, 87 per cent of the PCT applications go to one of three patent offices for
search: those in the United States, Europe, and Japan (WIPO 2007). Most of the other
systems rely on them for the search process and follow them in a number of other areas.
6

Many patent offices have a provision for challenging patents following their
issue. In the United States, any third party may request re‐examination of a patent
during its lifetime. For various reasons related to potential subsequent litigation this
opportunity has been taken up rarely in the past although recently the use of re‐
examination requests in conjunction with litigation appears to have increased.8 In
Europe and Japan, robust patent opposition systems with limited time frames operate,
and these systems are often used by rival firms as an alternative to more expensive
litigation (Hall et al., 2003; Harhoff and Reitzig 2004). In Europe this avenue of
challenge is particularly attractive because it is the last opportunity to attack the
validity of a patent at the European‐wide level rather than in individual national courts.
Patents are valuable only if they can be enforced and this fact has a number of
implications for their use. First, the ability of the courts to reach the ‘correct’ verdict
with respect to infringement and validity will matter; in situations or jurisdictions
where there is a great deal of uncertainty about the outcome, and even if both parties
agree as to the merits of the case, it may be worthwhile for one or both of them to
pursue the issue further or in some cases, to reach a private financial settlement to
avoid a random outcome in the courts.9 Second, the costs of litigation will matter:
parties with deep pockets can threaten those with less access to financial resources, or
where the opportunity cost of paying attention to a patent suit is high, as in small
entrepreneurial firms. On the other hand, smaller parties with little to lose can also hold
up firms with large sunk investments at risk (Hall and Ziedonis 2001, Lemley and
Shapiro 2007, Shapiro 2010). Finally, the threat of litigation may discourage firms from
even entering certain areas, thus providing a disincentive rather than an incentive for
R&D. Lerner (1995) documented this phenomenon for biotechnology.
The degree to which these kinds of threats matter depends to a great extent on
the costs and extent of litigation, both of which tend to be higher in the United States
than in many other countries. However, there are signs that concerns about litigation
cost have been increasing elsewhere, notably in Europe where there is active debate
over proposals to reduce enforcement costs by creating a supranational patent court
system of some kind. At the time of writing, the current proposal, which is the European
Patent Litigation Agreement (EPLA), has not yet been ratified by enough countries to
make it legally binding, and there exists a new proposal for a unitary European patent.
See EPO (2007b) for the current state of all legislative initiatives in Europe.
8

Users of this procedure are estopped from raising any issues of validity that might have been raised in
re-examination in subsequent litigation. In practice, less than one per cent of U.S. patents are re-examined, and
almost half of those re-exams are requested by the patentholder or the USPTO itself (Graham et al., 2003).
Recently the number of re-exams requested by third parties has been rising slightly and there is evidence that
this procedure is now part of the arsenal used by potential infringers when defending against a patentholder (D.
Crouch, Patently-O website, 5 June 2008).
9

See Farrell and Shapiro (2007) for detailed models of this process.

7

3. Are patents effective in inducing innovation?
The economic view of patents is that they offer a bargain between society and
the inventor: in return for a limited period of exclusivity, the inventor agrees to make
his invention public rather than keeping it secret. Two questions immediately arise
from this: first, what is the optimal design of such a policy instrument? And second, are
patents effective at accomplishing this task? This section of the article looks at the
second question – how effective are patents at inducing innovation? A later section will
look more closely at the related question of how to improve patent system design.
Table 1 presents a framework for thinking about the costs and benefits of the
patent system in two dimensions, innovation and competition, a framework that reflects
some of the things economists have learned about the operation of patent systems in
practice during the past twenty or so years. The on‐diagonal boxes represent the
traditional tradeoff between negative effects for competition arising from market power
and the positive effects for innovation, while the shaded off‐diagonals represent the
ways in which patents might actually discourage innovation but enable and encourage
competition.
Table 1
The Patent System Tradeoffs
Effects on:

Benefit

Cost

Innovation

creates an incentive for R&D;
promotes the diffusion of
ideas

impedes the combination of
new ideas & inventions; raises
transaction costs

facilitates entry of new small
firms with limited assets;
Competition

allows trading of inventive
knowledge, markets for
technology

creates short‐term monopolies,
which may become long‐term
in network industries

This chart suggests that in addition to the familiar arguments that patents
increase innovation via incentive effects and diffusion and decrease competition
because they create temporary monopolies, there are offsetting effects in both cases,
effects that have become more apparent in recent years. These offsetting effects are the
tendency of patents to increase the costs of subsequent innovators, especially when
these innovators need to combine inventions from many sources, as well as the fact that
patents may help competition by facilitating the vertical disintegration of knowledge‐
8

intensive industries and helping new entrants. The next two sections of the article
review the evidence, both theoretical and empirical, on the effectiveness of the current
patent systems in achieving the goal of encouraging innovation without incurring too
high a cost for competition.
Theoretical evidence
A voluminous theoretical literature addresses a range of questions about the
workings and design of the patent system and the consequences of the system for firm
strategy. Time and space will prevent us from supplying an exhaustive review in this
article. However, we are able to refer the reader who desires more information to two
recent surveys of the topic, a handbook chapter by Rockett (2010) and an advanced text
by Scotchmer (2005), as well as an excellent non‐technical review of the literature on
the choice of incentives for innovation by Gallini and Scotchmer (2002). In addition,
there is an earlier handbook chapter by Reinganum (1989) that reviews the first wave
of the literature on patent races and innovation timing. In our review here we focus on
what the most recent literature has to say about the effectiveness of patents in
promoting innovation.
As is often the case with models that admit the complexity of the world, the
theoretical literature addressed to this question produces ambiguous results with
respect to incentives provided by patents. In the simplest case, where a patent
corresponds to a single product and knowledge is not particularly cumulative, it is clear
that patents will encourage innovation. Offering individuals the short‐term right to
exclude others from practicing an invention provides them with the opportunity to earn
rents or supranormal profits when they innovate that are higher than those they would
earn if there were immediate free entry into imitation of their invention. The early
theoretical industrial organization literature on patent races even seemed to suggest
that patents produced too much innovation when there was free entry into invention
(Wright, 1983; Reinganum, 1989).
However, it is also immediately clear that the simple case ignores at least two
realities: 1) invention is cumulative and the knowledge covered by a patent is
frequently an input into further invention and patenting; 2) most products are covered
by multiple patents and these patents may be held by more than one entity. These two
facts greatly complicate both the design of an optimal patent system and the expected
effects of any patent system on innovation. In the case of cumulative invention, the
literature has considered two main cases and their variations: in the first (at least) two
innovative stages are required to produce the product (the “research tool” case) and in
the second there is a sequence of products each of which is an improvement over the
previous product (the cumulative or “quality ladder” case). In either case, it is possible
that any particular invention uses one or more other inventions as input or is an input
to one or more future inventions.
9

Cumulative invention
As first pointed out by Scotchmer (1991), in the case of sequential invention
where one invention builds on another, and only the second generates a product that
can be priced in the market, it is impossible to set up a decentralized incentive system
using patents that guarantees the first best level of innovative activity by both
inventors, essentially because of a double marginalization problem. The only solution
that is able to do this is an ex ante contract between first and second inventor before
R&D is sunk by either of them. But this solution is obviously difficult to implement most
of the time, because the first inventor is unable to identify the second inventor at the
time he is prepared to sink R&D costs nor is there full information on the value of either
the second or the first invention.
In their review of the literature, Gallini and Scotchmer (2002) emphasize the fact
that licensing contracts will often solve problems arising from disjoint ownership of
complementary knowledge inputs. At the same time, fluid contracting (to use their
term) may lead to anti‐competitive behavior and therefore antitrust concerns,
especially in the case of cross‐licensing and patent pools. Maurer and Scotchmer (2006)
propose a set of acceptable licensing terms that could be used for per se enforcement in
this case (although their use would seem to involve some rule of reason). Lerner and
Tirole (2004) offer a thorough welfare analysis of patent pools and are able to show that
a pool is never affected by the possibility of that a member can license one or more
patents independently if and only if the pool is welfare‐enhancing. This suggests a way
to ensure that only welfare‐enhancing patent pools are allowed.
Several recent papers use models of cumulative innovation to examine the
welfare impact of the patent system and its design. An influential paper by Bessen and
Maskin (2006) develops a model of sequential (cumulative) and complementary
innovation in a differentiated product setting and analyzes the effect of patent
protection in two settings, nonsequential and infinitely sequential (that is, where each
invention builds on the preceding invention). The results are somewhat complex but
intuitive: in the static nonsequential case, having patents generally yields higher welfare
than not having them, as in the one patent‐one product case. But in the fully sequential
case, the equilibrium without patents has higher welfare and innovation than the
equilibrium with patents if the upper tail of the distribution of innovation values is
sufficiently thick. They show that the two commonly used distributions for innovation
value, lognormal and Pareto, satisfy this condition.10 They also show that in some cases,
even the original innovator may benefit from the absence of patents in the dynamic
case, because he receives spillovers from follow‐on innovation. Empirical evidence that
suggests some positive value to this kind of spillover has been offered recently by
10

Later in this article we describe the evidence that these two distributions are a reasonable
characterization of the distribution of returns to innovation.

10

Belenzon (2006) using sequences of patent citations to measure knowledge flows in and
out of the firm.
O’Donoghue et al. (1998) introduced the concepts of “effective patent life”, which
is the time until a new innovation displaces the current one, “lagging breadth” (which
protects against inferior products), and “leading breadth” (the minimum quality
improvement that avoids infringement). They show that lagging breadth may not
provide sufficient incentives for R&D. Using a simple model of the exogenous arrival of
ideas at each firm, which may or may not be taken up, they show that with finite but
very broad patents, the diffusion of new products is encouraged, but with long and
narrow patents, there are lower R&D costs. Either choice can attain a specified level of
innovation. O’Donoghue (1998) uses a similar quality ladder model of patented
innovations of various inventive steps, but where the size of the step is chosen by the
innovator, to examine how a patentability requirement (leading and lagging breadth of
the patent) and patent life affect the level of innovation. In his model, by using a
patentability requirement (minimum inventive step) one can get the optimal level of
R&D investment by extending the effective patent life.
Using a model similar to that of O’Donoghue et al. (1998), Hopenhayn et al.
(2006) derive an optimal reward system for the cumulative innovation setting where
idea quality and development cost are private information to the inventor. They show
that an optimal patent menu can be implemented via licensing without knowledge of
the licensee, by having each innovator commit to a price ceiling at which he will sell his
rights to a future inventor.
Fragmented invention
The analysis of patent ownership fragmentation has increased in importance
because of the complexity of modern technology and also because of growth in patent
use in sectors that traditionally had regarded patent protection as relatively
unimportant. Briefly described, the new setting is one where a single product involves
accessing the technologies in hundreds of patents. This feature is really new, but it has
assumed increasing importance in a number of technology areas such as information
technology and biotechnology (Shapiro 2001). Unlike the case of cumulative innovation,
in the absence of transaction costs the problems of fragmented innovation could in
principle be solved by contracting over patent licenses, although there remains a
bargaining problem given the presence of patent rents. Although the two cases are very
similar, the essential difference is one of timing: fragmented innovation is assumed to
be based on inventions made more or less simultaneously whereas cumulative
innovation requires invention in sequential order.
However, when development of an innovative product requires multiple patent
inputs, Heller and Eisenberg (1998) have argued forcefully that the licensing solution
may fail because of transactions costs if a large number of patentholders are involved.
11

One consequence of this fragmentation threat may be increased defensive patenting by
the product developer in order to be able to threaten a countersuit if attacked. Empirical
evidence for this proposition has been provided by Ziedonis (2004) in the context of the
semiconductor industry. She shows that firms patent more aggressively when their
patents draw on a more widely dispersed base of technology. An interesting recent
paper by Galasso and Schankerman (2010) shows that in cases like this that rely on
bargaining for profit division, settlement time among the patentholders is decreasing as
their numbers increase holding complementarity among the patented inventions
constant and nonincreasing in complementarity holding the number of patentholders
constant. They find support for these assertions in U.S. patent litigation data.
Denicolo and Halmenschlager (2010) build a model of fragmented IP rights
where the patent office commits both Type I and Type II errors when granting patents
and there is a free entry equilibrium. Two complementary innovations are needed for a
product; if only one is patentable, the firm that owns it controls the technology and
obtains all the profits. They show that under fragmentation of ownership and
uncertainty over patentability, fewer and stronger patents are needed for the social
welfare optimum, which is a plausible conclusion.
Hunt (2006) presents a model of R&D competition with overlapping patents,
where the firms involved capture some of the rents from their competitor’s R&D and
patenting activities. He shows that if the overlap is strong enough (because of the
density of patenting, because of spillovers, or simply because the patent office has made
errors in issuing patents on obvious inventions), the effect of patents is to reduce rather
than increase the incentive of R&D investment. Hunt (2004) contains a dynamic version
of this model, which reaches much the same conclusion.
Empirical evidence
It is fair to say that the theoretical work surveyed above does not deliver a clear
message about the effectiveness of the patent system in encouraging innovation,
although it does supply interesting insights into which design features are of interest
and could be used to tune the system. For evidence on the effectiveness of patents in
general in encouraging innovation, we turn to the empirical evidence.
Unfortunately, the question has also proved difficult to answer empirically,
largely because of the absence of real experiments, at least since the nineteenth century.
Some researchers have looked at historical eras when there were changes to the system
and examined the consequences for subsequent innovative activity, measured either by
patenting in a jurisdiction not affected by the changes to the system or by invention
counts obtained independently. Using aggregate data from 1850 to 2000, Lerner (2002)
found that domestic patenting both at home or in Great Britain fell when the patent
system was strengthened, although patenting by foreign firms rose. Moser (2005)
constructed a dataset of 15,000 innovations from a number of European countries that
12

were displayed at two international fairs during the 19th century, and found that
although the level of innovative activity in these countries was unaffected by the
presence of a patent system, in countries without such a system innovation tended to be
concentrated in sectors where secrecy was a useful protection mechanism.
A particularly interesting example from the 19th century is the emergence of
industrial leadership in artificial dyestuffs. While England was initially the leading
manufacturer of artificial dyes after the first invention (aniline purple, which was later
called mauve in France) had been made by Perkin in 1856, the chemical industry in
Germany became dominant by 1880 and extended this lead up to the years before the
First World War The size of the market, the availability of finance, and access to end
markets should all have favored England, hence the reversal occurred against the odds.
The role that patents had in this development is contested. Boldrin and Levine
(2008) argue that the case of the dyestuff industry bolsters their call for an outright
abolition of patents: Germany only adopted a comprehensive patent system in 1877,
and patent protection then granted was weak as only processes, but not products were
covered. However, the most detailed study of this development by Murmann (2003) is
considerably more nuanced in its assessment. In Murmann’s assessment, the dominant
factor in the ascendancy of German producers was the evolution of close cooperation
between academic research in universities and the emerging R&D laboratories in the
German chemical industry. He also argues that collective action by industry, academe,
and policy‐makers strengthened the position of German producers by bringing targeted
reform to the German patent system.11 Moreover, he credits patent laws with a positive
role in German dominance: “Even if there had been no patent protection in any of the
three countries, Germany would have outperformed the British and American dye
industries. But without patents in Germany and in other large dye markets, the German
dye industry would not have been able to acquire a virtual monopoly.”12
Our reading of the historical episode is that the German patent system allowed
for a much better balance between competition and innovation than its British and
French counterparts: patent system design matters, and more restrictive patent
systems with strong examination standards may be superior to those with weak quality
standards. Moreover, policy‐makers in Germany were apparently willing to shape
patent laws in the favor of a particular industry. This is reminiscent of the ways in which
many developing countries in East Asia have tailored their patent systems to their level
of development, introducing full protection at the levels in developed countries only late
in their development.

11

Murmann (2003), p. 5.

12

Murmann (2003), p. 179.

13

A second widely used approach to the empirical analysis of patent effectiveness
is to survey firm managers, asking about their own patent use and the use of patents in
their industry (Mansfield, 1986; Levin et al., 1987; Cohen et al., 2002; Arundel, 2003).
Using these kinds of survey data matched to R&D spending and innovation outcomes,
Baldwin, Hanel and Sabourin (2000), Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen (2003) and Bloom,
Van Reenen and Schankerman (2007), among others, have pursued estimation
strategies based on econometric modeling.
A few conclusions have emerged from this body of work. First, introducing or
strengthening a patent system (lengthening the patent term, broadening subject matter
coverage or available scope, improving enforcement) unambiguously results in an
increase in patenting and also in the use of patents as a tool of firm strategy (Lerner,
2002; Hall and Ziedonis, 2001). This is to be expected, but it is much less clear that these
changes result in an increase in innovative activity (Lerner 2002; Baldwin et al., 2000),
although they may redirect such activity toward things that are patentable and away
from those than can be kept secret within the firm (Moser, 2005). Sakakibara and
Branstetter (2001) studied the effects of expanding patent scope by allowing multiple
claims in Japan in 1988 and found that this change to the patent system had a very small
effect on R&D activity in Japanese firms.
An exception to this conclusion are two studies based on cross country data:
Park and Ginarte (1997) and Kanwar and Evenson (2003). Park and Ginarte (1997)
uses aggregate data for 60 countries during from 1960‐1990 and an index of the
strength of IP rights (subject matter coverage, term length, etc.) which they developed
and which has since been widely used in the literature. Using a simultaneous equations
model of economic growth, investment, schooling, and R&D investment, they found that
the strength of IP rights was positively associated with investment and R&D investment
in countries with above median income but not for the less‐developed countries. IP
rights had no independent effect on growth above and beyond that contributed by
investment and R&D. However, Park and Ginarte (1997) also shows that the strength of
IP rights in high income countries (but not in low income countries) can be predicted by
prior R&D intensity, which raises some questions about the simultaneity of IP
protection and a country's orientation towards R&D and innovation. That is, it is
possible that the demand for IP protection increases when a large share of the industrial
base is engaged in innovative activities.
The study by Kanwar and Evenson (2003) looks at the variation across country
in R&D spending as a function of the Ginarte‐Park index over the 1981‐1995 period and
finds similar results, with stronger IP protection related to higher R&D intensity.
Although well done in many respects, this study makes no attempt to explore the
potential endogeneity of the relationship nor does it control for the level of
development of the countries, which arguably drives both R&D and the development of
IP institutions.
14

In contrast to the two results cited above, Qian (2007) performs a similar
analysis for pharmaceutical patents in 85 countries over the 1978‐1999 period, but
using matched sampling and also fixed country effect estimators in a serious attempt to
control for the simultaneity between levels of IP protection and R&D intensity at the
country level. She finds that national patent protection does not stimulate domestic
innovation activities, except at higher development levels, and that above a certain level
of patent protection, innovation activities are actually reduced.
A third finding from the empirical literature is that if there is an increase in
innovation due to patents, it is likely to be centered in the pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, and medical instrument areas, and possibly specialty chemicals. This
conclusion relies mostly on survey evidence from a number of countries which shows
rather conclusively that patents are not among the important means to appropriate
returns to innovation, except perhaps in pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and some
specialty chemicals (Mansfield, 1986; Levin et al., 1987; Cohen et al., 2001; Arora et al.,
2001; Graham et al., 2009). Using a structural model that combines survey responses
with accounting data on R&D, Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen (2003) found that increasing
the patent premium, which they define as the difference in payoffs to patented and
unpatented inventions, can be expected to increase R&D in most manufacturing sectors,
with the greatest increase in medical instruments, followed by biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals.
Fourth and finally, the existence and strength of the patent system affects the
organization of industry, by allowing trade in knowledge, which facilitates the vertical
disintegration of knowledge‐based industries and the entry of new firms that possess
only intangible assets (Hall and Ziedonis 2001; Arora et al 2003; Arora and Merges
2004). The argument is that, by creating a strong property right for the intangible asset,
the patent system enables activities that formerly had to be kept within the firm
because of secrecy and contracting problems to move out into separate entities.
Although limited, research in this area supports this conclusion in the chemical and
semiconductor industries. Later in this article we discuss the role of patents in obtaining
financing for new knowledge‐intensive firms.
The bottom line from the empirical evidence is that the patent system provides
clear incentives for innovation in only a few sectors, but that firms and industries do
respond to its presence, both by making use of the system and by sometimes tailoring
their innovative strategies to its presence. One possible interpretation of the quote from
Edith Penrose at the beginning of this article is that history matters, in the sense that
industrial organization and firms adapt themselves to the institutional regime in which
they find themselves and that changing this regime, whatever it is, involves substantial
short term costs that may not be outweighed by the long term benefits.

15

4. Are patents effective at inducing disclosure?
The notion that the patent literature facilitates follow‐on inventions is
widespread. As we discussed in the introduction, the patent system is often portrayed
as a contract between inventors (respectively patent‐holders) and society. Inventors
receive a valuable exclusion right in exchange for their inventive efforts, and society
receives valuable information that allows follow‐on inventor to improve upon the
invention. Machlup and Penrose (1950) are an early example of this tradition and state
their presumption that patents help to disseminate technical information, which in turn
supports productivity growth. The argument is repeated in other contributions, such as
Landes and Posner (2003), Kitch (1977), Menell (2000). Discussions from an economic
point of view have been provided, inter alia, by Dam (1994), Mazzoleni and Nelson
(1998) and Scherer (2002, 2010). In formal economic models of the patent system,
disclosure is usually assumed to have a strong impact on follow‐on inventors and
cumulative invention processes (Scotchmer 1990, Scotchmer and Green 1990, Denicolo
and Franzoni 2003). To date there is little empirical evidence as to what extent
disclosure occurs and what its impact is in economic terms.
Disclosure assumes major importance in IP law: in almost all patent systems,
insufficient disclosure of the invention can lead to revocation of a patent right or the
rejection of an application. In the legal reasoning of US courts, the disclosure argument
has played a major role, and a number of legal doctrines are based on the notion that
disclosure is highly relevant. In a detailed survey of the literature on patent disclosure,
Roin (2007) lists a number of Supreme Court cases in this vein. Some court opinions
place the disclosure function of the patent system even ahead of its incentive function
(Roin, 2007:2011f.). Contrary to the courts, many legal scholars appear to be skeptical
that disclosure has a strong effect – these scholars argue that disclosure effects are
small for both institutional and practical reasons.
The first two related arguments supporting this view point to the conscious
decision that inventors have to make. Typically, they will have to decide between trade
secrecy and patenting.13 Patenting would appeal to an innovator if the invention can
readily be reverse‐engineered from the innovative product. But if that is the case, then
patented products would simply reveal information irrespective of the patent
document. Second, if inventors know that rivals would learn a lot from their disclosed
patents, secrecy may become the more appealing option for protecting an invention or
innovation (Levin et al. 1987, Moser 2011). To summarize, inventions that are patented
will be revealed via product designs in the market. And those inventions which would
generate considerable valuable information for third parties via the patent documents
alone will be particularly unlikely to be patented. Presumably this leaves a small group
13
For theoretical treatments of this choice, see Anton and Yao (2004), Bhattacharya and Guriev (2006),
Denicolo and Franzoni (2004), and Encaoua and Lefouilli (2005).

16

of technologies for which patent documents contain valuable information.
Pharmaceuticals are likely to be such a case since the product appears very late in the
market due to extensive clinical testing. Hence, rivals may be able to learn important
information from patent documents in these fields. Moreover, they may learn what
inventions are already covered by patents so that they may be able to avoid duplicative
efforts.
The latter argument does not pass muster, either, unless engineers and scientists
are willing to study patent documents. Many US scholars argue that Willful
Infringement Rules in the US create additional risks for inventors (and applicants) who
use patent documents as sources of information (Lee and Cogswell 2004; Powers and
Carlson 2001; Sterne et al. 2004; Moore 2004). To manage that risk it may become
necessary to take additional precautions and prepare legal opinions that shield the
inventor from willful infringement attacks. This risk is likely to force R&D managers to
stop using patent documents as information sources in the invention and innovation
process. Patents may still be used in the IP clearing process at the end of the innovation
process (Toffel 2004) – but at this point, they can neither have a dampening effect on
duplication, nor can they generate positive spillover effects (Roin 2010: 2021f., FTC
2003: 29‐31).
A final set of reasons why disclosure is unlikely to be effective lies in the timing
and quality of disclosure (Seymore 2010, Fromer 2009). The US patent system still
allows applicants to keep applications secret prior to grant – albeit at the expense of not
seeking patent protection in foreign jurisdictions. Furthermore, applicants may
deliberately seek to keep some crucial information out of the patent document, and they
may be successful in doing so unless they are challenged by the examiner to fill the gaps.
As long as the likelihood of seeing the patent revoked is small (e.g., due to a lack of
functional post‐grant reviews) the incentive to do so will be relatively high. Finally, by
developing complex claims construction rules, courts may have forced applicants to use
legal language in their filings which are not conducive to clear transmission of scientific
and engineering information (Roin 2007: 2023). Bessen and Meurer (2008: 8f.) support
this view and point to a second effect that failing disclosure or notice has: the
boundaries of intellectual property become “fuzzy”, thus provoking more litigation
among patent owners who are uncertain about the delineation of their rights.
So far, there have been few attempts to quantify the impact of patent literature
and technical information from patents. Thus, neither the optimistic assessment by
some courts nor the skeptical ones by legal scholars or economists can be confirmed. A
paper by Gambardella et al. (2011) provides a first set of estimates of cost‐savings
incurred by follow‐on inventors due to knowledge of the patent literature. The data
were collected in a large‐scale inventor survey covering more than 22,000 inventors in
23 countries. Inventors were asked for a qualitative assessment as to how important
patents were as a source of information for a particular invention. Questions of this type
17

have been used before in innovation surveys and – presumably for the first time – in the
Yale Survey. Cohen et al. (2002) argue that US companies generally prefer other sources
of information over patents. Moreover, Arora et al. (2008) find that these measures are
not related to spillover effects which would favor productivity gains. Nagaoka and
Walsh (2009) find large differences in the importance of patents between US and
Japanese inventors. In line with the prior studies, Gambardella et al. (2011) find that
patents are particularly important sources of information in a small number of technical
areas, such as polymers, organic chemicals, pharmaceuticals, petrochemical and
materials chemistry, and that Japanese inventors assign greater importance to
information in patents than either European or US inventors.
More importantly, inventors were also asked in the survey described by
Gambardella et al. (2011) to quantify the time saved for the respective invention
process when compared to a situation in which the information from patents had not
been available. Time savings from disclosures follow a highly skew distribution, with
estimated median values of 5.9 hours and mean values of 12.2 hours. There is
considerable heterogeneity across technical fields ‐ median values range between 36
hours (organic chemicals) and 1.0 hours ( digital communication technology). In fields
where patents have strong impact on appropriability such as chemicals and
pharmaceuticals, disclosure effects appear to matter the most.
As appealing as the disclosure argument is, this empirical analysis reinforces the
notion that patents have highly heterogeneous effects, and that the incentive and the
disclosure effects are strongly correlated. The overall social value of patent disclosures
appears to be quite small in comparison to the private value of patents (Gambardella et
al. 2011). Even if it were possible to “invigorate disclosure” (Fromer, 2009), total
disclosure effects are likely to remain relatively small.

5. Valuing patents and their use in the market place
Many researchers have documented the increased importance of intangible
assets relative to tangible assets in today’s developed economies (Corrado et al. 2006;
Hall 1993; RE Hall 2001; Haskel and Marrano 2007). The valuation of patents, as a form
of property right on at least some of these assets, has therefore taken on increased
importance. However, as emphasized by Schankerman and Pakes (1986) and Griliches
(1990), there can be confusion over what we mean by the “value of a patent,” even if we
confine ourselves to private value, that is, the value to the patentholder. The patent
itself has value as the right to exclude others from practicing the invention freely, but
the possession of the patent also serves as a proxy for the value of the underlying
invention, which may have private value even without the patent right (because of
associated tacit knowhow, required complementary assets, and so forth). Harhoff et al.
(2003) contains a useful discussion of the complexity of this issue.
18

In general, work like Schankerman and Pakes or Hegde and Sampat (2009), to
take a more recent example, which relies on patent renewals to estimate the value
distribution is the closest to measuring the value of the patent right itself. The downside
of using patent renewals to measure value is that because renewal fees are relatively
low (typically of the order of a few thousand dollars or euros, at most), this approach
conveys relatively little about the valuable tail of the value distribution, where there are
few patents but they are worth a great deal. It is also worth pointing out that the
renewal method captures the value of the patent right relative to having the patented
invention in the public domain.
Other methods for estimating patent value capture different aspects of value of
the patent right or the patented invention. These include those based on surveys of
individual patentholders and their patents and the use of market valuation of a firm
including its patent portfolio. The first approach was pioneered by Sanders et al. (1958)
with a survey of U.S. patentholders. Following up on Scherer’s analysis of the Sanders et
al. data, Harhoff, Scherer, et al. (1999, 2003) surveyed a number of German and U. S.
holders of German patents, asking them the following question:
“If in 1980 you had known how its contribution to the future
profitability of your enterprise would unfold, what is the minimum price
for which you would have sold the patent, assuming that you had a good‐
faith offer to purchase??“14
This study was followed by a larger study of European inventors that asked essentially
the same question of European patentholders (Gambardella et al. 2008).15 As these
authors point out, the value measured in this instance is the value of owning the patent
right relative to a situation where another firm owns the patent, which is not the same
value as that revealed by the renewal approach:
“Because the question asks about a hypothetical situation in which the
patent is sold, the value measure obtained from the answer logically
includes a strategic component of patent value not captured by the
renewal value. The reason is that the buyer of the patent will obtain the
exclusive right to the patent and may be able to block related patents of
the previous owner, thus preventing the original patent holder from
practicing these inventions or demand license fees for them. Another way

14

Harhoff et al. (2003), p. 1348.

15
The PATVAL survey, see Giuri et al. (2007). For the US and Japan, see Nagaoka and Walsh (2009),
although in these surveys the value question was much less precise.

19

to think about our measure is that it is equivalent to the market value of a
firm whose only asset is the patent.”16
The authors refer to the value measured in this way as the “asset value.”17 Both of these
studies (Harhoff et al. and Gambardella et al.) yielded an extremely skew value
distribution, as in the original Sanders et al. data. The mean asset value of a European
patent was about 10 times its median, suggesting considerable skewness.
These results are confirmed by those in studies by Scherer (1998) and Silverberg
and Verspagen (2007) who find a similar skew value distribution for a number of
datasets containing returns to innovation distributions (patent licensing royalties,
venture capital investment returns, patent profits according to survey evidence, the
number of citations per patent). In general these distributions are either log normal or
Pareto with a coefficient whose value ranges from below 1 (no mean to the distribution
exists) to around 3 (a mean and a variance exist and the distribution is difficult to
distinguish from log normal). In addition, the returns distributions to individual patents
or projects are more likely to be Pareto than more aggregate returns distributions.
The authors of the above studies have also shown that patent values are related
to a number of bibliometric and other properties of the patent, such as the number of
times it is cited, the number of jurisdictions in which a patent on the same invention is
taken out, the number of claims, and the number of backward reference made by the
patent. For the pioneering work on citations in this area, see Trajtenberg’s (1990) study
of CT scanners. In this study he finds that patent citations are related not only to private
value but to social value. Sampat and A. Ziedonis (2005) show that citations can also
help to predict whether a university will successfully license one of its patents, but not
the amount of licensing revenue earned.
A second line of work in this area relates the market value of a firm to its patent
portfolio and possibly the characteristics of that portfolio, using a methodology
introduced by Griliches (1981) that is essentially hedonic. Hall (2000) surveys some
early work relating measures of Tobin’s q for individual firms to their stock of
innovation assets, proxied by R&D and/or patents. Tobin’s q is the ratio of the market
value of the firm to the replacement value of its tangible assets, which is assumed to be
close to unity in equilibrium (and in the absence of other assets). Discrepancies in the
ratio are expected to be correlated with the value of the intangible assets held by the
firm, chief among which are its innovation assets.

16

Gambardella et al. (2008), p. 70.

17
Scherer (2010) includes a useful discussion on page 25. Asset value is defined as the value of a firm
that owns only the patent.

20

The first paper to include a citation‐weighted measure of patents in this
regression was Hall et al. (2005), who found that citations conveyed information about
firm value above and beyond that conveyed by R&D and patenting. In addition, they
showed that the relationship was highly nonlinear: Firms that averaged fewer than the
average citations per patent across all firms received no boost to market value whereas
firms in the top 17 per cent of the sample had a market value that was 35 per cent
higher and those in the top 5 per cent, 50 per cent higher, other things equal. It was also
noteworthy that self‐citations (citations to a firm’s own patents) were more valuable
than other citations.
Other recent work using patents as a measure of innovation output in the market
value equation is that by Blundell et al. (1999) and Toivanen et al. (2002) for the UK,
and Bosworth and Rogers (2001) for Australia. In addition, a very few papers have
looked at the market response to patent applications, grants, or announcements. In
general, one does not expect large short term increases in market returns from a single
patent given the relatively large size of the majority of publicly traded firms available
for analysis, but when a firm is primarily a technology firm (e.g., biotechnology firms) it
is possible to measure the market impact. Two examples of this kind of work are Austin
(1993) and Darby et al. (2004).
Using patents to secure financing
One consequence of patents viewed as property rights to intangible assets is that
they may be useful signals to investors that a startup firm has valuable assets even in
the absence of a current profit stream. A series of recent papers have examined patents
in this role, showing that although not all technology‐intensive startups use patents in
this way, in general those that do perform somewhat better than the firms that do not.
Sichelman and Graham (2010) report on a large survey of startup and early‐
stage companies conducted in 2008 and which is more fully described in Graham et al.
(2009). The companies surveyed were in the biotechnology, medical instrument,
software, internet, and computer hardware sectors and the survey results provide a rich
set of information about such companies, in spite of a relative low response rate
(approximately 10 per cent, yielding 1000 companies). Unlike non‐startup companies,
these companies rated financing and improving exit valuation as moderately to very
important motives for obtaining patents. In general, biotechnology and medical device
firms rated patents much more highly for securing competitive advantage than software
and internet firms. This was confirmed by expert investors (venture capital and others),
who reported that patents were much more important for their decision to invest in
biotechnology than in software and internet firms. Nevertheless, about half of these
experts found patents relevant for software and internet.
Mann (2005) reviews the pros and cons of patents for a small sample of software
startups, finding that in this technology inventing around is relatively easy, and patents
21

can be a distraction from the firm’s central activities. However, some firms still amass
patents in order to signal quality in later stage financing or for cross licensing purposes.
Mann and Sager (2007) find that only one quarter of the venture‐backed software firms
in their sample acquire a patent, but that firms that do experience better performance in
terms of financing, survival, and exit status. Cockburn and MacGarvie (2009) look at
how financing and performance vary across software sectors with respect to the
presence of patent “thickets” (subareas that are densely populated with patents). They
find that both financing and IPOS are delayed in markets that are associated with patent
thickets, implying that such thickets may be an impediment to innovative entry.
Looking at technologies other than software, Haeussler et al. (2009) find that
European patent applications (but not grants) serve as an important signal to VC
investors in German and British biotechnology firms. For nanotechnology, the type of
patent matters: an additional patent increases the amount of VC funding available to a
firm, but only if the patent is indeed in the nanotechnology area (Munari and Toschi
2007). Hsu and Ziedonis (2008) look at 370 venture‐backed semiconductor firms and
report a number of positive effects of patent applications for funding: a doubling in
patent application stock is associated with a 28 percent boost in funding‐round
valuations. This signaling value of patents is greater in earlier financing rounds and
when funds are secured from prominent investors. Larger patent application stocks
increase both the likelihood of sourcing initial capital from a prominent venture
capitalist and of achieving liquidity through an initial public offering.
With the exception of Haeussler et al. (2009), most of the above work on patents
and VC financing availability has focused on US firms and used US patents. An exception
is Helmers and Rogers (2011), who look at all high and medium technology startups in
the UK in a single year, 2000. Using a sample selection model to control for exit, they
investigate the impact of having UKIPO or EPO patent applications during 2000 or 2001
on asset growth during the 2001‐2005 period, finding a positive effect. This paper is
noteworthy for the care with which it discusses the problem that is endemic to all the
work in this area: the fact that firms that patent may be different (better) in
unobservable ways from firms that do not patent and we may be attributing too much
to the patenting decision given inability to control for the quality of their technology.
Nevertheless, patents can be interpreted as signals of this quality, so the results are still
of some interest. The interpretative problem is similar to the one described earlier: we
are not sure whether the patent right is important or simply the underlying invention
for which the patent is a proxy.

22

6. Current policy topics
Software and business method patents
A series of court decision during the mid to late 1990s in the United States
opened the door to a flood of software and business method patents. In consequence,
other patent systems, especially those in Europe, have been under considerable
pressure to reconsider their apparent prohibition of “disembodied” software patents.
The growth of this kind of patenting, the associated growth of high profile litigation of
these patents and the controversies these phenomena have engendered have inspired a
large research literature that attempts to answer the question of whether this
expansion of patentable subject matter was positive or negative for innovation in this
area.18
Analyzing these kinds of patents requires identifying them, and this has proved
somewhat difficult. Computer inventions are often described as combinations of
hardware and software to solve a particular problem, especially before the changes in
patentable subject matter during the mid‐1990s. There is still an incentive to do so if
patenting outside the United States is contemplated. In addition, most business method
and financial inventions described in patents are in fact implemented by software, so
making a distinction among these patents is also difficult.19 As Allison (Allison and Tiller
2003; Allison et al. 2011) has argued in several papers, the only way to identify these
patents accurately is to read them. But this is impracticable for large statistical studies,
so authors such as Graham and Mowery (2002), Bessen and Hunt (2004), and Hall and
Macgarvie (2010) have used other methods such as patent classes and keywords. All
agree that patenting by software firms was relatively inconsequential during the 1990s,
although it began to increase with the dotcom boom just before 2000.
Bessen and Hunt (2004) were among the first to look at the trends in software
patenting following these changes to the law. They show that fewer than 5 per cent of
software patents (by their definition, which is rather broad) are held by software firms;
most are held by computer hardware and electronics firms. Although the number held
by software firms has increased since the period covered by their study (1980‐1996),
largely owing to increased patenting by large firms such as Adobe, Microsoft and Oracle,
it is still true that most software firms hold no patents, even using a broad definition
(Bessen 2011).
18

Using a very broad definition of software patents (US classes 341, 345, 370, 375, 380-382, 700-707,
715-717, 726, and 902) Bessen (2011) finds that annual grants of software patents at the USPTO have increased
by a factor of 16 between 1984 and 2009, whereas the number of software patent lawsuit filings has increased
by a factor of almost 30.
19

For research focused specifically on financial and business method patenting, see Hunt (2008)
Komulainen and Takalo (2009), Lerner (2001, 2008), Merges (2003), and Wagner (2008).

23

The rise is software patenting has generated several policy concerns: first, there
have been many critiques of their quality in the sense that some are perceived not to
satisfy novelty and non‐obviousness requirements, probably partly because the USPTO
initially did not have computer science experts among its examiners.20 Second, this
sector is one where innovation is especially cumulative and therefore one where the
overall impact of patents may be expected to be negative for innovation, as discussed
earlier in this article. Unfortunately such a hypothesis is difficult to test because of the
absence of a true counterfactual. Several researchers have looked at related questions:
how did the change in the patentability of software affect entry of new firms into the
sector, and how did it affect the market valuation of existing firms with and without
patents?
In an early look at the entry question, Graham and Mowery (2002) found no
effects on entry as of the late 1990s. Cockburn and MacGarvie (2011) asked how
software patenting affected entry into various subsectors of the software sector and
found that firms were less likely to enter product classes in which there are more
software patents, but that, all else equal, firms holding software patents were more
likely to enter these markets and that patents were associated with higher survival
rates. Hall and MacGarvie (2010) looks at the market response to the important
patentability decisions of 1994‐1996 and finds that the market evaluated the
introduction of software patents as a negative development ex ante. Ex post, a greater
number of firms in all ICT sectors invested in these patents, and these firms had slightly
higher market values than those with no software patents, with the exception of pure
software firms. Overall, the conclusion was that given software patentability, ICT firms
engaged in patent portfolio races needed to add software patents to their portfolio, but
there was no particular positive impact on software innovation per se.
University patenting
One policy area that has generated a surprisingly large amount of research
recently concerns the role of patenting in the conduct and diffusion of scientific
research generated by universities and public research organizations. Although
university patenting remains low as a share of all patenting, it has been growing fairly
rapidly at least since the Bayh‐Dole Act in the United States (1980 with important
amendments to the law in 1984) and similar changes elsewhere in the world. Reasons
for this are not hard to find: the increased importance of scientific knowledge in the
production of certain kinds of innovation, notably those in the biotechnology area,
changes in the legal treatment of the ownership of university patents, and budget
pressures on the university that have led to it seeking new income sources. A useful
20

See Hall (2009) for a review of these critiques. The rise in requests for re-examination and the low
success rates of patent litigation in the software patent area discussed later in the paper also suggest some
uncertainty over patent validity.

24

survey of the broader topic of university‐industry relationships that includes a
discussion of the role of patents is provided by Foray and Lissoni (2010). Mowery et al.
(2004) present a detailed study of the impact of the Bayh‐Dole Act on both university
research and patenting.21
One reason for the enormous interest of academic researchers in this topic may
be the demand from their own university administrators for ways to evaluate the
consequences of these trends, as there have been many critics who complain that
university use of proprietary protections for knowledge detracts from their primary
mission as creators of public knowledge. Thus the questions addressed in these papers
are whether patenting distracts researchers from research leading to publications,
whether patenting changes the nature of their research towards research directed at
commercial ends, and whether university patenting slows the diffusion of knowledge by
privatizing some of it.
Henderson et al. (1999) was the first paper to examine the changes in university
patenting after the Bayh‐Dole Act comprehensively. Using all university held U. S.
patents applied for between 1965 and 1988, these authors show that such patents are
more highly cited and more general, but that the difference in the citation rate falls over
time, becoming insignificant after 1984. Sampat et al. (2003) reexamine these data
using seven additional years of citations (11‐14 years total as compared with 4‐7 years),
finding that although the gap between university‐owned patents and a control sample
narrows slightly, university‐owned patents have a significantly higher citation rate
throughout the period. Both of these papers control for differences across patent classes
in average citation rates.
Thursby and Thursby (2007) show theoretically that licensing of applied
research results can have a positive impact on the basic research output of universities,
for income effect reasons and because of joint production. A number of papers using
both U.S. and European data have examined whether patenting by academic research
affects their research productivity as measured by publications and all have reached the
same conclusion: publishing and patenting are complementary activities, not
substitutes, when looking across researchers (Azoulay et al. 2009; Breschi et al. 2007;
Carayol 2007; Fabrizio and DiMinim 2008; Thursby and Thursby 2009). There is some
evidence that research quality may be affected (Fabrizio and Di Minim) or that research
is shifted to areas with more commercial interest (Azoulay et al.). However, Thursby
and Thursby (2002) find little change to university research from patent licensing. It is
probably safe to summarize this work as showing that patenting and publishing are
complements across researchers (more productive researchers do more of both) but
21

A recent special issue of Research Policy (Grimaldi et al. 2011) is devoted to the topic of academic
research 30 years after Bayh-Dole and a recent special issue of Economics of Innovation and New Technology
(Geuna and Mowery 2007) to the effects of academic patenting in the US and Europe.

25

that they are slight substitutes within researcher (doing more of one inevitably reduces
the time available for the other, or at least changes the nature of the research).
Mowery and Ziedonis (2002) look at data on university patenting and licensing
for three major research universities before and after the Bayh‐Dole Act and find that
the impact on research content is very modest with no decline in the importance or
generality of their patents, while the impact on the marketing efforts of the university
technology transfer office is considerable. Looking at research universities as a whole,
they find substantial entry into technology transfer and patent licensing and that the
patents of the new entrants are less important (as measured by citations) and general
than those of universities with extensive patenting experience before Bayh‐Dole.
There is other evidence that the institutional attitude and context seems to have
a significant effect on the use of patents. Owen‐Smith and Powell (2001) survey faculty
inventors in two very different research universities, one an elite private institution
with a highly active and successful technology transfer office (TTO) and one that is a
large state university. Although they are of similar size and rank, the private institution
had ten times as many patents in 1998 and fifteen times the licensing revenue. Faculty
attitudes toward disclosure to the TTO differed significantly across the two universities
and this in turn influenced their success at patenting inventions.
In an interesting study of university software patents, Rai et al. (2009) also find
that the “university effect” is very important in explaining behavior. The most important
predictor of software patenting by a university is not their R&D or employment in the
computer science area, but their overall patenting. That is, some universities are active
in this area and others are not, but patenting is not especially driven by output in a
particular research area.
The heterogeneity of university experience with patent licensing is also
emphasized by Geuna and Nesta (2006) who looked at European university activity in
this area and found wide variation in the extent to which inventions by university
researchers were indeed patented by the university rather than industry or the faculty
member himself. As in the US, much of the university patenting was in the areas of
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and genetics. J. Thursby et al. (2007) finds that one
quarter of U.S. patents taken out by faculty researchers are assigned to firms rather than
universities and that these patents are less basic and more likely to be in the physical
than in the biological sciences. Czarnitzki et al. (2009) find that although those German
faculty patents that are owned by corporations have a higher value in terms of forward
citations, those assigned to academics or public research organizations are more
complex, more basic, and have stronger links to science. The authors suggest that this
signals weakness in the commercialization of technologies based on basic science in
Germany, although it could simply be the natural outcome of the different goals and
activities of the two types of institutions.
26

In a novel and influential paper, Murray and Stern (2007) look at the knowledge
diffusion effects of patenting research output which is also described in a published
paper. They exploit the lag between publishing and the patent grant to look at whether
future research (measured as citations to the associated paper) is enhanced or
discouraged by the proprietary effect of the grant, finding a modest decline in relative
citations after the patent is issued. Williams (2011) uses a similar quasi‐experimental
approach to the analysis of the impact of Celera Corporation’s temporary IP on selected
gene sequences, finding that Celera’s IP led to reductions in subsequent scientific
research and product development outcomes, relative to a counterfactual where the
same genes were always in the public domain.
A related issue that has received some attention is that of proprietary research
tools and materials, which raise the cost of doing research. Although many jurisdictions
have an explicit or implicit “research exemption” for those that use patented
information solely for research purposes, not all do, and a highly publicized US court
decision called this exemption into question (Madey v. Duke University 2002), holding
that the so‐called exemption was very narrow and did not generally apply to university
research. Nagaoka and Aoki (2007) develop a theoretical analysis of the research
exemption and conclude that although such an exemption can be justified in multi‐
period R&D competition, it is not necessarily innovation‐enhancing in a two stage
pioneer‐follower model, because it fails to reward the first inventor. They recommend a
broad exemption for research on the subject matter of an invention, together with
stronger protection for the pioneer in a product market.
Following on the Madey v. Duke University decision, Walsh, Arora, and Cohen
(2003) took an early look at the effects of increases in research tool patenting in the
drug discovery area. They found that such patenting had little impact thus far due to the
work‐arounds adopted by university researchers: taking out licenses, inventing around,
using an informal research exemption, and developing publicly available research tools.
Patent litigation22
Patent litigation is a relatively rare event in most jurisdictions. However, when it
occurs, it tends to involve the most privately valuable patents (Allison et al 2004;
Harhoff et al. 2003). If a firm believes that a patent is being infringed, it can sue the
infringer for damages and/or injunctive relief. Any firm that is alleged to have infringed,
either via a specific letter of notification or by being a defendant in a suit, may sue the
patent‐holder for declaratory relief, i.e., for a judgment that the firm is not infringing a
patent held by the defendant, or that the patent in question is not valid.

22

See Harhoff (2009) for a detailed survey and discussion of patent litigation in various European

countries.

27

Most patents are never litigated; for example, the rate of patent litigation in the
U. S. in recent years has been approximately 1 to 2 per cent of patents, with substantial
variation across fields (Lanjouw and Schankerman 2001; Bessen and Meurer 2005).
Most cases are settled privately and only a few go to trial. The infringement filing rate
for EPO‐granted patents in Germany has been estimated to be 0.9% and is thus slightly
lower than that in the U.S., even though litigation is considerably less costly in Germany.
While patent litigation is relatively rare, cases which are litigated can cause
considerable welfare losses, e.g., if the patents have been granted erroneously or if
infringement takes place and undermines incentives for R&D. Important design
elements of litigation systems are the financing of the court system, the availability of
strategic instruments that can be used unilaterally to affect the cost levels of a rival, and
the availability of injunctions.
Because of the need to gather a great deal of information, and because
considerable expertise is required, patent litigation systems are usually expensive.
Seeking full recovery of court costs from private parties may lead to high litigation costs
(as in the United States, Ireland and Great Britain) and, indirectly, to high incidence of
private settlements. While that may be optimal in some cases, it is clearly not if
adjudication delivers important information about patent validity (Shapiro 2003). In
this case, adjudication is the source of positive externalities, and public sector financing
of patent litigation would be justified.
Research on patent litigation is difficult because of the data collection problem (it
frequently requires accessing the records of courts in several different jurisdictions) but
in recent years there have been series of studies of US patent litigation (Moore, 2000;
Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001; Bessen and Meurer, 2005; Henry and Turner, 2006;
Allison et al., 2011) and at least one of the German system (Cremers, 2004).23 All of
these studies document the fact that litigated patents tend to be the more valuable
patents, as one might have expected. The US studies also show that only about five per
cent of such suits go to trial, with the remainder being settled before going to trial. They
also show that whether patent litigation has increased depends on whether it is
measured in aggregate or per patent. That is, the increase in patent litigation has
roughly paralleled the increase in patenting, at least in the United States, although there
is some indication that the litigation rate has risen in the very recent past (Bessen and
Meurer, 2005).
One of the consequences of the uncertain quality and breadth of software and
business method patents has been increased litigation. Lerner (2008) reports that
financial patents are litigated at a rate between 27 and 39 times higher than other
patents, and are predominantly being asserted by small entities or individuals against
23

For an early survey of the empirical literature on IP enforcement, see Lanjouw and Lerner (1998).

28

large firms. Allison et al (2011) examine a new database on patent litigation which is
arguably more complete than previous sources and they find that among the patents
litigated more than 8 times, three quarters are software patents including business
method patents. In principle such patents should be very strong, given the willingness
of their owner to litigate, and they are the subject of settlement slightly more frequently
than other patents. However, when they do go to trial, the patentholder wins only 13
per cent of the cases, as opposed to 51 per cent of cases involving non‐software patents.
These results are consistent with the models presented by Farrell and Shapiro (2007)
and Reitzig et al. (2007), which emphasize the ability of a holder of even a weak patent
to hold up a firm that produces a product that may infringe on the patent for more than
the (expected) value of the contribution to the product.

7. Design of the system
International treaties have led to some harmonization of patent systems over the
past decades, but important differences remain and some of these differences seem to
have first‐order effects regarding the impact of patent protection on innovation and
competition. Researchers have only started to explore this area, and much can still be
learned from comparative studies of patent systems. We discuss some of the more
recent studies regarding the role of fees and other costs of patenting, the timing of
examination, the design of post‐grant review, and finally patent office governance and
management.
Fees
Patent offices charge fees for a number of steps in the patenting process, such as
filing, search, examination, grant, re‐examination or opposition, and appeal. Fees are in
some cases contingent on the patent application itself, e.g., the number of pages
submitted and the number of claims. Many practitioners have argued that fees account
for only a small fraction of total patenting costs which are typically dominated by
attorney fees. But fees often represent marginal costs while attorney fees are largely
sunk ex ante. Recent empirical evidence points to a considerable impact of fees – while
the elasticities associated with particular fees tend to be below unity, indicating
inelastic reactions, they are not small. Fee changes may therefore be important
elements of patent office policies.
De Rassenfosse and von Pottelsberghe (2010) point to the fact that controversies
regarding the setting of fees are by no means new, but have received growing attention
given that patent systems are again trying to manage a growing back‐log of applications
and quality problems. The authors distinguish between pre‐grant and post‐grant costs
and fees, where the first group has received the least attention so far, but recent fee
changes have created unique opportunities to quantify the impact of these fee types. In
December of 2004, the USPTO changed its “excess claims fee”: while it had charged $18
29

for any claims exceeding 20 claims up to that date, it increased the claims fee to $50
(Archontopoulos et al. 2007). The average number of claims per patent fell from 28 to
23 subsequent to this change. Patents with more claims take longer to examine (Harhoff
and Wagner 2009, Lazaridis and van Pottelsberghe 2007), hence the fee change should
have led to a reduction of patent office workload. Regarding other pre‐grant fees, de
Rassenfosse and van Pottelsberghe (2010) summarize evidence from eight studies
which all point to inelastic demand with elasticities ranging between ‐0.03 and ‐0.60.
Panel data estimates for the trilateral offices (EPO, JPO, USPTO) indicate a long‐term
elasticity of about ‐0.30 (de Rassenfosse and van Pottelsberghe 2011).
Of all fee types, most attention has been awarded to post‐grant renewal fees.
Theoretical and empirical investigations have shown that renewal fees can serve an
important purpose by giving incentives to patent‐holders to let technologies not
valuable to them lapse into the public domain. Moreover, the fee structure (mostly that
at European patent offices) has been used to design powerful structural estimation
approaches with applicability far beyond the field of patent economics. The early work
by Pakes (1986) and Schankerman and Pakes (1986) has been followed by more
comprehensive empirical analyses by Lanjouw (1998) and Serrano (2010),
encompassing aspects such as litigation and additional options such as the sale of the
patent. Cornelli and Schankerman (1999) and Scotchmer (1999) have contributed
theoretical studies that demonstrate the optimality of patent renewal systems under
certain conditions. As to the impact of renewal fees on the patents in force, Danguy and
van Pottelsberghe (2009) estimate from cross‐sectional data covering the USA, Japan
and 15 European countries that the elasticity of the maintenance rate with respect to
the renewal fee rises from ‐0.03 at year 6 to ‐0.80 at year 20.
At the European Patent Office, additional types of fees apply since the EPO‐
granted patent has to be validated by the applicant at each of the national offices for
which patent protection is sought. Using data on validations, validation fees and early
renewal fees for EPC countries, Harhoff et al. (2009a) compute an elasticity of ‐0.30 of
validation of between‐country validation flows with respect to validation and early
renewal fees. Using data at the patent level, Harhoff et al. (2009b) show that increasing
validation fees by 1% reduces validation probabilities by 5.3%. Increasing early renewal
fees by 1% leads to a reduction of validations by 13.7%. Again, the behavior turns out to
be inelastic, but fee levels leave noticeable traces in applicant behavior.
Taken together, the studies demonstrate that patent office fees as well as
translation requirements are effective determinants of applicant behavior. Hence, they
are legitimate tools for patent policies. A comprehensive assessment of an optimal fee
structure is still elusive at this point , and it can probably not be conducted without
taking other design elements into account. Moreover, political economy issues come
into play when fee levels are being discussed. We discuss these below in our comments
on patent office governance.
30

Timing
One of the most neglected aspects of patent system design concerns the timing of
the pre‐grant phase. The concept of “deferred examination” which is of high practical
importance in many patent systems has only recently received serious attention among
economists (Thomas 2010). Deferred examination was “invented” by Dutch policy‐
makers in the 1960s as a response to mounting backlogs at the Dutch patent office. The
innovation spread quickly to other patent offices. Today, most countries allow
applicants to file examination requests as late as three years after the application date
(Argentina, China, Czech Republic, India, Russia, Slovenia, Taiwan, and Japan since
October 2001) or even five years after the application date (Australia, Costa Rica, Korea,
Thailand, and Canada since October 1996). At the JPO (prior to October 2001), CIPO
(prior to October 1996) and the German Patent Office (DPMA), patent examination has
followed or still follows a deferred request system where applicants may ask for
examination within seven years after the application date. In all of these countries,
publication occurs 18 months from the priority date of the application – hence, deferred
examination should not be confused with “submarine patenting” in patent systems that
publish applications at the time of grant.
There are a two major exceptions. At the USPTO, patent examination occurs
automatically – applicants do not have to file a request. At the EPO and several national
patent offices, patent examination needs to be requested within 6 months of the
publication of the search report. This is usually 24 months after the priority date (and
for most EP filings 18 months after the application date given that applicants at the EPO
typically make full use of the priority year). Thus, only the EPO and the USPTO as well as
very few other national offices appear to seek an early start of patent examination,
while most countries allow applicants to file a request for examination within a given
time period following the application date or ‐ in some cases ‐ the publication of the
search report. In some countries, failure to do so automatically leads to a lapse of the
application which is then “deemed to be withdrawn”. Moreover, most countries allow
third parties to file an examination request in order to prevent strategic delay of
examination. The respective third party then has to pay the examination fee.
Furthermore, in some countries, the respective patent office may decide on its own
behalf to examine a patent application.
The main effect of deferred examination is a substantial reduction of patent
office workload. At the DPMA, only two thirds of all applications handled by the office
are ever examined. The remaining applications are dropped by the applicants. About
one fifth of all decisions are made in the final year of the deferment period. Long
deferments are particularly frequent in pharmaceuticals and chemicals. Applicants at
DPMA start paying renewal fees in year 3 (irrespective of the legal status of the
application), and these fees are increasing over time.
31

The JPO switched to a 3‐year deferment option in October 2001. Prior to this
reform (which was accompanied by changes in fees and the transition to multiple‐claim
patents) applicants had a seven‐year period to make decisions. Since the JPO system
was affected by a number of changes (such as the shift to multiple claims system in
January 1988 and major changes in the fee structure in April 2004), the impact of the
reduced deferment period is difficult to elicit. Yamauchi and Nagaoka (2009) estimate
that the rate of eventual examination requests increased by about 8.6 percentage points
due to the change of the deferment period. As expected, the effects were stronger in the
technology areas with higher uncertainty where delay is likely to have high option
value. In some fields the increase was dramatic – for example, for pharmaceuticals
patents from 50.3 % in September 2001 to 76.5% in October 2001. The authors
conclude that the overall impact of the policy change could have been Pareto‐
worsening.
At the Canadian Intellectual Property Office (CIPO), a seven‐year deferment,
first‐to‐file system was instituted in 1989, combined with a statutory term of the patent
of 20 years from the date of filing. Then in 1996 CIPO went from the seven‐year
deferment period to a five‐year deferment option for applicants. Under the seven‐year
deferment system, only 67 percent of all applications were ever examined while one
third of applications dropped out. After the change and until 2002, 75 percent of
applicants requested examination, for an additional examination load of 8 percent
(Harhoff 2011).
While the reduction in patent office workload is one major advantage of the
deferment system, there is a second one as well: if applicants are not given a regular
option of delay, they may “purchase” such an option privately by filing divisional or
continuations, or by filing applications that are complex and thus take longer to be
examined (Guellec et al. 2007). In a comparison of U.S. and Canadian equivalents, i.e.
patents with exactly the same underlying priorities, Harhoff (2011) finds strong
evidence supporting this hypothesis. US equivalents corresponding to CIPO patents for
which long deferment periods were used were often continuations or continuations‐in‐
part.
Despite of these advantages, deferred patent examination may not be a magic
cure for patent offices. It comes at the cost of enhanced uncertainty for rivals of an
applicant who keeps an application in play (McGinley 2009). Henkel and Jell (2010) use
survey data to show that “creating uncertainty” is an important motive for requesting
examination at the DPMA relatively late. It remains to be analyzed to which extent
strategic generation of uncertainty can be kept at bay by administrative measures, for
example the right for third parties to request examination or by examination initiated
by the patent office itself. Nonetheless, the results confirm the view that immediate
examination may not be efficient for all patents, and that applicants should be given
some flexibility, possibly at a price that dampens incentives for mere generation of
32

uncertainty. Taking such considerations into account the USPTO recently announced a
plan to let applicants choose from three examination tracks: the examination timing as
previously used, a fast‐track option for applicants seeking fast examination (similar to
the option of accelerated examination at the EPO) and finally a three‐year deferment
option.
An important technical implication of the different timing regimes concerns the
grant rate. Within a given patent system and with the quality of patent applications
being held constant, the grant rate is a reasonable reflection of how permissive the
patent office is in granting exclusion rights. Some offices with relatively high grant rates
(such as the USPTO) have been criticized for not being sufficiently scrupulous in their
examination policies. However, comparisons of grant rates can be hazardous since they
typically neglect timing issues. The more time a patent system gives its applicants to
withdraw their applications upon the arrival of bad news (e.g., regarding technologies,
markets or prior art), the lower the grant rate will be. This is not a consequence of
particularly exacting procedures in search and examination ‐ it rather reflects
applicants’ drop‐out behavior under deferred examination.
Post­grant review
Many patent systems (such as those in Australia, Austria, China, Germany, Japan,
the US, and at the EPO) offer some form of administrative post‐grant review
mechanisms that offer third parties an opportunity for challenging a granting decision.
These institutions have highly divergent rates of utilization and impact. For example,
while the patent opposition mechanism at the EPO and the DPMA is used relatively
frequently, mechanisms of patent re‐examination at the USPTO have been less
successful. We briefly describe the opposition mechanism at the EPO which embodies
many of the institutional design aspects also found at other offices.
Any third party can oppose the European patent at the European Patent Office
within nine months of a patent's grant by filing an opposition against the granting
decision. Opposition can be filed by any third party, but not by the proprietor of the
patent, and its outcome is binding for all states in which the patent granted by the EPO
has effect. If opposition is not filed within nine months after the grant, the patent’s
validity can only be challenged under the legal rules of the respective countries in which
the patent has been validated. The EPO opposition procedure is the only centralized
challenge process for European patents. Opposition may be filed on various grounds.
These are (i) the subject matter is not patentable, (ii) the patent does not disclose the
invention sufficiently clearly or completely so that it can be carried out by a person
skilled in the art, or (iii) the subject matter of the European patent extends beyond the
content of the original application. If found valid, an Opposition Division (OD) panel
consisting of three technical examiners, two of whom must have taken no part in
examining the opposed patent, determines the outcome of the case.
33

Opposition proceedings at the EPO may have one of four possible outcomes.
First, the patent may be upheld without amendments, i.e., the opposition is rejected.
Second, the patent may be fully revoked. Third, when amendments are proposed by the
patentee, the patent may be maintained in amended form, a process that often takes the
form of a negotiation between the parties, with the OD serving as mediator. Finally, the
opposition procedure may be closed, which means either that the opposition has been
withdrawn or that the patent has been allowed to lapse. Either of the parties may appeal
the outcome once. Opposition at the EPO results in a revocation of the patent in about
30% of all cases. Amendments and rejections account for another 30% each, and cases
are closed without adjudication in about 10% of the cases (Graham and Harhoff 2009).
By the end of 2009, 6.3% of EPO‐granted patents had been opposed. The opposition rate
has been declining from 10.8% in 1981 to 5.2% in 2009.
EPO opposition proceedings have been compared to US re‐examination and
litigation in a number of studies. See Hall et al. (2003), Graham et al. (2003) and Graham
and Harhoff (2009). In the USA, the validity of a patent can be challenged in two forums:
within the administrative agency (USPTO) or in the judicial branch (courts). The
administrative process most often used, the reexamination, is ex parte (giving the
patentee exclusive rights to communication with the decision‐maker) and substantially
restricts the involvement of the challenger. Graham et al. (2003) document the limited
use, and usefulness, of the US reexamination proceeding, showing that only 0.3% of
patents granted between 1991 and 1998 were reexamined, and that patent owners
initiated more than half of these reexamination requests. A refinement of the procedure
introduced in 1999, the inter partes reexamination, allows challengers more access, but
creates such substantial disincentives to challengers that it has far less used in practice
(Farrell and Merges, 2004; Shang, 2009). Very recently, use of this form of re‐exam has
begun to increase, quadrupling between 2006 and 2010, although it is still true that
fewer than one per cent of patents are subject to either kind of re‐examination. It is
noteworthy that about half of the re‐examination requests in 2010 are known to be
associated with patent litigation (USPTO 2010).
Patent office governance and human resource management
Patent offices have historically been designed as public administrative entities.
In most countries they are part of national ministries without any discretionary
authority regarding fee policies and financing. Usually, excess income from fees is
maintained in favor of the public treasury, and shortfalls in financing are equally
covered by public sources. Most governments seek to have their patent office
operations financed by fees, rather than subsidize them permanently or use them as
income sources. From a public economics perspective, such a policy appears plausible,
yet there is no assurance that fee structures implementing a fully privately financed
patent system are optimal in terms of overall welfare.
34

Patent office designs and policies have immediate implications for a large
number of stakeholders, among them inventors, applicants, patent attorneys, patent
examiners and office staff, decision‐makers in governing bodies and member states in
the case of pan‐national patent organizations.
Governance problems may occur for a number of reasons. Most fee structures
are “back‐loaded”, i.e. renewal and other post‐grant fees are considerably higher than
the marginal costs of the concomitant administrative processes while application,
search for prior art and examination are more costly to the patent office than the
corresponding fees. While this structure may be justified regarding the impact of fees
(i.e. the elasticity of demand), the academic discussion has paid little attention to the
within‐office incentive problems arising from such structures. High income from
granted patents may induce patent offices to grant more patents than is socially optimal.
Similarly, internal accounting rules that grant patent examiners more
recognition for the effort leading to a grant rather than a refusal of a patent application
may lead to similarly dysfunctional incentives (Friebel et al. 2006). The structural
aspects of governance (i.e., a patent office preference for many grants) may translate
into management practices which award grants and discourage refusals.

8. Concluding thoughts
In this concluding section, we will forego a summary of the preceding sections, as
such a summary if adequately done would inevitably be long and repetitive of earlier
summaries in the article. Instead we try to highlight a couple of the larger themes and
insights we think have been gained.
A first observation is that the sheer size and growth of the recent literature might
lead one to assume that patents are an extremely important instrument of economic
development and growth, which therefore attract a great deal of interest from
researchers and policy makers. But this seems at odds with the weak evidence that
patents serve as an incentive for innovation and the fact that relatively few firms find
them an important means of securing returns to innovation. We think that the answer
to this conundrum has several pieces: First, a small subsector of industry, mostly
pharmaceuticals, does find them very useful and even essential as an incentive. Second,
although they are not important for innovation incentives in general, if your
competitors have them, you need them too, which effectively means they are a zero sum
game for the economy as a whole but necessary for each individual firm (Gambardella
and Hall 2006). Third, although patents may not add much to social welfare (and are
therefore not visibly effective in aggregate studies), they are capable of generating large
private returns in many instances, which means that a number of economic actors have
an interest in them, creating demands for more research.
35

With respect to the overall effectiveness of patents in encouraging innovation,
another thing we have learned from this research is that seemingly minor changes in
the institutional design of patent systems can have relatively large effects. The question
of whether patents do or do not have positive welfare implications cannot be answered
without stating which form of a patent system is being compared to the counterfactual
patent‐free world. Our reading of the literature is that researchers are still far away
from fully understanding the impact of the institutional aspects of patent systems. That
should give both abolitionists as well as advocates of an ever‐enlarging patent system
reason to pause. Despite all of their weaknesses, international comparisons of patent
systems look like a promising avenue for gaining more insights. However, the main
impediment to improving patent systems many not lie in gaining new insights, but in
the political economy of patent systems and the vested, often diverging interests that
many stakeholders have in the existing system.

9. Literature cited
Allison JR, Lemley MA, Moore KA, Trunkey RD. 2004. Valuable patents.
Georgetown Law Journal 92: 435‐79
Allison JR, Lemley MA, Walker J. 2011. Patent Quality and Settlement among
Repeat Patent Litigants. Georgetown Law Journal 99: 677‐712
Allison JR, Tiller EH. 2003. Statistical Analysis of Internet Business Method
Patents. In Intellectual Property in the Knowledge­Based Economy, ed. WM Cohen.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press
Anton JJ, Yao DA. 2004. Little Patents and Big Secrets: Managing Intellectual
Property. Rand Journal of Economics 35(1): 1‐22
Archontopoulos E, Guellec D, Stevnsborg N, van Zeebroeck N, van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie B. 2007. When small is beautiful: Measuring the evolution and
consequences of the voluminosity of patent applications at the EPO. Information
Economics and Policy 19(2): 103‐132
Arora A, Ceccagnoli M, Cohen WM. 2003. R&D and the patent premium.
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 9431
Arora A, Fosfuri A, Gambardella A. 2001. Markets for Technology: The Economics
of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Arora A, Merges RP. 2004. Specialized Supply Firms, Property Rights, and Firm
Boundaries. Industrial and Corporate Change 13: 451‐475
Arundel A. 2003. Patents in the Knowledge‐Based Economy: Report of the Know
Survey. Maastricht: MERIT, University of Maastricht
36

Austin DH. 1993. An Event‐Study Approach to Measuring Innovative Output: The
Case of Biotechnology. American Economic Review 83: 253‐58
Azoulay P, Ding W, Stuart T. 2009. The Impact of Academic Patenting on the Rate,
Quality and Direction of (Public) Research Output. Journal of Industrial Economics 57:
637‐76
Baldwin JR, Hanel P, Sabourin D. 2000. Determinants of innovative activity in
Canadian manufacturing firms: the role of intellectual property rights. Working Paper
No. 122. Ottawa: Statistics Canada
Baudry M, Dumont B. 2009. A Bayesian real option approach to patents and
optimal renewal fees. Nantes, France: LEMNA Working Paper 2009/09
Belenzon S. 2006. Knowledge flow and sequential innovation: Implications for
technology diffusion, R&D and market value. Oxford, UK: Nuffield College, Oxford
University, available at
http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Research/wp/pdf/paper259.pdf
Bessen, J. 2011. A generation of software patents. Boston University School of
Law Working Paper No. 11‐31. Available at
http://www.bu.edu/law/faculty/scholarship/workingpapers/2011.html
Bessen JE, Hunt RM. 2004. An Empirical Look at Software Patents. Philadelphia,
PA: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 03/17R
Bessen J, Maskin E. 2009. Sequential innovation, patents, and imitation. Rand
Journal of Economics 40: 611‐635
Bessen J, Meurer MJ. 2009. Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers
Put Innovators at Risk. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press
Bessen J, Meurer MJ. 2005. The patent litigation explosion. Law and Economics
Working Paper No. 05‐18, Boston University School of Law
Bhattacharya S, Guriev S. 2006. Patents vs. trade secrets: Knowledge licensing
and spillover. Journal of the European Economic Association 4(6): 1112‐1147
Bloom N, Van Reenen J, Schankerman M. 2007. Identifying technology spillovers
and product market rivalry. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4912. London, UK: CEPR
Blundell R, Griffith R, Van Reenen J. 1999. Market Share, Market Value and
Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms. Review of Economic Studies 66:
529‐54
Boldrin M, Levine DK. 2008. Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge, UK and
New York: Cambridge University Press
37

Bosworth D, Rogers M. 2001. Market Value, R&D and Intellectual Property: An
Empirical Analysis of Large Australian Firms. The Economic Record 77: 323‐37
Branstetter LG. 2004. Do Stronger Patents Induce More Local Innovation?
Journal of International Economic Law 7(2): 359‐70
Breschi S, Lissoni F, Montobbio F. 2007. The Scientific Productivity of Academic
Inventors: New Evidence from Italian Data. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 16: 101‐18
Carayol N. 2004. Academic Incentives and Research Organization for Patenting at
a Large French University. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 16: 119‐38
Cockburn IM, Macgarvie M. 2011. Entry and Patenting in the Software Industry.
Management Science. In press
Cockburn IM, MacGarvie M. 2007. Patents, Thickets, and the Financing of Early‐
Stage Firms: Evidence from the Software Industry. Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy 18: 729‐73
Cohen WM, Goto A, Nagata A, Nelson RR, Walsh JP. 2002. R&D spillovers, patents
and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United States. Research Policy 31: 1349–
67
Cornelli F, Schankerman M. 1999. Patent renewals and R&D incentives. RAND
Journal of Economics 30(2): 197‐213
Corrado C, Hulten CR, Sichel DE. 2006. Intangible Capital and Economic Growth.
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. w11948
Cremers K. 2004. Determinants of patent litigation in Germany. Mannheim,
Germany: Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW) Discussion Paper No. 04‐72
Czarnitzki D, Hussinger K, Schneider C. 2009. The Nexus between Science and
Industry: Evidence from Faculty Inventions. Mannheim, Germany: ZEW Discussion
Paper No. 09‐028
Dam KW. 1994. The economic underpinnings of patent law. The Journal of Legal
Studies 23: 247–271
Danguy J, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2009. Cost‐benefit analysis of the
Community Patent. Brussels, Belgium: Bruegel Working Paper 2009/08
Darby MR, Liu Q, Zucker LG. 2004. High Stakes in High Technology: High‐Tech
Market Values as Options. Economic Inquiry 42: 351‐69

38

Davis L. 2006. How do Small High‐Tech Firms Manage the Patenting Process?
DRUID Summer Conference on Knowledge, Innovation, and Competitiveness, Working
Paper No. 164. Available at
http://www2.druid.dk/conferences/viewpaper.php?id=164&cf=8
Deng Z, Lev B, Narin F. 1999. Science and Technology as Predictors of Stock
Performance. Financial Analysts Journal 55(3): 20‐32
Denicolò V. 2007. Do patents over‐compensate innovators? Economic Policy
22(52): 679‐729
Denicolò V, Franzoni LA. 2004. Patents, Secrets, and the First‐Inventor Defense.
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 13(3): 517‐538
Denicolò V, Franzoni LA. 2003. The contract theory of patents. International
Review of Law and Economics 23: 365–380
Denicolò V, Halmenschlager C. 2010. Optimal Patentability Requirements with
Fragmented Property Rights. Milano, Italy: Fondazione ENI Enrico Maffei Working
Paper No. 134
de Rassenfosse G, Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2011. On the Price
Elasticity of Demand for Patents. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. In press.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468‐0084.2011.00638.x
de Rassenfosse G, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2010. The Role of Fees in
Patent Systems: Theory and Evidence. Centre for Economic Policy Research, London:
CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7879
de Rassenfosse G, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2007. Per un pugno di
dollari: a first look at the price elasticity of patents. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23:
588‐604
Encaoua D, Lefouilli Y. 2005. Choosing Intellectual Protection: Imitation, Patent
Strength and Licensing. Annales d'Économie et de Statistique 79/80, Special issue of
Contributions in Memory of Zvi Griliches, Mairesse J, Trajtenberg M (eds.), 241‐271
EPO (European Patent Office). 2007a. Patent system. Available at
http://www.epo.org/topics/patent‐system.html
EPO (European Patent Office). 2007b. Legislative Initiatives. Available at
http://www.epo.org/patents/law/legislative‐initiatives.html
Fabrizio KR, Di Minim A. 2008. Commercializing the laboratory: Faculty
patenting and the open science environment. Research Policy 37: 914‐31
39

Farrell J, Merges RP. 2004. Incentives to Challenge and to Defend Patents: Why
Litigation Won’t Reliably Fix Patent Office Errors and Why Administrative Patent
Review Might Help. Berkeley Technology Law Journal 19 (3): 943‐970
Farrell J, Shapiro, C. 2008. How Strong Are Weak Patents? American Economic
Review 98(4): 1347‐1369
Fink C, Khan M, Zhou H. 2011. The Worldwide Surge in Patent Applications.
WIPO: Paper presented at the Third Annual Patent Analysis Workshop at ITPS, Seville,
Spain, June 13‐14. Available at
http://is.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pages/ISG/patents/documents/MosahidKhan.pdf
Foray D, Lissoni F. 2010. University research and public‐private interaction. In
Hall BH, Rosenberg N (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume I.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 276‐314
Friebel G, Koch AK, Prady D, Seabright P. 2006. Objectives and Incentives at the
European Patent Office. Study Commissioned by the Staff Union of the European Patent
Office (SUEPO). Available at http://idei.fr/doc/by/seabright/report_epo.pdf
Fromer JC. 2009. Patent Disclosure. Iowa Law Review 94: 539–596
Galasso A, Schankerman M. 2010. Patent thickets, courts, and the market for
innovation. Rand Journal of Economics 41(3): 472‐503
Gallini NT, Scotchmer, S. 2002. Intellectual Property: When Is It the Best
Incentive System? Innovation Policy and the Economy 2: 51‐77
Gambardella A, Hall BH. 2006. Proprietary vs. Public Domain Licensing of
Software and Research Products. Research Policy 35 (6): 875‐892.
Gambardella A, Harhoff D, Nagaoka S. 2011. The Social Value of Patent
Disclosure. Unpublished manuscript, LMU Munich
Gambardella A, Harhoff D, Verspagen B. 2008. The Value of European Patents.
European Management Review 5: 69‐84
Gans J, King S, Lampe R. 2004. Patent renewal fees and self‐funding patent
offices. Topics in Theoretical Economics 4(1): article 6
Geuna A, Mowery DC. 2007. Publishing and patenting in US and European
universities. Special issue of Economics of Innovation and New Technology 16(2): 67‐70
Geuna A, Nesta LJJ. 2006. University patenting and its effects on academic
research: The emerging European evidence. Research Policy 35(6): 790‐807

40

Ginarte JC, Park WG. 1997. Determinants of patent rights: a cross‐national study.
Research Policy 26(3): 283–301
Giuri P, Mariani M, Brusoni S, Crespi G, Francoz D, et al. 2007. Inventors and
invention processes in Europe: Results from the PatVal‐EU survey. Research Policy 36:
1107‐27
Graham SJH, Hall BH, Harhoff D, Mowery, DC. 2003. Post‐issue Patent ‘Quality
Control’: A Comparative Study of U.S. Patent Re‐examinations and European Patent
Oppositions. In The Patent System in the Knowledge­Based Economy, ed. WM Cohen, SA
Merrill. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 74‐119
Graham SJH, Harhoff D. 2009. Separating Patent Wheat from Chaff: Would the
U.S. Benefit from Adopting a Patent Post‐Grant Review? SSRN Discussion Paper,
available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1489579
Graham SJH, Merges RP, Samuelson P, Sichelman T. 2009. High Technology
Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey.
Berkeley Technology Law Journal 24: 1255‐1328
Graham SJH, Mowery DC. 2002. Intellectual Property Protection in the U.S.
Software Industry. In The Patent System in the Knowledge­Based Economy, ed. WM
Cohen, SA Merrill. Washington, DC: National Academies Press
Green J, Scotchmer S. 1995. On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation.
Rand Journal of Economics 26, 20‐33
Griliches Z. 1990. Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of
Economic Literature 28: 1661‐707
Grimaldi R, Kenney M, Siegel DS, Wright M. 2011. 30 Years After Bayh‐Dole:
Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship. Special issue of Research Policy 40(8): 1045‐
1144
Guellec D, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2007. The economics of the
European patent system. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press
Haeussler C, Harhoff D, Mueller E. 2009. To be financed or not...‐ the role of
patents for venture capital financing. Mannheim, Germany: ZEW Discussion Paper No.
09‐003
Hall BH. 2009. Business and Financial Method Patents, Innovation, and Policy.
Scottish Journal of Political Economy 56: 443‐73
Hall BH. 2007. Patents and Patent Policy. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23: 1‐
20
41

Hall BH. 2000. Innovation and Market Value. In Barrell R, Mason G, O’Mahoney M
(eds.), Productivity, Innovation and Economic Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press
Hall BH. 1993. The value of intangible corporate assets: an empirical study of the
components of Tobin's Q. Berkeley, CA: University of California at Berkeley Dept. of
Economics Working Paper No. 93‐207. Available at
http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/44x548gq
Hall BH, Graham SJH, Harhoff D, Mowery DC. 2003. Prospects for improving U.S.
patent quality via postgrant opposition. Innovation Policy and the Economy 4: 115–43
Hall BH, Harhoff D. 2004. Post Grant Review Systems at the U.S. Patent Office –
Design Parameters and Expected Impact. Berkeley Law Technology Journal 19 (3): 989‐
1016
Hall BH, Helmers C. 2010. The role of patent protection in (clean/green)
technology transfer. Santa Clara High Technology Law Journal 26 (2010): 487‐532
Hall BH, Jaffe AB, Trajtenberg M. 2005. Market value and patent citations. Rand
Journal of Economics 36: 16–38
Hall BH, MacGarvie M. 2010. The private value of software patents. Research
Policy 39: 994‐1009
Hall BH, Ziedonis RH. 2001. The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of
patenting in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979–1995. Rand Journal of Economics 32:
101–28
Hall RE. 2001. The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation. American Economic
Review 91: 1185‐1202
Harhoff D. 2011. Deferred Patent Examination. München, Germany: Ludwig‐
Maximilians‐Universität München, manuscript
Harhoff D. 2009. Economic Cost­Benefit Analysis of a Unified and Integrated
European Patent Litigation System. Final Report to the European Commission. Available
at
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/indprop/docs/patent/studies/litigation_system_e
n.pdf
Harhoff D, Hoisl K, Reichl B, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2009a. Patent
validation at the country level ‐ The role of fees and translation costs. Research Policy
38(9): 1423‐1437

42

Harhoff D, Hoisl K, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2009b. Languages, Fees
and the Regional Scope of Patenting in Europe. Centre for Economic Policy Research,
London: CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7241
Harhoff D, Narin F, Scherer FM, Vopel K. 1999. Citation frequency and the value
of patented inventions. Review of Economics and Statistics 81: 511–515
Harhoff D, Reitzig M. 2004. Determinants of opposition against EPO patent
grants: The case of biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. International Journal of
Industrial Organization 22: 443‐480
Harhoff D, Scherer FM, Vopel K. 2003. Citations, Family Size, Opposition, and the
Value of Patent Rights. Research Policy 32: 1343‐1364
Harhoff D, Wagner S. 2009. The Duration of Patent Examination at the European
Patent Office. Management Science 55(12): 1969–1984
Haskel J, Giorgio Marrano M. 2007. How Much Does the UK Invest in Intangible
Assets? London, UK: CEPR Working Paper No. 6287
Hegde D, Sampat B. 2009. Examiner citations, applicant citations, and the private
value of patents. Economics Letters 105: 287‐89
Heller MA, Eisenberg RS. 1998. Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons
in biomedical research. Science 280: 698–701
Helmers C, Rogers M. 2011. Does Patenting Help High‐Tech Start‐Ups? Research
Policy 40:1016‐1027
Henderson R, Jaffe AB, Trajtenberg M. 1998. Universities as a Source of
Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting 1965‐1988. Review
of Economics and Statistics 80: 119‐27
Henkel J, Jell F. 2010. Patent Pending – Why Faster Isn’t Always Better. SSRN
Discussion Paper, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1738912
Henry M, Turner JL. 2006. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit's Impact
on Patent Litigation. Journal of Legal Studies 35: 85‐117
Hopenhayn H, Llobet G, Mitchell M. 2006. Rewarding Sequential Innovators:
Prizes, Patents, and Buyouts. Journal of Political Economy 114(6): 1041‐1068
Hunt RM. 2008. Business Method Patents and U.S. Financial Services.
Contemporary Economic Policy 28: 322‐52
Hunt RM. 2006. When do more patents reduce R&D? American Economic Review
96(2): 87‐91
43

Hunt RM. 2004. Patentability, Industry Structure, and Innovation. Journal of
Industrial Economics 52(3): 401‐425
Hsu DH, Ziedonis RH. 2008. Patents as Quality Signals for Entrepreneurial
Ventures. 2008 Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings. Available at
http://www.management.wharton.upenn.edu/hsu/inc/doc/papers/david‐hsu‐
signals.pdf
ICTSD and UNCTAD. 2003. Intellectual Property Rights, Implications for
Development Policy. Geneva, Switzerland: ICTSD and UNCTAD
James TC. 2007. Patent Protection in India: Policy Trends. Presentation to the
Conference on Intellectual Property Rights, Globalisation and Related Issues. Delhi,
India: Delhi School of Economics
JPO (Japanese Patent Office). 2006. A history of system of industrial property
rights. Online. Available at
http://www.deux.jpo.go.jp/cgi/search.cgi?query=history&lang=en&root=short,
accessed 19 December 2006
Jaffe AB, Lerner J, 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent
System is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ
Johnson DKN, Popp D. 2001. Forced Out of the Closet: The Impact of the
American Inventors Protection Act on the Timing of Patent Disclosure. RAND Journal of
Economics 34 (1): 96‐112
Judd KL. 1985. On the performance of patents. Econometrica 53: 567–95
Kanwar S, Evenson R. 2003. Does Intellectual Property Protection Spur Technical
Change? Oxford Economic Papers 55: 235‐264
Kitch EW. 1977. The nature and function of the patent system. Journal of Law and
Economics 20: 265–290
Klemperer P. 1990. How broad should the scope of patent protection be? Rand
Journal of Economics 21, 113–30
Komulainen M, Takalo T. 2008. Does State Street lead to Europe? A study of
financial exchange innovations. Bank of Finland Research Discussion Paper No.
22/2009, Helsinki, Finland
Ladas and Parry LLP. 2003. A brief history of the patent law of the United States.
Online. Available at http://www.ladas.com/Patents/USPatentHistory.html
44

Lanjouw J. 1998. Patent Value in the Shadow of Infringement: Simulation
Estimations of Patent Value. Review of Economic Studies 65: 671–710
Lanjouw JO, Lerner J. 1998. The Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights: A
Survey of the Empirical Literature. Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 49‐50: 223‐246
Lanjouw JO, Schankerman M. 2001. Characteristics of Patent litigation: a window
on competition. Rand Journal of Economics 32: 129–51
Lazaridis G, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2007. The rigour of the EPO
patentability criteria: An insight into the “induced withdrawals.” World Patent
Information 29(4): 317‐326
Lee WF, Cogswell LP. 2004. Understanding and addressing the unfair dilemma
created by the doctrine of willful patent infringement. Houston Law Review 41: 393–457
Lemley MA, Shapiro C. 2007. Patent holdup and royalty stacking. Texas Law
Review 85: 1991‐2049
Lerner J. 2008. The Litigation of Financial Innovations, Cambridge, MA: NBER
Working Paper No. w14324
Lerner J. 2002. Patent policy shifts and innovation over 150 years. American
Economic Review 92: 221–5
Lerner J. 2001. Where Does State Street Lead? A First Look at Finance Patents,
1971‐2000. Journal of Finance 57: 901‐30
Lerner J. 1995. Patenting in the shadow of competitors. Journal of Law and
Economics 38: 463–95
Lerner J, Tirole J. 2004. Efficient Patent Pools. American Economic Review 94(3):
691‐711
Lerner J, Zhu F. 2005. What is the Impact of Software Patent Shifts? Evidence
from Lotus v. Borland. International Journal of Industrial Organization 25: 511‐29
Levin RC, Klevorick AK, Nelson RR, Winter SG. 1987. Appropriating the returns
from industrial research and development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1987(3): 783–831
Machlup F, Penrose ET. 1950. The patent controversy in the nineteenth century.
The Journal of Economic History 10: 1–29
Madey v. Duke University. United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit,
2002. 307 F.3d 1351; 64 U.S.P.Q.2d (BNA) 1737
45

Mann RJ. 2005. Do Patents Facilitate Financing in the Software Industry? Texas
Law Review 83: 961‐1030
Mann RJ, Sager TW. 2007. Patents, Venture Capital, and Software Startups.
Research Policy 36: 193‐208
Mansfield E. 1986. Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study. Management
Science 32(2): 173‐181
Marco A, Prieger JE. 2009. Congestion Pricing for Patent Applications. SSRN
Discussion Paper, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1443470
Maskus KE. 2004. Encouraging International Technology Transfer. Geneva,
Switzerland: ICTSD and UNCTAD Issue Paper No. 7
Maurer SM, Scotchmer S. 2006. Profit Neutrality in Licensing: The Boundary
between Antitrust Law and Patent Law. American Law and Economics Review 8: 476‐
522
Mazzoleni R, Nelson RR. 1998. The benefits and costs of strong patent protection.
a contribution to the current debate. Research Policy 27: 273–284
McGinley C. 2008. Taking the heat out of the global patent system. Intellectual
Asset Management 31: 24‐29
Menell PS. 2000. Intellectual property: General theories. Encyclopedia of Law and
Economics 2: 129–186
Merrill SA, Levin RC, Myers MB. 2004. A patent system for the 21st century.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press
Moore KA. 2004. Empirical statistics on willful patent infringement. Federal
Circuit Bar Journal 14: 227–237
Moore KA. 2000. Judges, Juries, and patent cases – an empirical peek inside the
black box. Michigan Law Review 99(281): 365–409
Moser P. 2011. Innovation Without Patents ‐ Evidence from the Word Fairs.
Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=930241
Moser P. 2005. How do patent laws influence innovation? Evidence from
nineteenth‐century world fairs. American Economic Review 95: 1214–36
Mowery DC, Nelson RR, Sampat BN, Ziedonis AA. 2004. Ivory Tower and
Industrial Innovation: University­Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the Bayh­
Dole Act. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA
46

Mowery DC, Ziedonis AA. 2002. Academic Patent Quality and Quantity before and
after the Bayh‐Dole Act in the United States. Research Policy 31: 399‐418
Munari F, Toschi L. 2007. How good are VCs at valuing technology? An analysis of
patenting and VC investments in nanotechnology. Riunione Scientifica Annuale Aiig: 1‐23
Murmann JP. 2003. Knowledge and Competitive Advantage – The Coevolution of
Firms, Technologies and National Institutions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press
Murray F, Stern S. 2007. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free
flow of scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti‐commons hypothesis" Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization 63(4): 648‐687
Nagaoka S, Aoki R. 2007. Economic Analysis of Patent Law Exemption for
Research on a Patented Innovation. Tokyo, Japan: IIR Working Paper, Hitotsubashi
University
Nagaoka S, Walsh JP. 2009. Commercialization and other uses of patents in Japan
and the US: Major findings from the RIETI‐Georgia Tech inventor survey. Tokyo, Japan:
RIETI Discussion Paper
O'Donoghue T. 1998. A Patentability Requirement for Sequential Innovation.
Rand Journal of Economics 29(4): 654‐679
O'Donoghue T, Scotchmer S, Thisse J‐F. 1998. Patent Breadth, Patent Life, and the
Pace of Technological Progress. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 7(1): 1‐32
Owen‐Smith J, Powell WW. 2001. To Patent or Not: Faculty Decisions and
Institutional Success at Technology Transfer. Journal of Technology Transfer 26: 99‐114
Pakes A. 1986. Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding
European Patent Stocks. Econometrica 54: 755—784
Pakes A, Schankerman M. 1984. The rate of obsolescence of patents, research
gestation lags, and the private rate of return to research resources. In R&D, Patents, and
Productivity, Griliches Z (ed), pp. 73‐88. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press
Park WG, Ginarte, JC. 1997. Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Growth.
Contemporary Economic Policy XV, 51‐61
Penrose ET. 1951. The Economics of the International Patent System. Johns
Hopkins Press
Powers MD, Carlson SC. 2001. The evolution and impact of the doctrine of willful
patent infringement. Syracuse Law Review 51: 53
47

Prager FD. 1946. Brunelleschi’s Patent. Journal of the Patent Office Society 28(2):
109‐135
Qian Y. 2007. Do Additional National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation
in a Global Patenting Environment? Review of Economics and Statistics 89: 436‐453
Rai A, Allison JR, Sampat BN. 2009. University Software Ownership and
Litigation: A first examination. North Carolina Law Review 87: 1519‐70
Reinganum JF. 1989. The Timing of innovation: research, development, and
diffusion. In Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 1, ed. R. Schmalensee and R. D.
Willig. Amsterdam: North‐Holland
Reitzig M, Henkel J, Heath C. 2007. On sharks, trolls and their patent prey:
Unrealistic damage awards and firms' strategies of "being infringed". Research Policy
36(1): 134‐154
Rockett K. 2010. Property rights and invention. In Hall, B. H., and N. Rosenberg,
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume I, Chapter 7. Amsterdam and New
York: Elsevier
Roin B. 2007. The Disclosure Function of the Patent System: or Lack Thereof.
Harvard Law Review 118: 2007–2028
Sakakibara M, Branstetter L. 2001. Do stronger patents induce more innovation?
Evidence from the 1988 Japanese patent law reforms. Rand Journal of Economics 32, 77–
100
Sampat BN, Mowery DC, Ziedonis AA. 2003. Changes in University Patent Quality
after the Bayh‐Dole Act: A Re‐examination. International Journal of Industrial
Organization 21: 1371‐1390
Sampat B, Ziedonis A. 2005. Patent Citations and the Economic Value of Patents.
In Handbook of Quantitative Science and Technology Research, pp. 277‐298
Sanders BS, Rossman J, Harris LJ. 1958. The Economic Impact of Patents. Patent,
Trademark, and Copyright Journal of Research 2: 340‐362
Schankerman M, Pakes A. 1986. Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in
European Countries During the Post‐1950 Period. Economic Journal 96: 1052‐76
Schankerman M, Scotchmer S. 2001. Damages and Injunctions in the Protection
of Proprietary Research Tools. Rand Journal of Economics 32(1): 199‐220
Scherer FM. 2010. A Half Century of Research on Patent Economics. WIPO
Journal 2 (1): 20‐27
48

Scherer FM. 2002. The economics of human gene patents. Academic Medicine 77:
1348–1367
Scherer FM. 1998. The size distribution of profits from innovation. Annales
d'Economie et de Statistique 49/50: 495‐516
Scherer FM. 1967. Research and development resource allocation under rivalry.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 81: 359‐394
Scotchmer S. 2005. Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Scotchmer S. 1999. On the optimality of the patent renewal system. RAND Journal
of Economics 30(2): 181‐196
Scotchmer S. 1991. Standing on the shoulders of giants. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 5(1), 29–41
Scotchmer S, Green J. 1990. Novelty and disclosure in patent law. Rand Journal of
Economics 21: 131–146
Serrano CJ. 2010. The dynamics of the transfer and renewal of patents. RAND
Journal of Economics 41(4): 686‐708
Seymore SB. 2010. The Teaching Function of Patents. Notre Dame Law Review 85
(2): 621–669
Shang R. 2009. Inter Partes Reexamination and Improving Patent Quality.
Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 7: 185‐209
Shapiro C. 2010. Injunctions, Hold‐Up, and Patent Royalties. American Law and
Economics Review 12(2): 280‐318
Shapiro C. 2007. Prior User Rights. American Economic Review 96(2): 92‐96
Shapiro C. 2003. Antitrust limits to patent settlements. RAND Journal of
Economics 34: 391‐411
Shapiro C. 2001. Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
Standard‐Setting. Innovation Policy and the Economy 1: 119‐150
Sichelman T, Graham SJH. 2010. Patenting by Entrepreneurs: An Empirical Study.
Mich. Telecomm. Tech. L. Rev. 17: 111‐180
Silverberg G, Verspagen B. 2007. The size distribution of innovations revisited:
An application of extreme value statistics to citation and value measures of patent
significance. Journal of Econometrics 139: 318‐39

49

Sterne RG, Garrett PE, Wood TA. 2004. The written description requirement.
Akron Law Review 37: 231–241
Thomas JR. 2010. Deferred Examination of Patent Applications: Implications for
Innovation Policy. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service Report 7‐5700
Thompson NC, Mowery DC, Ziedonis AA. 2011. Materials Transfer Agreements
(MTAs), Licenses, and the Flow of Scientific Knowledge. UC Berkeley and University of
Oregon, manuscript
Thursby JG, Fuller A, Thursby MC. 2007. US Faculty Patenting: Inside and Outside
the University. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. w13256
Thursby JG, Thursby MC. 2009. University Licensing: Harnessing or Tarnishing
Faculty Research. Innovation Policy and the Economy 10: 159‐189
Thursby JG, Thursby MC. 2002. Who Is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of
Growth in University Licensing. Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and
Technology Transfer, Management Science 48 (1): 90‐104
Thursby MC, Thursby JG. 2007. Are There Real Effects of Licensing on Academic
Research? A life cycle view. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 63(4):
Toffel MW. 2004. Strategic management of product recovery. California
Management Review 46: 120–141
Toivanen O, Stoneman PL, Bosworth D. 2002. Innovation and the Market Value of
UK Firms, 1989 ‐ 1995. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 64: 39‐62
Trajtenberg M. 1990. A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citation and the Value of
Innovations. Rand Journal of Economics 21: 172‐87
USPTO (United States Patent and Trademark Office). 2010. United States Patent
and Trademark Office Performance and Accountability Report Fiscal Year 2010.
Available at http://www.uspto.gov/about/stratplan/ar/index.jsp
USPTO (United States Patent and Trademark Office). 2011. Patents.
http://www.uspto.gov/main/patents.htm
Wagner S. 2008. Business Method Patents in Europe and their Strategic Use ‐
Evidence from Franking Device Manufacturers. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 17: 173‐94
Walsh JP, Arora A, Cohen WM. 2003. Effects of Research Tool Patenting and
Licensing on Biomedical Innovation. In The Patent System in the Knowledge­Based
Economy, ed. WM Cohen, SA Merrill. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, pp.
285‐340
50

Williams HL. 2010. Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from
the Human Genome. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. w16213
WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization). 2007. Patent statistics,
available at http://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/, accessed 3 December
2007
Wright BD. 1983. The economics of invention incentives: patents, prizes, and
research contracts. American Economic Review 73: 691–707
Yamaguchi I, Nagaoka S. 2008. Complementary Reforms of Patent Examination
Request System in Japan. Tokyo, Japan: Hitotsubashi University Hermes‐IR Technical
Report No. 2008‐12
Ziedonis RH. 2004. Don’t fence me in: fragmented markets for technology and
the patent acquisition strategies of firms. Management Science 50: 804–820

51

