                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DE GUSTIBUS NON EST TAXANDUM:
        HETEROGENEITY IN PREFERENCES AND OPTIMAL REDISTRIBUTION

                                       Benjamin B. Lockwood
                                        Matthew C. Weinzierl

                                        Working Paper 17784
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17784


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




We are grateful to Robert Barro, Rafael di Tella, Alex Gelber, Caroline Hoxby, Louis Kaplow, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, Greg Mankiw, David Moss, Eric Nelson, Julio Rotemberg, Dan
Shoag, Aleh Tsyvinski, Glen Weyl, Danny Yagan, anonymous referees and seminar participants at
Harvard and Michigan for helpful comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Benjamin B. Lockwood and Matthew C. Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
De Gustibus non est Taxandum: Heterogeneity in Preferences and Optimal Redistribution
Benjamin B. Lockwood and Matthew C. Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 17784
January 2012, Revised April 2014
JEL No. H2,H21

                                             ABSTRACT

The prominent but unproven intuition that preference heterogeneity reduces re-distribution in a standard
optimal tax model is shown to hold under the plausible condition that the distribution of preferences
for consumption relative to leisure rises, in terms of first-order stochastic dominance, with income.
Given mainstream functional form assumptions on utility and the distributions of ability and preferences,
a simple statistic for the effect of preference heterogeneity on marginal tax rates is derived. Numerical
simulations and suggestive empirical evidence demonstrate the link between this potentially measurable
statistic and the quantitative implications of preference heterogeneity for policy.


Benjamin B. Lockwood
Littauer Center, Room 200
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
lockwood@fas.harvard.edu

Matthew C. Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu
Introduction
In the early years of modern optimal tax research, theorists assumed all individuals have the
same preferences over consumption and leisure. James A. Mirrlees’s (1971) second simpli-
fying assumption was that "Di¤erences in tastes...are ignored. These raise rather di¤erent
kinds of problems, and it is natural to assume them away." This simpli…cation freed Mirrlees
to assume that the only way in which people di¤er is in their ability to earn income.1 His
powerful approach–complete with its assumption of preference homogeneity–now dominates
theoretical work on tax design.
       The omission of this form of preference heterogeneity has cast a shadow over optimal
tax research from the beginning, however, both because di¤erences in these preferences are
an evident feature of reality and because omitting them is far from innocuous in Mirrlees’s
setting. Kahneman (2011) reports that such preference di¤erences are widespread among
young adults and correlate with outcomes later in life. Data shown in Section 3 of this paper,
from the World Values Survey and General Social Survey, reveal that respondents report a
wide range of views toward the value of material possessions. More anecdotally, people
choose a wide range of consumption-leisure bundles, even conditional on apparent budget
constraints. Importantly, these preferences over consumption and leisure are observationally
equivalent to the income-earning ability at the heart of the Mirrlees approach. That is, an
individual may earn a low income, and respond to taxes the way he does, either because
he has low ability or because he has a weak relative preference for consumption. As has
long been recognized, for instance in the formal literature by Agnar Sandmo (1993), the
possibility of these two cases presents a challenge for optimal tax design. If an individual
is to be compensated for having low ability but held responsible for his preferences, in the
terms of Marc Fleurbaey and Francois Maniquet (2004), society will want to redistribute
income to a low earner in the …rst case but not in the second.
       Complicating matters is that the e¤ect of preference heterogeneity on optimal redistribu-
   1
     Mirrlees was not the …rst to adopt this simpli…cation. Arthur Pigou (1928) wrote, in a classic text:
"Of course, in so far as tastes and temperaments di¤er, allowance ought, in strictness, to be made for this
fact...But, since it is impossible in practice to take account of variations between di¤erent people’s capacity
for enjoyment, this consideration must be ignored, and the assumption made, for want of a better, that
temperamentally all taxpayers are alike."



                                                      2
tion is ambiguous. While critics of redistribution have long stressed that income may signal
preferences rather than ability2 , in principle adding preference heterogeneity to the model
may increase optimal redistribution. Intuitively, if preferences for consumption relative to
leisure are lower among those with high incomes, attributing income variation to ability
alone will understate the income-earning abilities of high earners and imply an optimal ex-
tent of redistribution that is too small. This theoretical ambiguity has been left unresolved
in general settings by previous analyses.3 As Louis Kaplow (2008) notes, "This di¢ culty is
not merely technical; many have suspected that the nature of the optimum may change in
important ways...Although such conjectures have been informally expressed, the issue has
received little sustained attention."
       In this paper, we derive two novel results that clarify preference heterogeneity’s e¤ects
on the optimal extent of redistribution.
       First, we generalize a standard optimal tax model to compare the extent of redistribution
under an optimal policy in which preference heterogeneity is allowed to exist to that under
the Mirrleesian benchmark policy in which all heterogeneity is assumed to be in ability.
Our model fully nests the conventional model. We show that the prominent but unproven
intuition that heterogeneity in preferences over consumption and leisure lowers optimal re-
distribution is incomplete but correct under a speci…c, plausible condition. In particular, if
the distribution of the relative preference for consumption over leisure rises with income (in
   2
      See Robert Nozick (1974), "Why should we treat the man whose happiness requires certain material
goods or services di¤erently from the man whose preferences and desires make such goods unnecessary for
his happiness?" Or, Milton Friedman (1962), "Given individuals whom we are prepared to regard as alike in
ability and initial resources, if some have a greater taste for leisure and others for marketable goods, inequality
of return through the market is necessary to achieve equality of total return or equality of treatment."
    3
      Mirrlees (1976, 1986) addressed the general case but obtained inconclusive results. Some prior work
adopts specialized settings, such as Sandmo’s (1993) insightful analysis with only preference (not ability)
heterogeneity; Robin Boadway, Maurice Marchand, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria del Mar Racionero’s (2002)
results with two preference types, two ability levels, and quasilinear utility; and Fleurbaey and Maniquet’s
(2006) analysis with a speci…c normative approach. Other work has focused on numerical simulations, such
as Ritva Tarkiainen and Matti Tuomala (2004) or Kenneth L. Judd and Che-Lin Su (2006), who explain the
computational complexities associated with multiple dimensions of heterogeneity. Two other recent papers
focus on related but somewhat di¤erent questions. Narayana Kocherlakota and Christopher Phelan (2009)
focus on the policy implications of uncertainty over the relationship between individuals’ preferences and
another, welfare-relevant, dimension of heterogeneity such as wealth. They argue that such uncertainty causes
a planner using a maximin objective to avoid redistributive policy that is optimal when no such uncertainty is
present. Paul Beaudry, Charles Blackorby, and Dezso Szalay (2009) indirectly address preference di¤erences
by including in their optimal tax analysis di¤erences in productivity of market and non-market labor e¤ort.
They show that the optimal redistributive policy makes transfers to the poor conditional on work.


                                                        3
terms of …rst-order stochastic dominance), then optimal marginal tax rates are lower at all
incomes, and redistribution to the lowest earner is less, than in the Mirrleesian case. We
show this result analytically for the case of quasilinear utility studied in Diamond (1998),
and we show through numerical simulations that it holds for more general utility functions
with income e¤ects. As a consequence, the conventional Mirrleesian assumption of prefer-
ence homogeneity ought not to be seen as neutral with respect to determining the optimal
extent of redistribution.
      Second, we derive a simple statistic for the e¤ect of heterogeneity in preferences on opti-
mal marginal tax rates assuming plausible functional forms for ability and the distributions
of ability and preferences. We demonstrate the link between this statistic and the quantita-
tive implications of preference heterogeneity for optimal policy using numerical simulations
calibrated to the U.S. economy. We also generate empirical estimates of this statistic for
OECD countries and U.S. states and use them to show suggestive evidence that existing
policy variation appears to be consistent with our theoretical …ndings. Though this simple
statistic is not observable through conventional economic variables, our …ndings suggest it
is a valuable target for future empirical work.
      We obtain our novel analytical results by combining two recent innovations in the litera-
ture with a third innovation of our own. First, in a setting with a continuum of agents and
standard utility functions, Philippe Choné and Guy Laroque (2010) show how heterogeneity
in the opportunity cost of work can justify negative marginal tax rates at low incomes. They
achieve this important …nding in part by collapsing multiple dimensions of heterogeneity
into a single composite characteristic that determines behavior. This technique, similar to
that used by Craig Brett and John Weymark (2003), avoids the technical obstacle of multi-
dimensional screening that had limited much of the prior work on preference heterogeneity.4
We adopt an approach akin to Choné and Laroque’s in order to reduce to a single dimen-
sion the heterogeneity driving individual behavior. While this technique cannot help with
all conceivable dimensions of heterogeneity,5 it is well-suited for the preferences over con-
  4
     Casey Rothschild and Florian Scheuer (2013) use a di¤erent method to avoid the technical problems
with multi-dimensional income-earning ability.
   5
     For example, time discounting as in Mikhail Golosov, Maxim Troshkin, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Matthew
Weinzierl (2013) or Peter Diamond and Johannes Spinnewijn (2011).



                                                  4
sumption and leisure studied in this paper. Second, we adopt the moral reasoning behind
the "second fairness requirement" in the prominent work of Marc Fleurbaey and Francois
Maniquet (2006), which states that "the laisser-faire (this is, the absence of redistribution)
should be the social optimum in the hypothetical case when all agents have equal earning
abilities" even if they have di¤erent preferences.6 In other words, we adopt the normative
perspective that preferences over consumption and leisure do not justify redistribution by
themselves. Though speci…c, this interpretation is the natural one if preferences are thought
of as tastes as opposed to, for example, needs (see Kaplow 2008 for a discussion). Third, and
crucially, we introduce the technique of studying how optimal policy changes when a given
distribution of income is attributed to more than one source of heterogeneity, rather than
how optimal policy changes when ability is augmented with additional sources of hetero-
geneity that change the distribution of income. This shift makes possible our progress over
prior results. It has the additional virtue of formulating the problem in a way resembling
that faced by policy makers, who must decide the appropriate extent of redistribution in the
face of an observable income distribution.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents the generalized Mirrleesian optimal tax
model that incorporates preference heterogeneity. Section 2 derives the analytical results
on optimal redistribution with quasilinear utility. Section 3 derives a simple statistic for
marginal tax rates for a familiar set of functional form assumptions and uses it to quantify
the potential impact of preference heterogeneity on optimal policy through both numerical
simulations and empirical evidence. The numerical simulations also demonstrate the robust-
ness of the analytical …ndings from Section 2 to the use of a utility function that includes
income e¤ects. Section 4 provides a concluding discussion.
   6
    Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) impose informational constraints on the social planner which rule out
conventional utilitarian social welfare functions and which, in combination with particular fairness require-
ments on allocations, imply the use of a maximin social welfare function. They conclude that the optimal
income tax should maximize the subsidies to the working poor: that is, it should be quite redistributive
to those with low ability but who exert labor e¤ort. Our analysis can be seen as a complement to theirs,
studying the same type of preference heterogeneity in a setting closer to the more conventional Mirrleesian
approach.




                                                     5
1          A generalized model with preference heterogeneity
Our model closely follows (and fully nests) the conventional Mirrleesian setup in which a
social planner designs taxes to maximize social welfare and a population of heterogeneous
individuals choose labor e¤ort, taking the tax system as given, to maximize their individual
utilities.


1.1         Individuals

A set of individuals of measure one, indexed by i, di¤er in both their abilities to convert labor
e¤ort into earned income and, in a departure from the standard approach, their preferences
for consumption relative to leisure. Individual i derives utility from consumption and leisure
(equivalently, disutility from labor e¤ort) according to the following function:

                                                                     li
                                          Ui (ci ; li ) = U   ci ;        ;                                   (1)
                                                                      i


where ci          0 denotes consumption, li             0 denotes labor e¤ort, and                i   > 0 denotes
preferences–all for individual i. We assume the standard conditions on the utility func-
tion U : R2 0 ! R        0   , namely Uc > 0, Ucc < 0, Ul < 0, Ull < 0. As in the conventional
model, labor e¤ort for individual i is calculated as li = yi =wi ; where yi                     0 denotes earned
income and wi         0 denotes income-earning ability.7
         Two formal di¤erences capture the distinction between the conventional model and this
generalization of it. First, individual type is now de…ned by a duple f i ; wi g, where the
preference parameter         i   de‡ates the quantity of labor supplied. In the conventional model,
 i   = 1 for all i 2 f1; : : : ; Ig: Here, “experienced labor” li =           i   denotes the relative preference-
adjusted amount of labor e¤ort by individual i. Second, the utility function in (1) is type-
speci…c, because utility as a function of consumption and labor e¤ort now depends on the
individual’s preference parameter           i.   In the conventional setup, heterogeneity enters only
     7
    As expression (1) makes clear, one could, as in the standard approach, include both components of the
heterogeneity in uni…ed type into the individual’s budget constraint. Instead, our approach treats the two
components of uni…ed type di¤erently, with preference heterogeneity a¤ecting the utility function directly.
This facilitates an intuitive understanding of why that component may not justify redistribution, in contrast
to di¤erences in ability that a¤ect individuals’budget constraints.



                                                        6
through the budget constraint and utility functions are homogeneous.
       This formalization of preferences allows us to collapse the two dimensions of individual
heterogeneity into a single “uni…ed type” ni =                i wi ,   such that any joint distribution of
preferences and ability       ( ; w) generates a univariate distribution of uni…ed type F (n) with
support over the range [n0 ; 1). This uni…ed type serves as a one-dimensional measure of
heterogeneity that determines i’s observable behavior. It allows us to analyze optimal policy
exactly as in the conventional approach, where the required technical conditions (especially
the single-crossing property) are now assumed to hold with respect to uni…ed type rather than
ability.8 This compression of multiple dimensions of heterogeneity into one is a particularly
simple example of the technique used in Choné and Laroque (2010).
       This uni…cation of types also provides a straightforward way to formalize the social
planner’s response to the normative complications raised by preference heterogeneity.9 We
now turn to the planner’s problem.


1.2       Social Planner

The social planner maximizes social welfare by specifying taxes as a di¤erentiable function
of income, denoted T (y) : R          0   ! R, where income is a function of uni…ed type n > 0.
Social welfare W is the integral of the product of a function G(n) and scalar weights                        n.

The function G(n) represents the social value of the utility of an individual of type n, and we
de…ne g (n) = dG(n)=dc(n) as the marginal social value of consumption for that individual.10
We write G(n) and g(n) as functions of n to maximize the generality of the model; this need
not imply that they depend on agents’ types directly. We assume g(n) decreases in n,
as is standard, providing a motive for redistribution from high types to low. To manage
   8
     A related observation is that the set of Pareto-e¢ cient allocations is identical under the conventional
model and our model when the distribution of abilities in the conventional model is the same as that of the
uni…ed types in our model. When choosing the optimal allocation within the Pareto-e¢ cient set, however,
any normative distinction between ability and uni…ed type becomes important.
   9
     Though preferences and ability are observationally equivalent and unobservable, we believe there is a
meaningful positive, as well as normative, distinction between them. Unobservability of preferences is public,
not private; that is, it would not be incentive compatible to reveal one’s true preferences to the planner. That
preferences are privately understood as di¤erent from ability, and that aggregate information on preference
heterogeneity might be useful, is suggested by evidence from the opinion surveys discussed in Section 3.2.
  10
     Familiar speci…cations of these functions in conventional models are, for example, G(n) = U (n) and
g(n) = Uc (n) for a utilitarian planner or G(n) = G(U (n)) and g(n) = G0 (U (n))Uc (n) with G00 (U (n)) < 0
for a more redistributive planner.

                                                       7
the addition of preference heterogeneity, the G(n) functions are weighted by type-speci…c
adjustment factors      n.   Below, we describe how the values of               n   are chosen.
   Maximization is subject to standard feasibility and incentive compatibility constraints.
Formally, the planner’s problem is:

Problem 1 Planner’s Problem

                                                    Z1
                                     max W =              n G (n) f   (n) dn;                                  (2)
                                     T (y)
                                                    n=0


where    n     0 for all i 2 f1; : : : ; Ig are weights on the social welfare values of individual
utilities, subject to feasibility:

                                         Z1
                                              T (y (n)) f (n) dn = 0                                           (3)
                                       n=0


and incentive compatibility:

                                                     h                 y i
                               y (n) = arg max U y             T (y) ;     8n:                                 (4)
                                                y                      n


   A tax function is feasible and incentive compatible if it satis…es conditions (3) and (4).
   This social planner’s problem is formally similar to that in a conventional analysis with
a generalized utilitarian planner, but the weights f             ng    play a novel role in this setting. For
clarity, we will call each     n   the "scaling factor" for uni…ed type n. Given a vector of such
scaling factors, or simply a “scaling”, the planner values marginal consumption for type m
relative to that for another type n as follows:

                                             @W=@cm           n g(n)
                                                    =                  :
                                             @W=@cn           m g(m)

Naturally, these relative valuations have substantial e¤ects on optimal policy.
   As the scaling f     ng   is empirically unidenti…ed, its selection is a normative decision. In
a conventional model, type is fully determined by ability, and the choice of                      i   is relatively
straightforward. In Saez (2001), for example, the planner simply sets                      n   = 1 for all n. In

                                                          8
this model, however, the set of individuals of any given uni…ed type n may vary in the two
underlying sources of heterogeneity, namely preferences                 and ability w. If these sources of
heterogeneity have di¤erent normative signi…cance for the planner, the planner’s values for
the scaling f    ng   will be a¤ected. Without loss of generality, we will restrict our consideration
to scalings such that E[       n]   = 1, since multiplying all values of g (n) by a common factor
does not a¤ect the optimal policy. Pinning down the appropriate values for this scaling has
been an obstacle to de…nitive results on preference heterogeneity and optimal redistribution.
Fortunately, work by Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) has found a way around that obstacle.
       We follow Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) in imposing a normative requirement that
we label preference neutrality. De…ning preference neutrality requires a preliminary step.
Consider the laissez-faire tax regime, in which individuals retain all the earnings they gen-
erate.11 In that setting, individual i maximizes utility in (1) subject to the laissez-faire
budget constraint ci = yi . Let yiLF                0 denote individual i’s choice in this setting. Then,
yiLF = y LF ( i wi ) is the implicit function de…ned by the agent’s …rst-order condition:


                                     LF     y LF      Ul y LF ; y LF =( i wi )
                             Uc y         ;         +                          = 0;
                                             i wi                i wi

where Uc and Ul denote the partial derivatives of utility with respect to consumption and
labor e¤ort. Our goal is to select a scaling such that this tax regime is optimal when ability
is uniform, that is, when all income inequalities arise from di¤erences in preferences. Let
g LF (n) denote the marginal social value of consumption for n under this tax regime.12
       Using this information, we de…ne preference neutrality as follows.

De…nition 1 The scaling f           mg     satis…es "preference neutrality" if and only if

                                          LF
                                    m E[g    ( i w)j i wi = m]
                                          LF
                                                                  = 1; 8m; n;                          (5)
                                    n E[g    ( j w)j j wj = n]

where w = E [wi ], the mean wage in the economy.13
  11
      The laissez-faire is a hypothetical regime, and thus unobservable, but that does not prevent us from
deriving the analytical or empirical results in this paper.
   12
      The superscript LF is necessary, as g( ) may be endogenous to the tax regime in general. That is,
unlike the g ( ) terms in most cases, g LF ( ) is independent of the i values because the tax system in the
laissez-faire is …xed (i.e., there is no taxation).
   13
      As demonstrated in the appendix, for a common class of examples the choice w is irrelevant.

                                                          9
       In words, preference neutrality adjusts the marginal social weights                  n    so that inequalities
that would arise due to preferences if all agents had a common ability do not merit redistri-
bution.14 In the conventional Mirrlees case of homogeneous preferences,                            i   = 1 for all i. In
                                LF (w)
                             mg
that case, (5) becomes       ng
                                LF (w)    = 1, implying      m    =        n,   and the standard Mirrlees results
                                                                                                 LF (m)
                                                                                           mg
hold. On the other hand, if ability is homogenous, then (5) becomes                         ng
                                                                                                 LF (n)   = 1, implying
the laissez-faire allocation is optimal. Since g LF (n) decreases with n, g LF ( w) is decreasing
in , and therefore if the conditional distribution F ( i j i wi = m) …rst-order stochastically
dominates F ( i j i wi = n) whenever m > n (intuitively, if the distribution of preferences is
“rising”with incomes) then         n     is rising with n.
       With the objective in (2), condition (5) means that under preference neutrality, preference
heterogeneity alone does not justify redistribution. That idea has been understood for some
time, and is clearly stated in (for example) Sandmo (1993), but reliable implications of it
for optimal policy have been elusive. We now turn to the task of deriving the implications
of allowing this type of preference heterogeneity into a standard optimal tax model.



2        A su¢ cient condition for preference heterogeneity to
         reduce redistribution
In this section, we compare the tax policies that solve the planner’s problem of Section 1 un-
der two possible assumptions about the sources of heterogeneity. The benchmark assumption
is that the distribution of uni…ed types F (n) is produced by a degenerate joint distribution
of preferences and ability in which           i   = 1 and ni = wi , for all i 2 f1; : : : ; Ig. In contrast,
the alternative assumption studied in this paper allows some heterogeneity in income to be
attributed to heterogeneous preferences, so that              i   6=   j   for some types i; j.
       We compare policies along two dimensions–progressivity and redistribution, which we
formally de…ne as follows.
  14
    The preference-neutral marginal social weights depend on the joint distribution of abilities and pref-
erences. This endogeneity is due to our assumption that i is unobservable, so that the i terms involve
a conditional expectation over the uni…ed type distribution. If preferences were observable, these social
marginal weights would depend only on each individual’s allocation, just as in the standard model.




                                                        10
De…nition 2 Consider two feasible and incentive compatible, Pareto e¢ cient income tax
functions T (y) : R      0   ! R and T^ (y) : R    0   ! R, resulting in endogenous income distribu-
tions y(n) and y^(n).

         T (y) is "less progressive" than T^ (y) if marginal tax rates under T (y) are less than
         those under T^ (y) for all agents, that is if T 0 (y(n)) < T^0 (^
                                                                         y (n)) for all n;

         T (y) is "less redistributive" than T^ (y) if the net tax on the lowest type agent under
         T (y) is greater than that under T^ (y), that is if T (y(n0 )) > T^ (^
                                                                              y (n0 )).


       Given these de…nitions, we can show a useful and intuitive lemma, proven in the Appen-
dix.

Lemma 1 If the tax function T (y) is less progressive than the tax function T^ (y), then T (y)
is less redistributive than T^ (y).

       To analyze the implications of preference heterogeneity for optimal tax policy, we use
Diamond’s (1998) well-known expression for optimal marginal tax rates when agent utility
is quasilinear in consumption: that is when


                                 U (c (n) ; y (n) =n) = c(n) + v(y(n)=n);                                 (6)


with v 0 (l) < 0; v 00 (l) < 0: This case is particularly tractable, and it allows us to prove a
sharp result that we formalize in the following proposition.15 We have been unable to extend
this result to the case of nonzero income e¤ects of tax changes— that is, when individuals’
labor supply decisions are a¤ected by changes to marginal tax rates on incomes lower than
their own.16 We therefore rely on numerical simulations to con…rm that the proposition’s
…ndings extend to that more general case.
  15
     Technically, the absence of income e¤ects means a change in the lump sum grant does not induce a change
in labor supply, facilitating the proof. As Diamond notes, “In the presence of distorting taxes, income e¤ects
imply that lump-sum taxes have e¢ ciency e¤ects since they change distorted labor supply decisions.”
  16
     Analysis toward su¢ cient conditions for the case of income e¤ects is available from the authors.




                                                       11
       Incorporating our preference neutral scaling into Diamond’s (1998) condition for the
optimal marginal income tax rate yields
                                                    Z    1
                         T 0 (y(n))    1+"                        (m)g(m)
                              0
                                    =                        1                  dF (m);                     (7)
                        1 T (y(n))    "nf (n)        n


where " denotes the elasticity of taxable income, and                denotes the shadow value of public
funds. In the conventional approach, n represents ability; here we interpret n as uni…ed type
and use the preference neutral scaling factors               (n) to adjust for preference heterogeneity.
Note that we could incorporate the           n   weights into the G(n) functions. By separating them
out, however, we can use the        n   terms to absorb any e¤ects of preference heterogeneity on the
planner’s objective. In particular, in this section we assume the g(n) values are independent
of the     n   values.17 This independence is useful in proving the following proposition.

Proposition 1 Let T (y) solve the planner’s problem in (2) through (4) in the presence of
preference heterogeneity, and let T^ (y) solve this problem with               i   = 1; 8i. If F ( jyi ) sto-
chastically dominates F ( jyj ) whenever yi > yj , and if individual utility takes the quasilinear
form in (6), then T (y) is less progressive and less redistributive than T^ (y).

Proof.

R 1 The planner values consumption for uni…ed type n at (n)g(n). At the optimum, =
 0
     (m)g(m)dF (m), since perturbing the demogrant must have no …rst-order e¤ect on social
welfare. If the true distribution of preferences is heterogeneous such that F ( jyi ) …rst-order
stochastically dominates F ( jyj ) whenever yi > yj , then since y is increasing with uni…ed
type n, n is increasing in n. Under the Mirrlees benchmark, tastes are mistakenly assumed
to be constant, with scaling factors equal to one. Let ~ (n) = n 1 denote the di¤erence
between the true preference neutral scaling n and the Mirrlees benchmark; note ~ (n) is
increasing in n and E[~ (n)] = 0. Then we can let 2 [0; 1] parameterize the continuous
  17
     The simplest form for G(n) yielding such independence is to set G(n) equal to scalars that depend on
type n only, a frequently-used approach (see Salanié 2011, for a textbook treatment). Given quasilinear
utility, in this case the terms g(n) also depend only on type n; and g 0 (n) < 0 is assumed. As long as these
weights decline so that incentive constraints bind in the typical way, this setting yields results comparable to
models with strictly concave social marginal utility of consumption, such as the standard utilitarian setup.
A more nuanced form for G(n) also yielding such independence is as follows. De…ne h(n) as the di¤erence
between the utility levels of individual n under the optimal policy (i.e., given values for the n that adjust
for preference heterogeneity) and under the optimal policy given the conventional values n = 1 for all n:
Then de…ne G (n) = G(U (n) h(n)), which we assume to be concave. By construction, U (n) h(n) obtains
the same value for di¤erent values of n . Given quasilinear utility, g(n) = G0 (U (n) h (n)) is therefore
independent of n , and g 0 (n) < 0.


                                                        12
transformation from the Mirrlees benchmark to the true optimum:
                                               R1
             T 0 (y(n))     1+"                   (1 + ~ (m))g(m)dF (m)
                  0
                        =           1 F (n) Rn1                                                            ;         (8)
            1 T (y(n))    "nf (n)               0
                                                  (1 + ~ (m))g(m)dF (m)

We wish to sign the derivative of this expression with respect to — this will indicate the
directional impact on marginal tax rates of perturbing the Mirrlees benchmark toward the
true optimum under preference heterogeneity. By construction, g(n) does not depend on
preferences, so g(n) does not vary with . Therefore the derivative of (8) with respect to ,
evaluated at = 0, is
             R1              R1                     R1               R1
   1+"        n
                g(m)dF (m) 0 ~ (m)g(m)dF (m)         0
                                                       g(m)dF (m) n ~ (m)g(m)dF (m)
                                          R1              2                               :
  "nf (n)                                     g(m)dF (m)       0

The denominator is positive, so the sign is determined by the numerator, which can be
manipulated as follows:
      Z 1               Z 1                   Z 1            Z 1
           g(m)dF (m)         ~ (q)g(q)dF (q)     g(r)dF (r)       ~ (s)g(s)dF (s) =
       n                  0                    0               n
          Z 1Z 1                               Z 1Z 1
                    g(m)~ (q)g(q)dF (m)dF (q)           g(r)~ (s)g(s)dF (s)dF (r) =
                     0    n                                             0       n


                           Z      1   Z   1
                                              (g(m)~ (q)g(q) g(q)~ (m)g(m)) dF (m)dF (q) =
                              0       n
                                              Z 1Z 1
                                                      g(m)g(q) (~ (q) ~ (m)) dF (m)dF (q) =
                                               0   n
Z    n   Z    1                                                   Z     1   Z   1
                  g(m)g(q) (~ (q)             ~ (m)) dF (m)dF (q)+                  g(m)g(q) (~ (q)   ~ (m)) dF (m)dF (q):
 0        n                                                         n       n

The right term integrates to zero. If ~ (n) is increasing (decreasing) in n, the left term is
negative (positive). Therefore the derivative of (8) with respect to is negative for all n—
that is, perturbing the Mirrlees benchmark toward the true optimum lowers all marginal tax
rates. The same argument holds at all 2 (0; 1), which, together with Lemma 1, implies
Proposition 1.



         In words, Proposition 1 says that the true optimal policy T (y) features smaller mar-
ginal tax rates and less redistribution than the Mirrlees benchmark policy T^ (y) whenever
consumption preferences rise, in the sense of …rst-order stochastic dominance, with income.
It is important to note that this su¢ cient condition depends on the relationship between
preferences and income— for which it seems highly plausible— not preferences and ability.


                                                               13
    The intuition for Proposition 1 is as follows. If income variation is due to variation in
both preferences for consumption relative to leisure (which does not merit redistribution) and
ability (which does), then the optimal extent of redistribution depends on how preferences
vary with income. If preferences and income move together, then attributing all of a high
earner’s income to ability would exaggerate his or her ability level and yield too great an
extent of optimal redistribution. If, on the other hand, preferences fall with income, then high
earners must have greater abilities than a model without preference heterogeneity would infer.
In that case, optimal redistribution rises relative to a conventional analysis. Proposition 1
clari…es a condition on the relationship between preferences and income that guarantees the
former case holds, i.e., that preference heterogeneity lowers optimal redistribution.
    Proposition 1 establishes a new result that helps to resolve the theoretical ambiguity
over the e¤ects of preference heterogeneity on optimal tax policy. To build on this result
and obtain quantitative implications, we now turn to a more fully speci…ed model.



3     A simple statistic for the quantitative e¤ects of pref-
      erence heterogeneity on redistribution
In this section, we choose speci…c functional forms–for the social welfare function G (n),
individual utility, and the distributions of ability and preferences–enabling us to derive a
second novel analytical result: a simple statistic for the e¤ect of heterogeneity in preferences
on optimal marginal tax rates. We assume the planner is a "pure Utilitarian":


                                                     G (n) = U (n):                               (9)

                  @Ui (ci ;li )
so that g (n) =     @ci
                                ,   that is, the social marginal value of consumption is the unscaled
individual marginal utility of consumption. We assume that the utility function in expression
(1) takes the following familiar form:

                                                        c1i         1   1   li
                                        Ui (ci ; li ) =                          ;              (10)
                                                           1                 i




                                                               14
where       > 0, the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, determines the concavity of utility from
consumption (for which             = 1 is taken to represent log utility from consumption),                           1
a¤ects the elasticity of labor supply, and li = yi =wi : We will further suppose that ln                        i   and
ln wi are jointly normally distributed, so that y LF has a lognormal distribution. Though
evidence (see Saez 2001) suggests that the upper tail of the income distribution is better
described as a Pareto distribution, lognormality has long been used in the optimal tax liter-
ature to describe most of the income distribution (see Tuomala 1990). Moreover, assuming
preferences are bounded above, the optimal top marginal tax rate in this generalized setting
will be the same as that obtained in the conventional analysis with no preference hetero-
geneity. The e¤ects of preference heterogeneity on tax rates is thus more relevant for the
mass of the earnings distribution below the top tail, a mass well-described as lognormal.
       Given these conditions, we can prove the following result relating the joint distribution
of preferences and income to the optimal tax structure.

Proposition 2 Let T (y) solve the planner’s problem in (2) through (4). If the planner
is utilitarian and individual utility takes the form in (10) ; and ln                        i   and ln wi are jointly
normally distributed, then T (yi ) depends on the distribution of preferences f i gi only through
the statistic     :
                                                  cov(ln i ; ln ni )
                                              =                      :                                              (11)
                                                    var(ln ni )

Proof.
    Under the utility function in (10), y LF ( i wi ) = ( i wi ) + 1 , and g LF (n) = y LF (n)                         ,
so, from (5), the preference neutral scaling and the scaling f g satis…es
                                                    h                       i            +       1
                                                  E ( i w)    +   1   jni        E                   jni
                      m     E g LF ( i w)jni                                         i
                          =                     =  h                        i=                             :        (12)
                      n     E [g LF ( i w)jmi ]   E ( i w)    +   1   jmi                +       1
                                                                                 E   i               jmi

Note that under this utility function, the preference neutral scaling does not depend on the
mean wage w.18
  18
    The irrelevance of w holds under utilitarianism whenever individual utility exhibits constant relative risk
aversion and labor supply elasticity is uniform in the laissez-faire state. This is proved in Lemma 2 in the
Appendix.




                                                       15
       Because the conditional distribution of ln                     i   is normal, the numerator can be written

              +   1
  E       i           jni = E exp                         ln   i    jni
                                              +       1
                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                 var (ln i jni )
                            = exp E                       ln i jni         exp                                                         (13)
                                              +       1                                   +            1               2

By construction, ln ni and ln i are jointly normally distributed, and therefore the conditional
variance var (ln i j ln ni ) is independent of ln ni . Therefore the right exponentiated factor in
(13) is constant with respect to ni — call its value K.
    When X and Y are jointly normal, E[XjY ] = E[X] + (cov(X; Y )=var(Y ))(Y               E[Y ]),
so we rewrite the expectation in (13) as

                                                                                cov(ln i ; ln ni )
                           E [ln i j ln ni ] =                     E[ln ] +                        (ln ni               E[ln n])
              +        1                          +        1                      var(ln ni )
                                            =                  (E[ln ] + ln ni                     E [ln n]) :                         (14)
                                                  +        1

Substituting (14) into (13) and then into (12), we have:

                                           exp    +   1
                                                          (E[ln ] + ln n                  E[ln n])         K
                                  m
                                       =
                                   n       exp    +   1
                                                          (E[ln ] + ln m                  E[ln n])          K

                                           exp    +   1
                                                            ln n            m     (   +    1   )
                                       =                              =                            :
                                           exp             ln m             n
                                                  +   1


In particular, the scaling n = n ( + 1 ) is preference neutral; plugging it into the well-
known condition derived in Saez (2001) yields the optimal nonlinear income tax.19 Thus the
population statistic is su¢ cient to incorporate fully the e¤ect of preference heterogeneity
in this case.


       This simple and intuitive20 statistic proves to be a convenient tool with which to examine
the quantitative, not just qualitative, implications of preference heterogeneity for policy. To
illustrate this, note that                 = 0 corresponds to the Mirrlees case of homogeneous preferences
and       = 1 corresponds to the opposite extreme of homogeneous ability. In the latter case,
 n     = n( + 1 ) for all n, and the optimal extent of redistribution is zero. If < 0, optimal
  19
     Of course, any other scaling that yields the same ratios m = n for all m and n would generate the same
optimal income tax, as this would amount to multiplying all agents’utility functions by the same constant.
  20
     Note that can be interpreted as the coe¢ cient from a regression of ln on ln n.



                                                                    16
redistribution is greater than in the conventional analysis.21
       We can also write    as the product of the correlation between ln and ln n and the ratio
of their standard deviations. Thus, a particularly simple case obtains when preferences and
ability are independent. Then var(ln n) = var(ln ) + var(ln w), and                     = var(ln )=var(ln n),
while 1        = var(ln w)=var(ln n). That is, when preferences and ability are independent,
represents the “share”of of the variation in income driven by preference heterogeneity.


3.1       Numerical simulations of optimal policy

We now use calibrated numerical simulations and the statistic                to characterize the potential
quantitative e¤ects of preference heterogeneity on optimal policy.
       Our calibration strategy is to match the income distribution chosen by individuals in
this Section’s model, taking U.S. tax policy as given, to the empirical income distribution
in the United States, and thus infer a distribution of uni…ed types F (n). We assume a
pure Utiltarian social planner. We consider a range of utility function parameter values for
expression (10) that spans most mainstream estimates:                 2 f0:5; 1; 2g and         2 f2; 3; 6g.
We use data from the Tax Policy Center reporting e¤ective marginal and average tax rates
at the following income percentiles: 20, 40, 60, 80, 90, 95, 99, and 99.9. Using the utility
function (10), and given values for          and , we can back out the implied uni…ed type ni at
each quantile. We assume that the uni…ed types n are drawn from a lognormal distribution
with parameters        and . Then, we search for the values of             and     that minimize the sum
of squared di¤erences between the resulting simulated income quantile thresholds and the
empirical ones. For example, using the parameter values                   = 1 and         = 3, the resulting
parameter estimates are         = 1:6673 and      = 1:0025. Our conceptual results are not sensitive
to these values, but having a realistic calibration makes the magnitudes of our results easier
to interpret.
       We then use this calibrated model to calculate optimal policy under a range of values
for      as de…ned in (11) : We choose values for the welfare weights               i   to satisfy Preference
  21
    This discussion of Proposition 2 shows that it is closely related to Proposition 1 from the previous
section. If preferences rise, in the sense of …rst-order stochastic dominance, with income, then the covariance
between preferences and uni…ed type (equivalently, income) is positive, and therefore > 0.



                                                      17
Neutrality and solve for optimal policy according to the planner’s problem in (2) through
(4). Figure 1 plots average tax rates against income for four values of                                                                and a baseline set
of utility parameters:                            = 1 and                 = 3. It shows how optimal redistribution varies with the
role attributed to preference heterogeneity.



                                             1
                                                       β   = -0.1

                                           0.8
                                                       β   =0
                                                       β   = 0.3
                                                       β   =1
                                           0.6


                                           0.4


                                           0.2
                        Average tax rate




                                             0


                                           -0.2


                                           -0.4


                                           -0.6


                                           -0.8


                                            -1
                                                  0   50            100     150    200        250        300   350   400   450   500
                                                                                         Income (1,000s)




                      Figure 1: Optimal average tax rate schedules for four
                                                                                  values of


In Figure 1, the Mirrleesian benchmark is the                                                            = 0 scenario, where all heterogeneity is
ascribed to ability. The opposite assumption, where all heterogeneity is ascribed to prefer-
ences, is     = 1: An intermediate value of                                                 = 0:3 is used to provide a sense for the e¤ects
of a more moderate adjustment to the standard model. Finally, we show the results for
  =       0:1, a negative value. A negative                                              indicates that high incomes are associated with
low preferences for consumption (and thus very high abilities).22
       The results for positive values of                                         suggest that preference heterogeneity has the po-
tential to substantially reduce the optimal extent of redistribution across a given income
  22
    It is theoretically possible for to be greater than one, as well, which would indicate that high incomes
are associated with very high preferences for consumption (and thus very low abilities). If > 1, optimal
policy is even less redistributive than the = 1 case shown in Figure 1. This case is also considered in Chonè
and Laroque (2010) in their analysis of when optimal marginal tax rates are negative.


                                                                                            18
distribution. For example, while the conventional case of                                                                    = 0 recommends a tax rate of 49
percent at $500,000 of annual earnings, the case with                                                             = 0:3 recommends a rate of 40 per-
cent. For reference, the empirical average tax rate at $500,000 in 2012 was approximately 27
percent. The results for                             =         0:1 con…rm the role of the su¢ cient condition in Proposition
1, as in that case preference heterogeneity increases the optimal extent of redistribution and
preferences for consumption do not rise with income.
     Figure 2 shows the average tax rate schedules for the values of                                                                           across nine combinations
of    and , where the center graph is identical to Figure 1 and is provided for comparison
purposes.



                                                      γ = 0.5, σ = 2                   γ = 0.5, σ = 3                        γ = 0.5, σ = 6
                                            1                                1                                    1
                       Average tax rate




                                          0.5                              0.5                                  0.5

                                            0                                0                                    0

                                          -0.5                             -0.5                                 -0.5

                                           -1                               -1                                   -1
                                                 0       200         400          0      200          400              0       200           400

                                                      γ = 1, σ = 2                     γ = 1, σ = 3                           γ = 1, σ = 6
                                            1                                1                                    1
                       Average tax rate




                                          0.5                              0.5                                  0.5

                                            0                                0                                    0

                                          -0.5                             -0.5                                 -0.5

                                           -1                               -1                                   -1
                                                 0       200         400          0      200          400              0       200           400

                                                      γ = 2, σ = 2                     γ = 2, σ = 3                           γ = 2, σ = 6
                                            1                                1                                    1
                       Average tax rate




                                          0.5                              0.5                                  0.5

                                            0                                0                                    0

                                          -0.5                             -0.5                                 -0.5

                                           -1                               -1                                   -1
                                                 0       200      400             0       200      400                 0        200      400
                                                     Income (1,000s)                  Income (1,000s)                       Income (1,000s)




                   Figure 2: Optimal average tax rate schedules for a range
                    of parameter values. In each case, the solid line shows
                                    = 0, the conventional benchmark. The dotted line
                     shows                             = 1, the dashed line shows                                          = 0:3, and the
                                                               dash-dot line shows                          =              0:1.


The results in Figure 2 demonstrate that the e¤ect of preference heterogeneity is not sensitive
to the particular values selected for                                             and          . They also suggest that these e¤ects, and



                                                                                         19
therefore the conclusions of Proposition 1, are not sensitive to the inclusion of income e¤ects.
    Though      is not conventionally observable, these simulations show its value as a straight-
forward way in which to modify a numerical version of the model to determine the potential
quantitative implications of preference heterogeneity. Moreover,                may be a more plausible
empirical target than has previously been identi…ed, especially if unconventional sources of
evidence are brought to bear, as we now show.


3.2     Suggestive empirical patterns

To demonstrate the empirical potential of our results, and to reinforce the usefulness of the
population statistic ; we now provide some suggestive evidence that preference heterogeneity
may be related to real-world policy across countries and U.S. states in the ways that our
previous results suggest. We emphasize that these results are admittedly far from conclusive
and are vulnerable to a variety of criticisms. Our hope is that they stimulate further data
gathering and empirical work that can more reliably test for the implications of the theory
in existing policy.
    First, we consider cross-sectional23 international data. The World Values Survey asked
the following question of respondents between 2005 and 2007: "Now I will brie‡y describe
some people. Using this card, would you please indicate for each description whether that
person is very much like you, like you, somewhat like you, not like you, or not at all like you?
...It is important to this person to be rich; to have a lot of money and expensive things."
We will use the answers to the question to measure preferences f i g : This question is well-
posed for our purposes, as it attempts to have the respondent re‡ect on his or her underlying
preferences rather than how he or she feels in the status quo, i.e., "on the margin." Moreover,
the World Values Survey’s international coverage is unmatched. The World Values Survey
also asks respondents to report their place in the income distribution (it asks which of ten
"steps" the respondent’s household income falls into). Since income increases monotonically
  23
     Panel analysis would be desirable, but the survey data we use to measure preferences is available over
at most a ten-year horizon. We believe this is too narrow a window over which to expect either meaningful
changes in preference variation or a response to any such changes in policy, so we leave the analysis of panel
data for future research.




                                                     20
with uni…ed type, we use these reported values as a measure of uni…ed type fni g.24 It is
possible to calculate the covariance of these data within each country, giving us all of the
components required to calculate . We relate these values of                    to a standard measure of
redistribution, the level of social (transfer) expenditures as a share of GDP, as reported by
the OECD. Such expenditures include bene…ts for the poor, disabled, and elderly, as well as
health-related and other transfer programs. We are able to calculate                  for 13 countries with
PPP-adjusted GDP per capita greater than $25,000 in 2005 U.S. dollars, a simple threshold
that helps to control for the wide range of institutional variables that likely a¤ect the scale
of redistribution. Figure 3 shows the results visually.




                        Figure 3: Redistribution and           in 13 rich countries




  24
    The distribution of responses is far from uniform across deciles in most countries, which could re‡ect
either the pattern of sampling or surveyor and respondent behavior toward such a question. Though their
exact meaning is ambiguous, these data are arguably superior even to perfect information on individuals’
incomes (which, regardless, we lack) because we are using them in concert with individuals’stated attitudes
toward the importance of being "rich." Income data that re‡ect a respondent’s perceived place in the income
distribution may provide a more appropriate match to these preference data. Related, we calculate in this
analysis using the levels of preferences and income reported, not the logs of those levels. The reason is that
income is reported on a linear scale from 1 to 10, so that individuals are likely interpreting the scale roughly
as deciles. If income is distributed roughly log-normally, taking logs of these levels would be redundant. For
consistency, we assume that the preference scale represents a similar implicit transformation. Nevertheless,
if we calculate using the logs of these scales instead, the sign and signi…cance of the coe¢ cient on are
virtually unchanged from the analysis shown.



                                                      21
    A weak but noticeable negative relationship between redistribution and                    is apparent
in Figure 3, consistent with the theory developed above. That is, countries in which pref-
erence heterogeneity plays a larger role in explaining income variation appear to have less
redistributive policies. Note that this relationship may re‡ect interdependence rather than
unidirectional causality.25 The point estimate of the coe¢ cient on            is -64.1, and it is signi…-
cant at the 15 percent level (with a standard error of 39.9); it is also the slope of the dashed
best-…t line shown in the …gure. Though this evidence is far from de…nitive, the relationship
shown here is robust to controlling for some obvious alternative explanations. If we control
for the log of GDP per capita and the extent of inequality as measured by the pre-tax Gini
coe¢ cient, the size and signi…cance of the coe¢ cient on            slightly increase, namely to -66.0
signi…cant at the the 12.5 percent level. The results weaken somewhat, to a coe¢ cient of
-49.4 signi…cant at only the 35 percent level) if we include three OECD countries at an earlier
stage of development than those shown in Figure 3–Chile, Korea, and Poland–the …rst two
of which have social expenditures of 10 and 7 percent of GDP but low values of . Of course,
any results with such a limited sample are merely suggestive of a relationship that, given the
potential feasibility of measuring the statistic , may reward greater study.
    Next, we turn to data for states within the United States. For preferences, as with the
international data, we use responses to a question on the importance of material possessions.
The General Social Survey, administered in 1993, asked "How about having nice things? Is
it one of the most important values you hold, very important, somewhat important, not too
important, or not at all important?" Unfortunately, restrictions on the data prevent us from
calculating values for     because we cannot link respondents preferences and income.26 As an
alternative, we compare redistribution to the ratio of the standard deviation of preferences to
the standard deviation of log income in a state.27 Recall that              equals this ratio multiplied
  25
     That is, it may be that residents of countries with more redistributive policies tend to evolve toward
having more similar preferences. Related, it may be of interest to note that the pattern in Figure 3 is
consistent with Alesina and Angeletos (2005). In redistributive countries, small implies that ability–"luck"
in their model–plays a large role in determining income relative to preferences–"e¤ort" in their model.
  26
     The geographic identi…cation codes of the GSS are closely protected to ensure con…dentiality. They are
used in these analyses but cannot be shared by the author. To obtain the data, contact the National Opinion
Research Center at www.norc.org.
  27
     We estimate the variance of log income using state-level annual wages at the 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles, obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oessrcst.htm).       We select the Pareto log-normal distribution that


                                                    22
by the correlation between preferences and income. To the extent that this correlation varies
across states independently of the ratio we are able to calculate, our approach will give a
reliable indication of the relationship between redistribution and . For redistribution we
follow Feldstein and Wrobel (1998), who calculate the di¤erence between the (statutory)
average state income tax rates at the $100,000 and $10,000 income levels in 1989. Figure 4
shows the results (con…dentiality prevents us from identifying the states).




                 Figure 4: Redistribution and a proxy for       in 36 U.S. states


As Figure 4 shows, the same suggestive pattern as was apparent across countries appears to
hold across U.S. states. The coe¢ cient on the ratio of the standard deviation of preferences
to the standard deviation of income is -0.017, which is signi…cant at the 2 percent level
(it is the slope of the dashed best-…t line shown in the …gure). If we control for the log
of average personal income in each state and the share of state income claimed by the top
decile of earners (a proxy for inequality), the magnitude of the estimated coe¢ cient and its
signi…cance both slightly increase.
best matches these observed data (in terms of minimum squared errors at the observed values of the
distribution function), then calculate the variance of log incomes for each calibrated distribution.


                                                23
    We reiterate that these empirical patterns are meant to suggest, not prove, that the
relationship between preference heterogeneity and redistribution identi…ed in the theory and
captured (under speci…c functional form assumptions) by the statistic      may be consistent
with variation in existing policy. At the least, these analyses demonstrate that further
empirical study of preference heterogeneity’s relationship to prevailing policies may be both
possible and rewarding.



4     Conclusion
By adopting and adding to recent innovations in optimal tax analysis, we have shown that
long-standing intuitions about preference heterogeneity reducing optimal redistribution are
incomplete but correct given a plausible condition on how preferences relate to income. We
have also shown that a simple statistic for this e¤ect exists, assuming familiar functional
forms for utility and the distributions of ability and preferences, and we have shown how
that statistic provides a straightforward and potentially empirically-relevant way to gauge
the quantitative implications of preference heterogeneity for redistribution.
    Though these results modify those of the conventional Mirrleesian approach, we see them
as essential steps toward strengthening the modern theory of optimal tax design. While
preference di¤erences have been largely left out of that theory, they are readily apparent
in the real world and have long been a staple of broader debates over taxation. Given the
potential empirical and normative importance of preference heterogeneity demonstrated in
this paper, it seems (at least to us) to be a feature of reality that a convincing theory of
optimal taxation ought to include.




                                             24
Appendix
In this appendix, we prove two results mentioned in the text.
   Lemma 1: If the tax function T (y) is less progressive than the tax function T^ (y), then
T (y) is less redistributive than T^ (y).
Proof.
    Suppose on the contrary that T (y) were more redistributive, so that T (y(n0 )) < T^(^y (n0 ))
(note that these taxes on the lowest type agent are likely to be negative). Consider a
reform of T^(y) (not necessarily feasible and incentive compatible) that maintains each agent’s
earnings y^(n), but lowers each agent’s marginal tax rate to T 0 (^
                                                                  y (n)) and raises consumption
    ^
by T (^y (n0 )) T (y(n0 )) > 0. Since earnings are unchanged and consumption is higher, each
agent must be made better o¤ by this reform. Now suppose agents are allowed to optimize
(while the tax function is adjusted to maintain each type’s marginal tax rate). By assumed
incentive compatibility of T (y), they will select y(n), and this adjustment cannot decrease
utility. Therefore all agents are strictly better o¤ under T (y) than T^(y), contradicting our
assumption that T^(y) was Pareto e¢ cient. Therefore, T (y) is less redistributive than T^(y).


   Next, the proof of Proposition 2 stated the following Lemma:

Lemma 2 The preference neutral scaling is invariant to the choice of reference wage w when
the social welfare function takes the utilitarian form in (9) and the utility function U (c; l)
takes the form in (10).

Proof.
   Given the functional form assumptions in the lemma, g LF ( i w) = Uc y LF (w i ); y LF (w i )=(w i ) .
Preference neutrality therefore requires that the scaling f i gIi=1 satis…es

                           Uc (y LF (w i ); y LF (w i )=(w i ))         j
                                                                =           ; 8i; j:                      (15)
                           Uc (y LF (w j ); y LF (w j )=(w j ))         i

   Let " denote the elasticity of taxable income under the laissez-faire tax regime:

            @yi      1      T 0 (yi )               @y LF ( i wi )     wi       @y LF (w i )     w
     "=        0
                                                  =                 LF
                                                                              =               LF
                                                                                                      :
        @(1 T (yi ))        yi          T (y)=0         @wi        y ( i wi )       @w       y (w i )

Let denote the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion. For the class of utility functions in the
statement of the lemma, " and are constant.
    To see the e¤ect of varying w on the preference neutral scaling, we di¤erentiate (15) with




                                                       25
respect to w, where derivatives are evaluated at y LF (w i ) and y LF (w j ):
                             "                                                #
                                                         j LF
                 1 Uci Ucj Ucc   i LF
                                   yi   @yiLF w        Ucc yj    @yjLF w
                    2                                                           :
                Ucj     w         Uci    @ w yiLF        Ucj      @ w yjLF

The term in brackets is equal to     " + " = 0, proving that (15) does not vary with w, and
thus the scaling preference neutral scaling does not vary with w.




References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005). "Fairness and Redistribution,"
     American Economic Review, 95(4), (September).
 [2] Beaudry, Paul, Charles Blackorby, and Dezso Szalay (2009). "Taxes and Employment
     Subsidies in Optimal Redistribution Programs," American Economic Review, 99(1), pp.
     216-242.
 [3] Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria del Mar Racionero
     (2002). "Optimal Redistribution with Heterogeneous Preferences for Leisure," Journal
     of Public Economic Theory, 4(4), pp. 475-498.
 [4] Brett, Craig and John A. Weymark (2003). "Financing Education using Optimal Re-
     distributive Taxation," Journal of Public Economics.
 [5] Chone, Philippe and Guy Laroque (2010). "Negative Marginal Tax Rates and Hetero-
     geneity", American Economic Review 100, pp. 2532-2547.
 [6] Diamond, Peter (1998). "Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped
     Pattern of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates", American Economic Review, 88(1) pp. 83-95.
 [7] Diamond, Peter and Johannes Spinnewijn (2011) "Capital Income Taxes with Heteroge-
     neous Discount Rates," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4), November.
 [8] Feldstein, Martin and Marian Vaillard Wrobel (1998). "Can State Taxes Redistribute
     Income?" Journal of Public Economics.
 [9] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2004). "Compensation and Responsibility,"
     working paper from 2004 used. Forthcoming in K.J. Arrow, A.K. Sen and K. Suzumura
     (eds) Handbook of Social Choice and Welfare.
[10] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2006). "Fair Income Tax," Review of Economic
     Studies, 73, pp. 55-83.
[11] Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press.

                                               26
[12] Golosov, Mikhael, Maxim Troshkin, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Matthew Weinzierl (2013).
     "Preference Heterogeneity and Optimal Capital Income Taxation," Journal of Public
     Economics.
[13] Judd, Kenneth and Che-Lin Su (2006). "Optimal Income Taxation with Multidimen-
     sional Taxpayer Types," Working Paper, earliest available draft April, 2006; more recent
     draft November 22, 2006.
[14] Kahneman, Daniel (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus, and
     Giroux (see page 401).
[15] Kaplow, Louis (2008). "Optimal Policy with Heterogeneous Preferences," The B.E.
     Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 8(1) (Advances), Article 40.
[16] Kocherlakota, Narayana and Christopher Phelan (2009). "On the robustness of laissez-
     faire," Journal of Economic Theory 144, pp. 2372-2387
[17] Mirrlees, James A. (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxa-
     tion," Review of Economic Studies.
[18] Mirrlees, James A. (1976). "Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis," Journal of Public
     Economics.
[19] Mirrlees, James A. (1986) “The Theory of Optimal Taxation”, in Handbook of Mathe-
     matical Economics, edited by K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intrilligator, vol. III, ch. 24, 1198-
     1249.
[20] Nozick, Robert (1974). Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
[21] Pigou, Arthur C.(1928). A Study in Public Finance. Macmillan. (page 58, 1960 reprint).
[22] Rothschild, Casey and Florian Scheuer (2013). "Redistributive Taxation in the Roy
     Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[23] Saez, Emmanuel (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,"
     Review of Economic Studies, 68.
[24] Salanié, Bernard. The Economics of Taxation. MIT.
[25] Sandmo, Agnar (1993). "Optimal Redistribution when Tastes Di¤er," Finanzarchiv
     50(2).
[26] Tarkiainen, Ritva and Matti Tuomala (2004). "On Optimal Income Taxation with Het-
     erogeneous Work Preferences," Tampere Working Economic Papers.
[27] Tuomala, Matti (1990). Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution, Oxford University
     Press.
[28] Vickrey, William (1945). "Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions to Risk," Econo-
     metrica, 13(4), (October), pp. 319-333.


                                             27
