                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES IN OPEN EMERGING ECONOMIES

                                            Joon-Ho Hahm
                                          Frederic S. Mishkin
                                           Hyun Song Shin
                                             Kwanho Shin

                                         Working Paper 17780
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17780


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012


Paper presented at the 2011 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference.
We are grateful to Anil Kashyap for his comments as discussant. We also thank Yongwhan Jung
for his excellent research assistance. This paper is a shorter version of the report with the same title
prepared for the Bank of Korea. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Bank of Korea.
All views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily of the Bank of Korea,
Columbia University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Joon-Ho Hahm is a Professor
of International Economics and Finance at the Graduate School of International Studies, Yonsei University.
Frederic Mishkin is the Alfred Lerner Professor of Banking and Financial Institutions at the Graduate
School of Business, Columbia University, and a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Hyun Song Shin is Hughes-Rogers Professor of Economics at Princeton University. Kwanho
Shin is a Professor of Economics at Korea University. Disclosure of Mishkin and Shin's outside compensated
activities can be found at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/OUTSIDEACTIVITIES.pdf
and http://www.princeton.edu/~hsshin/biographical.html, respectively.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17780.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Joon-Ho Hahm, Frederic S. Mishkin, Hyun Song Shin, and Kwanho Shin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroprudential Policies in Open Emerging Economies
Joon-Ho Hahm, Frederic S. Mishkin, Hyun Song Shin, and Kwanho Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 17780
January 2012
JEL No. E44,E52,E58,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines macroprudential policies in open emerging economies. It discusses how the recent
financial crisis has provided a rationale for macroprudential policies to help manage the economy
and the need for policymakers to monitor the financial cycle and systemic risks. It also discusses one
particularly promising measure of the state of the financial cycle, the growth of non-core liabilities
of the financial sector, and evaluates macroprudential policy frameworks. The paper uses Korea as
an example and conducts an empirical evaluation of non-core liabilities of Korean banks as a measure
of the financial cycle.


Joon-Ho Hahm                                      Hyun Song Shin
Yonsei University                                 Department of Economics
Seoul, Korea                                      Princeton University
jhahm@yonsei.ac.kr                                Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                  and NBER
Frederic S. Mishkin                               hsshin@princeton.edu
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business                       Kwanho Shin
Uris Hall 817                                     Korea University
3022 Broadway                                     Department of Economics
New York, NY 10027                                Seoul 136-701
and NBER                                          Korea
fsm3@columbia.edu                                 khshin@korea.ac.kr
1. Introduction
       Prior to 2007, there was a general consensus in central banks about most elements of
monetary policy strategy and prudential supervision of the financial system.         Then, starting
in August 2007, the world was hit by what Alan Greenspan, former Chairman of the Federal
Reserve, described as a “once-in-a-century credit tsunami.”         The credit tsunami not only
flattened the world economy, resulting in the most severe worldwide economic contraction
since the Great Depression, but has also called into question the basic policy strategies used
to manage the economy.          This has led to a new focus on macroprudential regulation and
supervision, that is, regulation and supervision of the financial system that focuses on system-
wide risk, rather than just the riskiness of individual financial institutions, as an important
policy tool to promote a healthy economy.

       This study examines macroprudential policies in open emerging economies, with a
particular emphasis on South Korea.           We start in Section 2 by first examining why thinking
has changed about basic policy strategies to manage the economy.           Section 3, then examines
in more detail the rationale for macroprudential policies and the need for policymakers to
monitor the financial cycle and systemic risks.         We then discuss in Section 4 one particularly
promising measure of the state of the financial cycle, the growth of non-core liabilities of the
financial sector. This section also applies the analysis to Korea and conducts an empirical
evaluation of non-core liabilities of Korean banks as a measure of the financial cycle.
Section 5 broadens the discussion to evaluate macroprudential policy frameworks. Section 6
provides some concluding remarks.


2. How Has Thinking Changed About Policies to Manage the
Economy?

       To put things into perspective, we will first examine how central bankers and academic
economists viewed the basic policy strategy before the crisis and then go on to discuss how
their thinking has changed as a result of the crisis.1



   1
       This section draws heavily on Mishkin (2011a).

                                                        1
2.1. Basic Policy Strategy Before the Crisis

    Before the crisis there was broad consensus in central banks and academia for a policy
framework that pursued a form of flexible inflation targeting, while assuming a dichotomy
between monetary policy and financial stability policy. There was somewhat less agreement
on what the central bank’s response should be to asset-price bubbles.2

Flexible Inflation Targeting

    The basic monetary policy framework followed by almost all central banks (who had the
ability to conduct an independent monetary policy because they did not pursue an exchange
rate peg) involved a strong, credible commitment by the central bank to stabilize inflation in
the long run, often at an explicit numerical level, but also allowed for the central bank to
pursue policies to stabilize output around its natural rate level in the short run.3This
framework is referred to in the academic literature as “flexible inflation targeting” (Svensson,
1997), although the phrase “inflation targeting” to describe this monetary policy strategy is
somewhat unfortunate.         This is because central banks have different approaches to the
communication strategy of flexible inflation targeting, with some objecting to characterizing
their inflation objective as a “target”.

    Many central banks, such as the Bank of Korea, have announced an explicit numerical
inflation objective and treat it as a target, and these are classified a full-fledged inflation
targeters.    Others are reluctant to be so explicit.        For example, the Federal Reserve has


   2
       One element of monetary policy strategy before the crisis not discussed here is gradualism, in which
policy interest rates display a substantial amount of inertia (see Mishkin, 2010a). Gradualism is is not
discussed here because it is not as central to the discussion of macroprudential policies.
    3
       The rationale for the flexible inflation targeting framework was provided by eight basic principles derived
from the science of monetary policy and which have become known as the new neoclassical synthesis
(Goodfriend and King, 1997). These eight principles, which are discussed in detail in Mishkin (2011a) are: 1)
inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon; 2) price stability has important benefits; 3) there is
no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation; 4) expectations play a crucial role in the
determination of inflation and in the transmission of monetary policy to the macroeconomy; 5) real interest rates
need to rise with higher inflation, i.e., the Taylor Principle; 6) monetary policy is subject to the time-
inconsistency problem; 7) central bank independence helps improve the efficiency of monetary policy; 8)
commitment to a strong nominal anchor is central to producing good monetary policy outcomes; and 9)
financial frictions play an important role in business cycles.
                                                             2
espoused a strong commitment to stabilize inflation, but has not been willing to announce an
explicit inflation objective. Instead, the Federal Reserve reports on the individual FOMC
participants’ projection of inflation in the long run under “appropriate monetary policy.” In
effect, the Fed provides the long-run inflation objective for each FOMC participant, but has
not required that the participants agree on a common objective for inflation. The Federal
Reserve has therefore not yet adopted an agreed upon inflation objective and so it is not
classified as being in the inflation targeting camp. On the other hand, the FOMC
participants long-run inflation projections all have been in a pretty tight range between 1 ½
and 2%, and so they are not far from committing to a specific inflation objective and not very
large modifications in their communication strategy would move them to the inflation
targeting camp (Mishkin, 2008). In other cases, such as the European Central Bank or the
Swiss National Bank, central banks have been willing to announce an explicit numerical
inflation objective, but are reluctant to treat it as a target because they believe that this would
not give them sufficient flexibility. They are unwilling to be classified as inflation targeters
because they believe that the use of the word “target” might lead the public to expect them to
hit the inflation targets too precisely or over too specific a horizon.

    Despite these apparent differences in communication strategy, the basic approach of
central banks with an independent monetary policy before the crisis was very similar. They
were willing to conduct monetary policy under a strong commitment to stabilize inflation in
the long run. Indeed, Svensson (2002) argues that any central bank that indicates that it will
pursue the standard objective function which involves minimizing both inflation and output
gap in an intertemporal setting is effectively a flexible inflation targeter.   Before the crisis,
almost all central banks with an independent monetary policy fell into this classification.

Dichotomy Between Monetary and Financial Policy

    Although most central bankers were aware that financial disruptions could have a serious
negative impact on the economy, nonetheless, the general equilibrium modeling frameworks
at most central banks did not incorporate financial frictions as a major source of business
cycle fluctuations.   This naturally led to a dichotomy between monetary policy and financial
stability policy in which these two types of policies would be conducted separately.
Monetary policy instruments would focus on minimizing inflation and output gaps. It
                                                   3
would then be up to prudential regulation and supervision to prevent excessive risk taking
that could promote financial instability. Although most central banks supported the
dichotomy between monetary policy and financial stability policy, there were views that
monetary policy should address financial stability issues, particularly with regard to
responding to potential asset price bubbles, as discussed below.

The “Lean” Versus “Clean” Debate on the Response to Possible Asset-Price Bubbles

    An active debate in central banks before the crisis focused on how central banks should
respond to potential asset price bubbles. Because asset prices are a central element in the
transmission mechanisms of monetary policy, the theory of optimal monetary policy requires
that monetary policy responds to asset prices in order to obtain good outcomes in terms of
inflation and output. Hence, the issue of how monetary policy might respond to asset-price
movements is not whether it should respond at all, but whether it should respond over and
above the response called for in terms of objectives to stabilize inflation and employment.
Another way of stating the issue is whether monetary policy should try to pop, or slow the
growth of possibly developing asset-price bubbles to minimize damage to the economy when
these bubbles burst?   Alternatively, should the monetary authorities not respond directly to
possible asset price bubbles, but instead respond to asset price declines only after a bubble
bursts to stabilize both output and inflation?   These two positions have been characterized as
leaning against asset price bubbles versus cleaning up after the bubble bursts and so the
debate over what to do about asset price bubbles has been characterized as the “lean” versus
“clean” debate.

    Even before the crisis, there was no question that asset price bubbles have negative
effects on the economy.    As Dupor (2005) has emphasized, the departure of asset prices
from fundamentals can lead to inappropriate investments that decrease the efficiency of the
economy.    Furthermore, the bursting of bubbles throughout history has been followed by
sharp declines in economic activity, as Kindleberger’s (1978) famous book demonstrated.

    The clear cut dangers of asset-price bubbles led some economists before the crisis, both
inside and outside central banks —such as Cecchetti and others (2000), Borio and Lowe
(2002), Borio, English, and Filardo (2003), and White (2004)—to argue that central banks

                                                  4
should at times “lean against the wind” by raising interest rates to stop bubbles from getting
out of hand.   They argued that raising interest rates to slow a bubble’s growth would
produce better outcomes because it would either prevent the bubble or would result in a less
severe bursting of the bubble, with far less damage to the economy.

    The opposing view to the “leaning against the wind” view that asset prices should have a
special role in the conduct of monetary policy over and above that implied by their
foreseeable effect on inflation and employment is often referred to as the Greenspan doctrine,
because he strenuously argued that monetary policy should not try to lean against asset price
bubbles, but rather should just clean up after they burst (Greenspan, 2002). There are
several elements of this argument.

    First, bubbles are hard to detect. In order to justify leaning against a bubble, a central
bank is assuming that it can identify a bubble in progress.   That assumption was viewed as
highly dubious because it is hard to believe that the central bank has such an informational
advantage over private markets. If the central bank has no informational advantage, and if it
knows that a bubble has developed, the market will almost surely know this too, and the
bubble will burst. Thus, any bubble that could be identified with certainty by the central
bank would be unlikely ever to develop much further.

    A second objection against leaning against bubbles is that raising interest rates may be
very ineffective in restraining the bubble, because market participants expect such high rates
of return from buying bubble-driven assets.     By definition, bubbles are departures from the
behavior that is normally incorporated within models, and so the tools of monetary policy are
unlikely to work normally in abnormal conditions.

    A third objection is that there are many asset prices, and at any one time a bubble may be
present in only a fraction of assets.   Monetary policy actions are a very blunt instrument in
such a case, as such actions would be likely to affect asset prices in general, rather than solely
those in a bubble.

    Fourth, although some theoretical models suggested that raising interest rates could
diminish the acceleration of asset prices, others suggest that raising interest rates would cause
a bubble to burst more severely, thus doing even more damage to the economy (Bernanke,
                                                  5
Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999; Greenspan, 2002; Gruen, Plumb, and Stone, 2005; and Kohn,
2006).    This view was supported by historical examples, such as the monetary tightening
that occurred in 1928 and 1929 in the United States and 1989 in Japan, suggesting that raising
interest rates may cause a bubble to burst more severely, thereby increasing the damage to the
economy.      Another way of saying this is that bubbles are departures from normal behavior,
and it is unrealistic to expect that the usual tools of monetary policy will be effective in
abnormal conditions. Attempts to prick bubbles were thus viewed as possibly violating the
Hippocratic oath of “do no harm”.

     Finally, there was a view that the monetary authorities had the tools to keep the harmful
effects of a bursting bubble at a manageable level, as long as they respond in a timely fashion.
This was true even if interest rates fell and approached the zero lower bound, and so the
conventional tool of lowering the policy interest rate was no longer an option. The economy
could be stimulated by either: 1) managing expectations so that the policy rate would be
viewed as staying low for an extended period, thereby lowering long-term interest rates, 2)
risk and term premiums could be lowered by purchasing securities, thereby changing their
relative supply, and 3) exchange rate interventions to lower the value of the domestic
currency, thereby increasing foreign demand for domestic production.

     One counterargument to this view was the experience of Japan after the bursting of the
stock market and real estate bubbles.    However, as Posen (2003) pointed out, the problem in
Japan was not so much the bursting of the bubble as it was the subsequent policies.       The
imbalances in Japan’s banking sector were not resolved, so they continued to get worse well
after the bubble had burst. In addition, as pointed out in Ahearne and others (2002), the
Bank of Japan did not ease monetary policy sufficiently or rapidly enough in the aftermath of
the crisis.

     The bottom line from this line of reasoning was that the cost of leaning against asset
price bubbles was likely to be high, while the costs of bursting bubbles could be kept low.
Instead of trying to lean against bubbles, central banks would just clean up after the bubble
afterwards. This approach was fully consistent with monetary policy focusing on stabilizing
inflation and employment without a special focus on asset price bubbles.


                                                  6
       Another argument against focusing on asset prices, is that it could lead to public
confusion about its objectives. As reported in Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006), interviews with
participants from different sectors of Swedish society suggested that statements on house
prices by the Riksbank confused the public and led to a general weakening of confidence in
the Swedish central bank.

       The Greenspan doctrine, which was strongly supported by Federal Reserve officials,
generally held sway in the central banking community before the crisis. However, even
among central bankers, there were dissenting voices. The Reserve Bank of Australia during
the period from 2002 to 2004 argued that rising housing prices in Australia posed a risk to the
economy and there is evidence that developments in the housing market encouraged the Bank
to tighten monetary policy earlier rather than later (see Bloxham, Kent and Robson, 2010).
In several meetings in 2004, a minority of members of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)
of the Bank of England argued for raising interest rates in order to reduce the risks that high
house-price appreciation and the rapid accumulation of household debt would lead to an
abrupt adjustment process.        Statements from officials at the European Central Bank and
other central banks also suggested that the possibility of an asset boom or bust might require
a longer period than the usual one to two years in assessing whether the price stability goal
was being met (Issing, 2003a,b; King, 2004a,b; Stevens, 2004; Selody and Wilkins, 2004;
Bank of Canada, 2006; and Rosenberg, 2006).

2.2. Lessons from the Financial Crisis

       There are three lessons from what occurred during the financial crisis that have a bearing
on basic policy strategy.4




   4
      There are two other lessons, not discussed here, that are relevant to whether monetary policy changes
should exhibit gradualism (see Mishkin, 2011a): the macro economy is highly nonlinear, and the zero-lower
bound for policy rates is more problematic then previously recognized. They are not discussed here because
our study focuses less on monetary policy issues.
                                                           7
Developments in the financial sector have a far greater impact on economic activity than was
recognized earlier.

    Although central bankers generally recognized that financial frictions could play an
important role in business cycle fluctuations, the 2007-2009 financial crisis made it clear that
the adverse effects of financial disruptions on economic activity could be far worse than was
anticipated for advanced economies.     When the financial crisis started in August 2007,
central bank actions to contain it seemed to be working. Many officials at the central banks,
although still concerned about the disruption to the financial markets, hoped that the worst
was over and that the financial system would begin to recover (see Mishkin, 2011b). The
subprime mortgage sector was after all only a small part of the overall capital market, and the
losses in the subprime mortgage market, although substantial, still seemed manageable.
By the summer of 2008, central banks were even turning their attention to the very high
inflation rates at the time: for example, there were discussions inside the Federal Reserve
whether the easing phase of monetary policy might have to be reversed in order to contain
inflation (e.g., see Wessel, 2009).

    But then came a set of shocks which sent the financial system and the economy over the
cliff: the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, the AIG collapse on
September 16, the run on the Reserve Primary Fund on the same day, and the U.S. Treasury’s
struggle to get the TARP plan approved by U.S. Congress over the next couple of weeks
(Mishkin, 2011b). The financial crisis now morphed into a global crisis that caused a sharp
drop in economic activity in the United States – real GDP declined at an annual rate of -1.3%
in 2008, Q4, -5.4% in 2009 Q1 and -6.4% in 2009 Q2 – but in the rest of the world as well –
with real GDP falling at a -6.4% rate in the fourth quarter of 2008 and a -7.3% rate in the first
quarter of 2009. The unemployment rate shot up to over 10% in the United States and in
many other advanced economies, with the unemployment rate remaining stubbornly high
even after the world economy started to recover.     The world-wide recession that resulted
from the financial crisis turned out to be the most severe economic contraction since the
world-wide depression of the 1930s.

    The global financial crisis of 2007-2009 therefore demonstrated that financial frictions
have become front and center in macroeconomic analysis: they no longer could be ignored in
                                                 8
the macro-econometric models that central banks use for forecasting and policy analysis, as
was generally the case before the crisis.

The cost of cleaning up after financial crises is very high.

    Besides the obvious cost of a huge loss of aggregate output as a result of the worldwide
recession, the global financial crisis suggests that there are likely to be three additional costs
that will raise the costs far higher: 1) financial crises are typically followed by very slow
growth, 2) the budgetary position of governments’ sharply deteriorates, and 3) the exit
strategy for central banks from nonconventional monetary policy may be both complicated
and hinder the ability of the central bank to successfully manage the economy in the future.

    When economies experience deep recessions, the typical experience is that they
subsequently have very strong recoveries, often referred to as V-shaped recoveries.
However, as Reinhart and Reinhart (2010) document, this V-shaped pattern is not
characteristic of recessions that follow financial crises because the deleveraging process takes
a long time, resulting in strong headwinds for the economy.      When analyzing fifteen severe
post-World War II financial crises, the Great Depression the 1973, oil shock period and the
recent crisis, they find that real GDP growth rates are significantly lower during the decade
following this episode, with the median decline in GDP growth being about 1%.
Furthermore, unemployment rates stay persistently higher for the decade after crisis episodes,
with the median unemployment rate five percentage points higher in advanced economies.
Although we have many years to go before a decade goes by after the most recent crisis, it
actually looks like it might have worse outcomes than the average crisis episode studied by
Reinhart and Reinhart.    They find that 82% of the observations of per capita GDP during
2008 to 2010 remain below or equal to the 2007 level, while the comparable number for the
fifteen earlier crisis episodes is 60%.   We now recognize that the cumulative output losses
from financial crises are massive, and this current crisis looks like it will be no exception.

    As pointed out by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), the aftermath of financial crises is almost
always a sharp increase in government indebtedness. We have seen exactly this situation in
the aftermath of the current crisis. The massive bailouts of financial institutions, fiscal
stimulus packages, and the sharp economic contractions that reduced tax revenue that

                                                  9
occurred throughout the world have adversely affected the fiscal situation for many countries.
Budget deficits over 10% of GDP in advanced countries like the United States have become
common.     Furthermore, this rise in indebtedness has the potential to sovereign debt defaults,
which has come to the fore with the Greek sovereign debt crisis and concerns about the long-
fiscal health of other European countries, including Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy. The
fiscal retrenchments required to put fiscal balances on a sustainable path are likely to not only
be contractionary, but also will increase societal stress. Indeed, there is even a possibility
that the fiscal problems brought on by the crisis could lead countries to exit the Euro.

    Actions by central banks to contain the global financial crisis resulted in huge expansions
of their balance sheets.   The expansion of balance sheets arising from liquidity provision is
typically easy to reverse because most of the liquidity facilities have provided loans at
interest rates that are higher than market rates during normal times. Hence these liquidity
facilities are self-liquidating because as financial markets return to normal, market
participants are no longer willing to borrow at above-market ranks, so the use of these
facilities shrinks. Hence this source of balance sheet expansion naturally reverses itself as
the financial system recovers, and this is exactly what has happened.

    A far more serious concern is the expansion of the balance sheet that stem from asset
market purchases. This expansion of the balance sheet is not self-liquidating and there are
concerns that the resulting expansion of the monetary base will lead to high inflation in the
future. This concern would be more worrisome if an expansion in the monetary base were
closely linked to an expansion in the money supply, but this is not the case in the current
environment. Because banks are perfectly happy to hold onto to huge amounts of excess
reserves as long as they are paid interest on them, as is the case currently, high growth rates in
the monetary base do not translate into high growth rates of the money supply.          Hence,
quantitative easing and the resulting increase in the monetary base are unlikely to be
inflationary.

    More problematic is that asset market purchases were often for long term securities
which exposes the central bank to interest risk (and credit risk if it buys private securities like
mortgage-backed securities) because these securities can have substantial price fluctuations.
Possible losses on these securities thus mean that there could be an erosion of capital in the
                                                  10
central bank’s balance sheet and this could subject it to congressional or parliamentary
criticism and actions that could weaken its ability to conduct an independent monetary policy.
In addition, if the central bank has bought private securities, their presence on the balance
sheet means that the central bank has encroached on the politicians’ turf because the central
bank has engaged in a form of fiscal policy, which makes its political position more
precarious, again possibly leading to a loss of independence.

    Even the purchase of long-term government securities poses a danger for central banks
because it may create the perception that the central bank is willing to accommodate
irresponsible fiscal policy by monetizing the debt. This is a particular concern right now in
the Eurozone, where the ECB has purchased securities issued by governments that not only
have large fiscal imbalances, but in the case of Greece, even lied about its fiscal position.
This problem is also a serious concern in the United States, where both political parties have
been unwilling to address long-run trends in entitlements that could cause U.S. government
debt to explode. Not only can the purchase of long-term government assets encourage fiscal
profligacy, but it can also lead to an unhinging of inflation expectations, that could make it
difficult for the central bank to control inflation in the future.

Price and output stability do not ensure financial stability.

    This is perhaps the most important lesson for central banks from the recent financial
crisis. Before the recent financial crisis, the common view, both in academia and in central
banks was that achieving price and output stability would promote financial stability. This
was supported by research (Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999, and Bernanke and Gertler,
2001) which indicated that monetary policy which optimally stabilizes inflation and output is
likely to stabilize asset prices, making asset-price bubbles less likely. Indeed, central bank’s
success in stabilizing inflation and the decreased volatility of business cycle fluctuations,
which became known as the Great Moderation, made policymakers complacent about the
risks from financial disruptions.

    The benign economic environment leading up to 2007, however, surely did not protect
the economy from financial instability. Indeed, it may have promoted it.       The low
volatility of both inflation and output fluctuations may have lulled market participants into

                                                   11
thinking there was less risk in the economic system than was really the case.      Credit risk
premiums fell to very low levels and underwriting standards for loans dropped considerably.
Some recent theoretical research even suggests that benign economic environments may
promote excessive risk taking and may actually make the financial system more fragile
(Gambacota, 2009). Although price and output stability are surely beneficial, the recent
crisis indicates that a policy focus solely on these objectives may not be enough to produce
good economic outcomes.

2.3. Implications for Monetary and Macroprudential Policy Strategy

    Now we can see what the implications of these lessons are for basic policy strategy and
in particular for macroprudential policies.

Flexible Inflation Targeting

    The first key point is that the lessons from the crisis do not invalidate the benefits of
having a strong, credible commitment to stabilize inflation in the long run, which is the key
rationale for adopting a flexible inflation targeting framework. (For a more detailed
discussion of this point, see Mishkin, 2011a.) Indeed, as argued elsewhere (Mishkin, 2008),
a strong, credible commitment to stabilize inflation can be even more valuable in periods of
financial market stress when prompt and decisive expansionary monetary policy may be
required to prevent a market meltdown, but which will only be effective if inflation
expectations remain grounded.

    However, although the case for a flexible inflation targeting framework is not weakened
by the lessons from the financial crisis, they do suggest that details of how such a framework
is executed would benefit from some rethinking.       Particularly important in this regard is
thinking about the lean versus clean debate on whether monetary policy should react to
potential asset-price bubbles.

The Lean Versus Clean Debate

    In thinking about this debate, it is worth distinguishing between two different types of
asset-price bubbles. As pointed out in Mishkin (2010a), not all asset price bubbles are alike.

                                                 12
Financial history and the financial crisis of 2007-2009 indicate that one type of bubble, which
is best referred to as a credit-driven bubble, can be highly dangerous. With this type of
bubble, there is the following typical chain of events: Because of either exuberant
expectations about economic prospects or structural changes in financial markets, a credit
boom begins, increasing the demand for some assets and thereby raising their prices. The
rise in asset values, in turn, encourages further lending against these assets, increasing
demand, and hence their prices, even more. This feedback loop can generate a bubble, and
the bubble can cause credit standards to ease as lenders become less concerned about the
ability of the borrowers to repay loans and instead rely on further appreciation of the asset to
shield themselves from losses.

    At some point, however, the bubble bursts. The collapse in asset prices then leads to a
reversal of the feedback loop in which loans go sour, lenders cut back on credit supply, the
demand for the assets declines further, and prices drop even more. The resulting loan losses
and declines in asset prices erode the balance sheets at financial institutions, further
diminishing credit and investment across a broad range of assets.      The decline in lending
depresses business and household spending, which weakens economic activity and increases
macroeconomic risk in credit markets. In the extreme, the interaction between asset prices
and the health of financial institutions following the collapse of an asset price bubble can
endanger the operation of the financial system as a whole.

    However, there is a second type of bubble that is far less dangerous, which can be
referred to as an irrational exuberance bubble.    This type of bubble is driven solely by
overly optimistic expectations and poses much less risk to the financial system than credit-
driven bubbles. For example, the bubble in technology stocks in the late 1990s was not
fueled by a feedback loop between bank lending and rising equity values and so the bursting
of the tech-stock bubble was not accompanied by a marked deterioration in bank balance
sheets. The bursting of the tech-stock bubble thus did not have a very severe impact on the
economy and the recession that followed was quite mild.

    However, we have learned from the recent crisis that the bursting of credit-driven
bubbles not only can be extremely costly, but are very hard to clean up after. Furthermore
bubbles of this type can occur even if there is price and output stability in the period leading
                                                  13
up to them.    Indeed, price and output stability might actually encourage credit-driven
bubbles because it leads market participants to underestimate the amount of risk in the
economy.      The case for leaning against potential bubbles rather than cleaning up afterwards
has therefore become much stronger.

    However, the distinction between the two types of bubbles, one which (credit-driven) is
much more costly than the other, suggests that the lean versus clean debate may have been
miscast, as White (2009) indicates.     Rather than leaning against potential asset-price bubbles,
which would include both credit-driven and irrational exuberance type bubbles, there is a
much stronger case for leaning against credit bubbles which would involve leaning against
credit-driven bubbles, but not irrational exuberance bubbles.      As White (2009) and Mishkin
(2010a) have pointed out, it is much easier to identify credit bubble than it is to identify asset-
price bubbles. Financial regulators and central banks often have information that lenders
have weakened their underwriting standards, that risk premiums appear to be inordinately
low or that credit extension is rising at abnormally high rates.    The argument that it is hard
to identify asset-price bubbles is therefore not a valid argument against leaning against credit
bubbles.

Macroprudential Policies

    This realization leads directly on to the main theme of this report, which is the use of
macroprudential policies to address the potential build-up of financial vulnerability.
Although there is a strong case to lean against credit bubbles, what policies will be most
effective?    First it is important to recognize that the key principle for designing effective
policies to lean against credit bubbles is whether they fix market failures. Credit extension
necessarily involves risk taking. It is only when this risk taking is excessive because of
market failures that credit bubbles are likely to develop. Recognizing that market failures
are the problem, it is natural to look to prudential regulatory measures to constrain credit
bubbles.

    Some regulatory measures to fix market failures are simply the usual elements of a well-
functioning prudential regulatory and supervisory system. These elements include adequate
disclosure and capital requirements, liquidity requirements, prompt corrective action, careful

                                                  14
monitoring of an institution’s risk-management procedures, close supervision of financial
institutions to enforce compliance with regulations, and sufficient resources and
accountability for supervisors.      However, the standard measures mentioned above focus on
promoting the safety and soundness of individual firms and fall into the category of what is
referred to as microprudential supervision. However, even if individual firms are operating
prudently, there still is a danger of excessive risk-taking because of the interactions between
financial firms that promote externalities.     An alternative regulatory approach, which deals
with these interactions, focuses on what is happening in credit markets in the aggregate, and
involves macroprudential policies.

    This recognition provides a strong rationale for macroprudential policies, which we
discuss in Section 3 of this study. However, in designing macroprudential policies, we
require measures of when systemic, excessive risk taking is taking place.     We discuss such
potential measures in Section 4. Macroprudential tools can be used to dampen the
interaction between asset price bubbles and credit provision, and these are discussed in more
detail in Section 5 of this study.

Monetary Policy

    The fact that the low interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve from 2002 to 2005 was
followed by excessive risk taking suggests to many that overly easy monetary policy might
promote financial instability Using aggregate data, Taylor (2007) has argued that excessively
low policy rates led to the housing bubble, while Bernanke (2010), Bean, Paustian, Penalver
and Taylor (2010), Turner (2010) and Posen (2009) have argued otherwise. Although it is
far from clear that the Federal Reserve is to blame for the housing bubble, the explosion of
microeconomic research, both theoretical and empirical, suggests that there is a case for
monetary policy to play a role in creating credit bubbles.    Borio and Zhu (2008) have called
this mechanism the “risk taking channel of monetary policy”.

    The literature provides two basic reasons why low interest rates might promote excessive
risk taking.   First, as Rajan (2005, 2006) points out, low interest rates can increase the
incentives for asset managers in financial institutions to search for yield and hence increase
risk taking.   These incentives could come from contractual arrangements which compensate

                                                  15
asset managers for returns above a minimum level, often zero, and with low nominal interest
rates only high risk investments will lead to high compensation. They also could come from
fixed rate commitments, such as those provided by insurance companies, forcing the firm to
seek out higher yielding, riskier investments.   Or they could arise from behavioral
considerations such as money illusion in which they believe that low nominal rates indicate
that real returns are low, encouraging them to purchase riskier assets to obtain a higher
target return.

    A second mechanism for how low interest rates could promote risk taking operates
through income and valuation effects. Low interest rate increase net interest margins and
increase the value of financial firm, increasing their capacity to increase their leverage and
take on risk (Adrian and Shin, 2009, 2010, and Adrian, Moench and Shin, 2010). In
addition, low interest rates can boost collateral values, again enabling increased lending.
This mechanism is closely related to the financial accelerator of Bernanke and Gertler (1999)
and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), except that it derives from financial frictions for
lenders rather than borrowers.

    Monetary policy can also encourage risk taking in two other ways. Although desirable
from a viewpoint of establishing credibility and a strong nominal anchor, more predictable
monetary policy can reduce uncertainty and encourage asset managers to underestimate risk
(Gambacota, 2009).      Monetary policy which cleans up after financial disruptions by
lowering interest rates, which has been named the “Greenspan put” because this was the
actual and stated policy of the Federal Reserve when Alan Greenspan headed the Fed, can
lead to a form of moral hazard in which financial institutions expect monetary policy to help
them recover from bad investments (e.g., see Tirole and Farhi, 2009, Keister, 2010, and
Wilson and Wu, 2010). The Greenspan put can also increase systemic risk because it is only
exercised when many financial firms are in trouble simultaneously and so they may be
encouraged to pursue similar investment strategies, thereby increasing the correlation of
returns.

    Micro empirical analysis provides a fair amount of support for the risk-taking channel of
monetary policy. Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro and Saurina (2009), using Spanish credit
registry data, finds that low nominal interest rates, although they decrease the probability of
                                                 16
defaults in the short term, lead to riskier lending and more defaults in the medium term.
Ioannidou, Ongena and Peydro (2009) examine a quasi-controlled experiment in Bolivia and
find that lower U.S. federal funds rates increases lending to low quality borrowers that ends
up with higher rate of defaults and yet at lower interest rate spreads.      Delis and Kouretas
(2010), using data from euro area banks, finds a negative relationship between the level of
interest rates and the riskiness of bank lending.

    Adrian and Shin (2010) discuss and provide evidence for the risk taking channel of
monetary policy using more aggregate data.        They find that reductions in the federal funds
rate, increase term spreads and hence the net interest margin for financial intermediaries. The
higher net interest margin, which makes financial intermediaries more profitable, is then
associated with higher asset growth, and higher asset growth, which they interpret as a shift
in credit supply, predicts higher real GDP growth.

    Given the support for the risk-taking channel, does this mean that monetary policy
should be used to lean against credit bubbles?      There are several objections to doing so.
First, if monetary policy is used to lean against credit bubbles, it violates the Tinbergen (1939)
principle because one instrument is being asked to do two jobs: 1) stabilize the financial
sector and 2) stabilize the economy.     Because there is another instrument to stabilize the
financial sector, macroprudential supervision, wouldn’t it be better to use macroprudential
supervision to deal with financial stability, leaving monetary policy to focus on price and
output stability?

    This argument suggests that macroprudential policies would be the first line of defense
against credit bubbles.    This is why we focus so much attention on these policies in this
study. However, there are reasons why macroprudential policies may not always be
sufficiently effective, providing a possible rationale for using monetary policy to restrain
credit bubbles.     Prudential supervision is subject to more political pressure than is monetary
policy because it affects the bottom line of financial institutions more directly. Thus they
will have greater incentives to lobby politicians to discourage macroprudential policies that
would rein in credit bubbles.     After all, it will be during a credit bubble that financial
institutions will be making the most money and so have greater incentives and more
resources to lobby politicians to prevent restrictive macroprudential policies. A case in
                                                    17
point has been the recent Basel III accord.    Press reports suggest that the capital standards in
the accord were substantially weakened because of complaints by the German Landesbanken.
Furthermore, implementation of the accord was put off for almost ten years, and the accord
did not contain measures to deal with systemic risk considerations such as adjusting capital
requirements over the credit cycle.    The Basel III episode suggests that political
considerations may make it extremely difficult to have effective macroprudential supervision.

    The possibility that macroprudential policies may not be implemented sufficiently well
to constrain credit bubbles, suggests that monetary policy may have to be used instead. But
this raises another objection to using monetary policy to lean against credit bubbles: it may
not work. We are sympathetic to the view discussed earlier that tightening monetary policy
may be ineffective in restraining a particular asset-bubble because market participants expect
such high rates of return from purchasing bubble-driven assets. On the other hand, the
evidence on the risk-taking channel of monetary policy suggests that there is a stronger case
that raising interest rates would help restrain lending growth and excessive risk taking.
Furthermore, the theoretical analysis discussed immediately above suggests that if a central
bank credibly commits to raise interest rates when a credit bubble looks like it is forming,
then expectations in credit markets will work to make this policy more effective. The
expectation that rates will go up with increased risk taking will make this kind of activity less
profitable and thus make it less likely that it will occur.   Furthermore, expectations that rates
will rise with increased risk-taking means that interest rates will not have to be raised as
much to have their intended effect.

    Nonetheless, using monetary policy to lean against credit bubbles is not a monetary
policy strategy that can be taken lightly. Doing so could at times result in a weaker
economy than the monetary authorities would desire or inflation that is too low. This
suggests that there is a monetary policy tradeoff between the pursuit of financial stability and
the pursuit of price and output stability. Also as mentioned earlier, giving monetary policy
another objective might lead to confusion about the central bank’s commitment to price
stability, thereby weakening the nominal anchor, with potentially adverse effects on economic
outcomes.



                                                  18
     Another danger from having monetary policy as a tool to promote financial stability is
that it might lead to decisions to tighten monetary policy when it is not needed to constrain
credit bubbles.      A situation of low interest rates does not necessarily indicate that monetary
policy is promoting excessive risk taking. One lesson from the discussion here is that
policymakers, and especially monetary policymakers, will need tools to assess whether credit
bubbles are developing.         This provides an additional motivation for our analysis of measures
to assess when systemic, excessive risk taking is occurring that we discuss in Section 4 of this
study. Such measures can help central banks decide if there is imminent danger of credit
bubbles, and whether monetary policy may has to be adjusted, in addition to using
macroprudential policies, to restrain them.            Monitoring of credit market conditions will
become an essential activity of central banks in the future.

     This danger of thinking of using monetary policy to promote financial stability is highly
relevant today. Some economists, for example Hoenig (2010), and Rajan (2010) have called
for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates because they argue that the current low rates are
encouraging excessive risk taking.            The $600 billion large-scale-asset-purchase program
(LSAP) the Federal Reserve adopted in November of 2010 has led to further criticism of
Federal Reserve monetary policy, with many commentators in the media suggesting that this
would also encourage excessive risk taking.              However, the U.S. economy is currently not in
a situation of rapid credit growth, low risk premiums and increasing leverage.                      Indeed, it still
seems to be mired in a deleveraging cycle that is producing serious headwinds for the
economy.       This doesn’t mean that the situation couldn’t change. However, at the current
juncture, the Federal Reserve’s expansionary monetary policy does not appear to be creating
the next credit bubble in the United States and justification for raising interest rates and
abandoning LSAP on these grounds is very weak.5

     But are there dangers from the current expansionary U.S. monetary policy for other
countries, especially open emerging economies.                The answer could be yes because many
emerging market economies are currently in a very different environment, with rapid credit
growth and rapidly rising real estate prices.            The empirical research by Ioannidou, Ongena

    5
       Even though objections to the large-scale-asset-purchase program on the basis that it would produce a
credit bubble are currently not justified, there are features of this program that does raise legitimate concerns
(see Mishkin, 2010b).
                                                            19
and Peydro (2009) discussed above is particularly relevant on this point, because it shows
that low U.S. interest rates helped promote a lending boom in an open emerging economy, in
this case, Bolivia. As we will see in Section 4, we find corroborating evidence for such an
effect in Korea because U.S. interest rates are found to be an important driver of the Korean
credit cycle.

    The current expansionary monetary policy suggests that policies in open emerging
market countries could be directed at prevention of a credit bubble.    But does this mean that
monetary policy tools should be used to do so?     In some cases, monetary policy is not an
option because the exchange rate is in effect pegged to an anchor currency like the U.S. dollar.
However, even in other cases where there is no exchange rate peg, monetary policy may not
be effective at constraining credit booms.    Again, our empirical results for Korea in Section
5 shed light on this issue.   There we find that Korean interest rates do not appear to be an
important driver of the Korean credit cycle, although U.S. interest rates are.   In addition, as
discussed in Section 3, open emerging market economies face the dilemma that when foreign
interest rates are very low, raising domestic interest rates may just encourage capital inflows
that may exacerbate the credit boom, rather than restraining it.

    The situation at the current juncture thus argues for an even greater focus on
macroprudential policies in open emerging market economies. However, not all open
emerging market economies are in the same boat right now.       For instance, liability measures
in Korea do not suggest that Korea has yet exited from a deleveraging cycle. Other
emerging market economies look quite different, suggesting that they may have to tighten
macroprudential standards to slow down credit growth.

Interaction Between Monetary and Macroprudential Policies

    Another lesson learned from the financial crisis and the discussion above is that
monetary policy and financial stability policy are intrinsically linked to each other and so the
dichotomy between monetary and financial stability policy is a false one.     As we have seen,
monetary policy can affect financial stability, while macroprudential policies to promote
financial stability will have an impact on monetary policy. If macroprudential policies are
implemented to restrain a credit bubble, they will slow credit growth and will slow the

                                                 20
growth of aggregate demand.       To counter this slow growth in aggregate demand, monetary
policy would be easier in order to stabilize inflation and output.     Alternatively, if policy
rates are kept low to stimulate the economy, there is a greater risk that a credit bubble might
occur.    This may result in tighter macroprudential policies to ensure that a credit bubble does
not get started. Coordination of monetary and macroprudential policies would make it
easier to pursue all three objectives of price stability, output stability and financial stability.


3. Balance Sheet Aggregates and Financial Stability

    The traditional approach to financial regulation is focused on the task of ensuring the
soundness of individual financial institutions. In the case of banking regulation, the focus
on soundness of individual institutions has been given specific form with requirements on
minimum capital for banks as a proportion of the risk-weighted assets of the bank.          However,
the traditional approach based on the “loss absorbency” of capital suffers from two
shortcomings.

 Loss absorbency does not address directly excessive asset growth during booms.

 Preoccupation with loss absorbency diverts attention from the liabilities side of banks’
   balance sheets and vulnerabilities from the reliance on unstable short-term funding and
   short-term foreign currency debt.

    To be effective, a macroprudential policy framework would address excessive asset
growth and fragility of bank liabilities.   Start first with the problem of excessive asset
growth in a lending boom.      During a lending boom, high bank profitability and low
measured risks tend to bolster bank capital ratios.     However, experience has shown
repeatedly that rapid loan growth is achieved only at the cost of lowering lending standards.
Take the example of Allied Irish Banks (AIB), which is currently very topical given the
difficulties in Europe, but there is no shortage of examples from the recent global financial
crisis.

    Figure 3.1 plots AIB’s loan growth and loan loss provisions from 2004 to 2009. AIB’s
loan book increased 43% in 2005 and 30% in 2006, but loan growth came to a sudden halt
with the global financial crisis. Provisions were low and falling throughout the lending
                                                   21
boom. However, the underlying vulnerability of the loan book was exposed by the
recession, and provisions have jumped above 4%.


                           Figure 3.1. Loan Growth and Provisions for AIB

                   4.50%                                                                                 50%
                                                                                       4.09%
                   4.00%                        43%
                                                                                                         40%
                   3.50%

                   3.00%                                    30%                                          30%
                                  28%
                   2.50%
                                                                                                         20%
                   2.00%
                                                                          14%
                   1.50%                                                                                 10%
                                                                                        1.36%
                   1.00%
                                                                                                         0%
                   0.50%       0.19%     0.15%        0.09%       0.07%           ‐1%            ‐3%
                   0.00%                                                                                 ‐10%
                             2004        2005         2006         2007          2008           2009

                                        Provisions (as % of Loans)                Loan Growth




   AIB’s capital ratios were highest at the peak of the boom in 2006 and did not issue timely
warnings, as seen in Table 3.1. The severity of the subsequent bust calls into question the
philosophy of relying on capital ratios while neglecting asset growth itself.



                                  Table 3.1. Capital Ratios for AIB

                                          2004        2005        2006          2007       2008        2009
            Tier 1 capital ratio (%)      7.9         7.2         8.2           7.5        7.4         7.2
            Total capital ratio (%)       10.7        10.7        11.1          10.1       10.5        10.2




   Would additional measures, such as forward-looking provisioning have prevented the
collapse?   Larger capital cushions would undoubtedly have mitigated the shock to the real
economy, but the experience of Spain (which had such forward-looking provisioning)
suggests that forward-looking provisioning may not be sufficient.

                                                             22
   Both Ireland and Spain as members of the Eurozone were prevented them from using
autonomous monetary policy to rein in domestic liquidity. However, as discussed in the
previous section, the loss of autonomy over monetary policy is a more general theme that
affects many more countries than just the Eurozone. Emerging economies with open capital
markets face constraints on monetary policy from carry trade inflows.      Faced with low
interest rates in advanced economies, raising domestic interest rates may backfire by inducing
greater carry trade inflows and looser domestic financial conditions.

   The constraints on monetary policy of an economy with open capital markets can be seen
from the findings of a recent empirical study by Kim and Shin (2010). This study illustrates
the way in which Korea’s monetary policy was affected by the U.S. monetary policy stance
even after Korea officially adopted a floating exchange rate policy.


   In Figure 3.2, the US policy rate, scaled by the left axis, is measured by the federal funds
target rate and the Korean policy rate, scaled by the right axis, is measured by the target rate
set by the Bank of Korea. We can clearly see that the Korean policy rate follows very closely
to the US policy rate with a few months’ lag. The chart is consistent with the following
narrative, often encountered in market financial commentary. When US interest rates fall,
carry trade capital flows into Korea, loosening domestic liquidity conditions and boosting the
economy. This capital inflow puts the Korean monetary authority in a dilemma, since raising
the policy interest rate may further attract capital inflows. According to Figure 3.2, the
Korean monetary authority resolved the dilemma by following the stance of US monetary
policy by lowering Korean rates.




                                                 23
                                          Figure 3.2. Policy Interest Rates in the US and Korea
 7.00%                                                                                                                                                                      5.50%


 6.00%
                                                                                                                                                                            5.00%

 5.00%
                                                                                                                                                                            4.50%

 4.00%
                                                                                                                                                                            4.00%
                                                                                                                                                                                     US
 3.00%
                                                                                                                                                                                     Korea
                                                                                                                                                                            3.50%
 2.00%

                                                                                                                                                                            3.00%
 1.00%


 0.00%                                                                                                                                                                      2.50%




                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐08
                                                                                                                      Jan‐06


                                                                                                                                        Jan‐07
                                                                Jan‐03


                                                                                  Jan‐04


                                                                                                    Jan‐05
         Jan‐00


                            Jan‐01


                                              Jan‐02




                                                                                                                               Jul‐06


                                                                                                                                                 Jul‐07


                                                                                                                                                                   Jul‐08
                                                                                           Jul‐04


                                                                                                             Jul‐05
                                                       Jul‐02


                                                                         Jul‐03
                  Jul‐00


                                     Jul‐01




   Note: The US policy rate, measured on the left axis, is the Federal funds target rate (from Jan. 2000 to Dec.
   2008) and the Federal funds target range – upper limit (from Jan. 2009-present).
   The Korean policy rate, measured on the right axis, is the overnight rate set by the Bank of Korea.
   Source: Federal Reserve Economic Data at Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Bank of Korea.



   When faced with excessive asset growth fueled by loose domestic financial conditions
other tools may be necessary to lean against the buildup of vulnerabilities. Administrative
measures on bank lending such as caps on loan to value (LTV) ratios and debt service to
income (DTI) ratios may be important additional ingredients in the macroprudential policy
framework.                 DTI rules serve as an anchor that ties loan growth to the wage level.                                                                                    The
experience of Korea and other Asian economies suggest that DTI rules may be a useful
complement to more traditional tools of banking supervision.


4. Non-Core Liabilities

   Excessive asset growth is mirrored on the liabilities side of the balance sheet by shifts in
the composition of bank funding. The core funding available to the banking sector is retail
deposits of household savers, which grow in line with the aggregate wealth of the household
sector. In a lending boom when credit is growing very rapidly, the pool of retail deposits is

                                                                                                              24
not sufficient to fund the increase in bank credit.    Other sources of funding are tapped to
fund rapidly increasing bank lending.     The state of the financial cycle is thus reflected in the
composition of bank liabilities.

    In an open emerging economy, rapid increases in the non-core liabilities of the banking
system show up as capital inflows through increased foreign exchange-denominated
liabilities of the banking system. Figure 4.1 charts the non-core liabilities of the Korean
banking sector, taken from Shin and Shin (2011) with the FX liabilities shown as the dark
band at the top of the chart. Note that the first peak in non-core liabilities coincides with the
1997 crisis.   After a lull in the early 2000s, non-core liabilities increase rapidly in the run-up
to the 2008 crisis.

    Figure 4.2 (also from Shin and Shin, 2011) plots the non-core liabilities as a fraction of
M2. We see that there has been substantial variation in non-core liabilities, ranging from
around 15% of M2 to a peak of 50% in the Lehman crisis.

    Shin and Shin (2011) have argued that the stage of the financial cycle can be gauged by
utilizing the information on the liabilities side of the banking sector balance sheet.
Although monetary aggregates are also liabilities-side aggregates of the banking sector, they
argue that traditional monetary aggregates can be refined and improved upon so as to serve as
an effective set of indicators that underpin effective macroprudential policy. In this regard,
they propose an approach to bank liability aggregates based on the distinction between core
and non-core liabilities.




                                                  25
                     Figure 4.1 Non-Core Liabilities of Korean Banking Sector
               800



Trillion Won
               700

               600

               500                                                                                                                                                                           FX borrowing
                                                                                                                                                                                             Debt Securities
               400
                                                                                                                                                                                             Repos

               300                                                                                                                                                                           Promissory Note 2
                                                                                                                                                                                             Promissory Note 1
               200
                                                                                                                                                                                             Certificate of Deposit

               100

                 0




                                                                                                                                                  Jan‐07
                                                                                                                  Jan‐03
                                                                                   Jan‐99
                                                 Jan‐95




                                                                                                                                                                         Sep‐09
                     Jan‐91




                                                                                                                            May‐04
                                                                                                                                     Sep‐05


                                                                                                                                                              May‐08
                                                            May‐96
                                                                       Sep‐97


                                                                                               May‐00
                                                                                                         Sep‐01
                              May‐92
                                       Sep‐93




                     Source: Shin and Shin (2011)




                                                          Figure 4.2. Non-Core Liabilities of
                                Korean Banking Sector as a Proportion of M2
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
                                                                                                              Apr‐99
                                                          Sep‐94




                                                                                                                                Feb‐01




                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep‐05
                                                                                Jul‐96
                                                                                            Jun‐97
                              Dec‐91




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun‐08
                                                                                                                       Mar‐00



                                                                                                                                                     Dec‐02
                                                Oct‐93


                                                                     Aug‐95




                                                                                                                                                                           Oct‐04


                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug‐06
                     Jan‐91


                                       Nov‐92




                                                                                                                                         Jan‐02


                                                                                                                                                                Nov‐03
                                                                                                     May‐98




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May‐09




                              Source: Shin and Shin (2011)


                                                                                                                   26
    As banks, particularly in emerging market economies, are the most important financial
intermediary and often play active roles in propagating the financial cycle, central banks have
given special attention to the growth and changing composition of bank liabilities. For
instance, traditional monetary aggregates give a window on the size and composition of bank
liabilities, and hence can give an insight into the stage of the financial cycle. Key monetary
aggregates such as M2 track the size of the short-term deposit base of the domestic banking
system, and hence can serve as a proxy for the claim of the household sector on the banking
sector, or the intermediary sector more generally encompassing money market funds and
other short-term claims held by the household sector.                 In this way, monetary aggregates
open a window on the possibility of macroprudential policy that take cues from the money
stock.6

    As emphasized by Shin and Shin (2011), Traditional classifications of monetary
aggregates focus on the transactions role of money as a medium of exchange. As such, the
criterion is based on how close to cash – how “money-like” – a particular financial claim is.
Demand deposits are the archetypal money measure, since such liabilities of the banking
sector can be quickly transferred from one person to another.                   Savings deposits are less
money-like, and hence figure broader notions of money, such as M2, but even here they fall
outside the M2 measure if the depositor faces restrictions on easy access to the funds.                        In
this way, the traditional hierarchy of monetary aggregates goes from cash to the very liquid
claims such as demand deposits going out to more illiquid claims on the banking sector such
as term savings deposits.         The criterion is how easily such claims can be used to settle
transactions.      In the context of the quantity theory equation of money, this traditional
monetary aggregate is more appropriate in identifying the extent to which inflation is likely.

    For financial stability purposes however, we need an alternative classification system for
liability aggregates which is more directly related to the propagation of financial risks. The



   6  Indeed, central banks that continue to give some attention to monetary aggregates have emphasized the
financial stability properties of monetary aggregates for this reason. For instance, the European Central Bank
(ECB) has shifted in recent years to interpreting their monetary pillar increasingly as a financial stability pillar.
Indeed, the ECB has published a comprehensive and in-depth study of the role of monetary aggregates in the
economy (ECB (2010)). The ECB study, which runs to almost 600 pages, covers both the traditional roles of
money in the quantity theory of money (and hence on inflation), as well as the more recent attention to the role
of monetary aggregates in financial stability issues.
                                                           27
movement of this alternative aggregate must have implications on the procyclicality of
financial cycles and the systemic risk, and this property is not always captured by the ease of
settlement of transactions. For instance, overnight repurchase agreements (repos) between
financial institutions are claims that are short-term and highly liquid. However, the
financial crisis of 2008 demonstrated through the near-failure of Bear Stearns and the
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers that repos can be highly destabilizing when the collateral
requirements on the repos rise through imposition of higher margins charged by creditors,
setting off a spiral of distress in the financial system as a whole (Adrian and Shin (2007),
Morris and Shin (2009), Gorton (2008)).

    Shin and Shin (2011) emphasize that an important dimension that is not addressed in the
traditional hierarchy of monetary aggregates is who holds the claims.      The same claim can
have very different financial stability implications if they are held by different entities.   For
instance, the cash deposits of a leveraged hedge fund at its prime broker are similar to
demand deposits of household savers in the banking system in terms of how liquid the claim
is. However, they have very different systemic implications. At the other end of the
spectrum in terms of liquidity, a covered bond issued by a bank is an extremely illiquid long-
term claim that is not money-like.    However, a covered bond held by long-term investors
such as a pension fund is similar to retail deposits in that the funding provided to the banking
sector is more “sticky” – i.e. stable – than a mortgage backed security or a collateralized debt
obligation (CDO) held by a securities firm.

    Hence, from the perspective of financial stability, traditional monetary aggregates such as
M2 fail to capture the stage of financial cycles. The relevant distinction is not how “cash-
like” a claim is as embedded in traditional monetary aggregates but the core versus non-core
distinction that has to do with whether the claim is held by the ultimate domestic creditors
such as the domestic household sector as it is more stable.     For instance, repos and other
claims held by banks on other banks can be regarded as non-core liabilities which are more
volatile.

    If the financial system is organized around the capital market, conventional measures of
money represent only a small proportion of aggregate size of the leveraged sector.       Nor is


                                                  28
the quantity of deposits the most volatile component of the total aggregate liabilities of the
financial system.    In such a world, money is less useful for macroprudential policy.

    The rapid move toward a market-based financial system in recent years has accelerated
the trend toward greater reliance on non-traditional, non-deposit based funding, toward
greater use of the interbank loan market, the market for commercial paper, and asset-backed
securities.   As an illustration, Figure 4.3 compares the composition of liabilities of financial
institutions in major countries.   As we can see, the composition of liabilities varies
substantially across countries and across time.    Note also that the share of deposits differs
dramatically across countries, which shows that the usefulness of monetary aggregates is
likely to be limited.


          Figure 4.3. Composition of Financial Liability of Financial Intermediaries

  100%
   90%
   80%
   70%
                                                                              Deposits
   60%
                                                                              Loans
   50%
                                                                              Bonds
   40%
                                                                              Funds
   30%
                                                                              Equities
   20%                                                                        Insurance/Pensions
   10%                                                                        Others
     0%




   Source: Hahm (2010)




    For countries with open capital markets, international capital flows play a particularly
important role in financial stability, and hence have implications for the design and
implementation of macroprudential policies. As argued by Shin and Shin (2011), during a

                                                  29
boom when bank assets are growing rapidly, the funding required outstrips the growth of the
domestic deposit base, and is often met by capital flows from the international banks and is
reflected in the growth of short-term foreign currency-denominated liabilities of the domestic
banking system. As such, short-term foreign currency-denominated bank liabilities can also
be seen as the volatile non-core liabilities of the banking sector.

    Overall, the core versus non-core properties of bank liabilities provide a better window on
the actual exposure of the banking sector to financial risk and their willingness to increase
exposures.     As such, the relative size of non-core liabilities can be used as a monitoring tool
to reflect the stage of the financial cycle and the degree of vulnerability to potential setbacks.


4.1. An Accounting Framework for Core versus Non-Core Bank Liability
Aggregates

    Shin and Shin (2011) considered a basic accounting framework to clarify the discussion
of core and non-core liabilities. Suppose that the domestic financial system consists of
ultimate borrowers (domestic firms and households) and ultimate creditors (domestic
households).     The domestic banking sector channels funds from ultimate creditors to
ultimate borrowers. There is also a foreign creditor sector that stands ready to supply funds
to the domestic banking sector. Shin and Shin (2011) show that the aggregate balance sheet
identity can be rewritten in the following way.

       Total Credit = Total Equity of Banking Sector
                  + Liabilities to Non-bank Domestic Creditors
                  + Liabilities to Foreign Creditors

    The accounting identity above helps us to understand the connection between (i) the
procyclicality of the banking system, (ii) systemic risk spillovers, and (iii) the stock of non-
core liabilities of the banking system.    The core liabilities of a bank are its liabilities to the
non-bank domestic creditors (such as through retail deposits). Then, the non-core liabilities
of a bank are either (i) a liability to another bank, or (ii) a liability to a foreign creditor. This
accounting identity nets out the claims and obligations between banks and describes only the
total claims of ultimate creditors on the ultimate debtors. The accounting identity is helpful

                                                   30
in keeping track of the total credit to the private sector, and the total funding that is needed to
support that credit. The systemic risks that result from the claims between banks will be
addressed below separately.


    The accounting identity above nets out the interbank claims, and so is not well suited to
identify the risks from runs. Instead, the focus is on total credit that flows to the ultimate
borrowers in the economy. If the concern is with "excessive" lending by banks (the inverted
commas indicating we're not giving a formal definition), then the accounting identity serves
to draw attention to the role of non-core liabilities in funding the excessive lending.

    As seen in section 3, in a boom when credit is growing very rapidly, the growth of bank
balance sheets outstrips the growth in the pool of retail deposits. As a result, the growth of
bank lending results in greater lending and borrowing between the intermediaries themselves,
or results in the sucking in of foreign debt. First, consider the simple case where there is no
foreign creditor sector. In a boom when the assets of banks grow rapidly but the pool of
retail deposits stays fixed, the proportion of banking sector liabilities in the form of retail
deposits must fall. More generally, in the presence of a foreign creditor sector, the increase
in bank lending will result both in increased cross-lending between banks, but also will result
in the sucking in of foreign debt. In this way, Shin and Shin (2011) argue that there are
close conceptual links between procyclicality, systemic risk spillovers and the stock of non-
core liabilities of the banking system.   The stage of the financial cycle is reflected in the
composition of the liabilities of the banking sector.

    The discussion so far suggests that the definition of core and non-core liabilities should
focus on whether the liability is to an ultimate domestic creditor or not.    In particular, Shin
and Shin (2011) argue that we should distinguish between:

            (1) Liabilities due to an ultimate domestic creditor

            (2) Liabilities due to an intermediary

            (3) Liabilities due to a foreign creditor




                                                  31
    The principle would be that (1) is classified as a core liability and (2) and (3) as non-core
liabilities.   In practice however, the classification is not so clear-cut in practice. For
instance, the claims held by domestic non-financial firms share features of both core and non-
core liabilities and are not easy to classify. For a small and medium sized enterprise with an
owner-manager, the bank deposits of that firm could be seen as household deposits.
However, the firm could be a major firm with access to market finance, who can issue bonds
and then deposit the proceeds of the bond sale in the banking system.              This is what
happened in Japan in the 1980s, for instance.          This latter case should not be counted as a
core liability, since the creditor firm is acting like an intermediary who borrows in the
financial markets to lend to the banks.


    For instance, as shown in Table 4.1, Shin and Shin (2011) suggest a two-way
classification that takes account of the traditional concern with the liquidity of monetary
aggregates together with the question of whether the liabilities are core or non-core.              While
acknowledging that some differences of views could lead to alternative classifications, they
used the distinction to examine the case of Korea.           For Korea, they define non-core
liabilities as the sum of (i) bank liabilities to foreign creditors (ii) bank debt securities (iii)
promissory notes (iv) repos and (v) certificates of deposit.7          This is the measure that is
plotted earlier in Figures 4.1 and 4.2.




7
  The inclusion of CDs in non-core liabilities is motivated by the fact that CDs are often held by financial
institutions engaged in the carry trade, who use CDs as an alternative to holding Korean government securities
in their carry trade.
                                                        32
                            Table 4.1. Classification of Core versus Non-Core Liabilities

                                Core liability        Intermediate        Non-Core liability
                                                                               Repos
            Highly liquid           Cash
                                                    Demand deposits
                                                                              Call loans
                                                     (non-financial
                              Demand deposits
                                                       corporate)
                               (households)                                  Short-term
                                                                            FX bank debt
            Intermediate




                                                                            Time deposit
                                Time deposit          Time deposit
                                                                              & CDs
                                   & CDs                & CDs
                                                                         (banks & securities
                                (households)         (non-financial
                                                                               firms)
                                                       corporate)


                               Trust accounts        Trust accounts        Long-term bank
                                (households)         (non-financial         debt securities
            Illiquid




                                                       corporate)        (banks & securities
                               Covered bonds                                    firms)
                                (households)
                                                                            ABS & MBS

         Source: Shin and Shin (2011)


   Note that this measure of non-core liabilities is an approximation of true non-core
liabilities as the classification is still based upon financial instruments rather than actual claim
holders. For instance, bank debt securities such as debentures and CDs can be held by
households, and those must be excluded from the non-core liabilities. Below in Section 4.3,
we conduct a more accurate analysis using information on claim holders of bank liabilities.

4.2. Empirical Properties of Bank Liability Aggregates: The Case of Korea

   Based on the above accounting framework, we examine the empirical properties of core
and non-core bank liability aggregates using Korean data. We construct more detailed
measures of core and non-core liabilities by utilizing information in the flow of funds data.
While the measures used in section 3 were suggestive, they were not rigorously formulated
since we did not use the information about who holds the claim.              In Korea, the flow of funds
data report the financial flows across various sectors of the economy. Since it contains
information about both assets and liabilities of each sector classified by detailed instruments,

                                                          33
we can infer the information about who holds the claim. We obtained Korea’s flow of funds
data from the Bank of Korea (http://ecos.bok.or.kr/).

    For our study, we focus on the liabilities outstanding (i.e. stock measures) of depository
financial corporations.      The depository financial corporations include domestically licensed
banks, specialized banks, foreign bank branches, bank holding companies, and non-bank
depository institutions such as bank trust accounts and credit unions.              Hereinafter, we simply
refer to the depository financial corporations as banks.           The data are quarterly (end of
quarter) from 2002 Q4 to 2010 Q1.8           Given our purpose of constructing core and non-core
bank liabilities, we exclude equities, FDIs, BOK loans, beneficiary certificates and
miscellaneous items from the total liabilities of banks.

    Our bank liabilities data are classified by two dimensions: by instruments and by claim
holders. First, in terms of instruments, bank liabilities are classified into seven broad
categories: deposits; securities other than shares; loans; government loans; call loans and call
money; financial derivatives; and other foreign debts. Other foreign debts are mainly
foreign borrowings of domestic banks and foreign bank branches located in Korea.
Deposits are further classified into six sub-categories: transferable and short term deposits;
long term savings deposits; cover bills; negotiable certificate of deposits (CDs); repurchase
agreements (RPs); and money in trust. Securities other than shares (hereinafter securities)
are further classified into three categories: financial debentures; commercial papers (CP); and
external securities.     Loans are further classified into four categories (excluding the BOK
loans): depository corporation loans; insurance company loans; loans by credit-specialized
financial institutions; and loans by public financial institutions. Second, in terms of
claimholders, the bank liabilities are classified into five categories depending upon who holds
the claim: other financial corporations; non-financial corporations; households; general
government; and the foreign sector.




   8
      The data begins from 2002 Q4 due to the substantial revision of the data collection method following the
1993 System of National Accounts (93 SNA). Before2002 Q4, there are no data reported according to the new
93 SNA and no separate accounts exist for different types of financial corporations. Another advantage of
using 93 SNA data is that it reports gross liability data within each sector without netting cross transactions
within the sector, which is more appropriate to capture the expansion and shrinkage of the balance sheet of
financial institutions.
                                                           34
                                                                         Figure 4.4. Bank Liabilities by Instruments

                  400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1800
   Trillion Won


                  350                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1600

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1400
                  300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1200
                  250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1000
                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      800
                  150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      600
                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      400

                   50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200

                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec‐08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec‐09
                                                                                                                                    Dec‐05




                                                                                                                                                                        Dec‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec‐07
                        Dec‐02




                                                            Dec‐03




                                                                                                Dec‐04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sep‐08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep‐09
                                                                                                                                                               Sep‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sep‐07
                                                   Sep‐03




                                                                                       Sep‐04




                                                                                                                           Sep‐05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun‐08



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun‐09



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar‐10
                                                                                                                                                      Jun‐06



                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun‐07



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar‐08
                                 Mar‐03
                                          Jun‐03



                                                                     Mar‐04
                                                                              Jun‐04



                                                                                                         Mar‐05
                                                                                                                  Jun‐05



                                                                                                                                             Mar‐06


                                            Securities other than Shares                                                        Loans                                                                                Government Loans
                                            Financial Derivatives                                                               Call loans and money                                                                 Other Foreign Debts
                                            Deposits

Source: Flow of funds data, Bank of Korea.
Note: Currency and deposits are measured by the right axis. Others are measured by the left axis.




        Figure 4.4 shows how banks’ liabilities classified by instruments evolved over time.                                                                                                                                                                                                          In
terms of size, deposits are the largest item, constituting over 70 percent of the total bank
liabilities.                      The growth of most instruments other than deposits has stagnated after the
outbreak of global financial crisis in 2008. Note that three instruments in particular –
securities, financial derivatives and foreign debts exhibit much more pronounced rise and fall
around the crisis.




                                                                                                                                                        35
                                                                 Figure 4.5. Bank Liabilities by Claim Holders

   Trillion Won   1000

                  900

                  800

                  700

                  600

                  500

                  400

                  300

                  200

                  100

                    0
                         Dec‐02




                                                             Dec‐03




                                                                                                 Dec‐04




                                                                                                                                     Dec‐05




                                                                                                                                                                         Dec‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dec‐07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec‐08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec‐09
                                                    Sep‐03




                                                                                        Sep‐04




                                                                                                                            Sep‐05




                                                                                                                                                                Sep‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep‐07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep‐08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep‐09
                                           Jun‐03




                                                                               Jun‐04




                                                                                                                   Jun‐05




                                                                                                                                                       Jun‐06
                                  Mar‐03




                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun‐07
                                                                      Mar‐04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun‐08
                                                                                                          Mar‐05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun‐09
                                                                                                                                              Mar‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                  Mar‐07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar‐08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mar‐09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar‐10
                                            Financial Corporations                                                          General Government                                                               Nonfinancial Corporations
                                             Individuals                                                                    Rest of the World

Source: Flow of funds data, Bank of Korea.


       Now we turn to the classification of bank liabilities by claimholders – namely by who
holds the claim. The evolution over time of bank liabilities by claimholders in Korea is
shown in Figure 4.5.                                              Recall that in the previous section, we defined liabilities held by
households or non-financial corporations as core liabilities and those held by financial
corporations or by the foreign sector as non-core liabilities.                                                                                                                                 We see that both the liabilities
held by financial corporations and liabilities held by the foreign sector had increased rapidly
before the crisis and then collapsed afterwards.                                                                                                       This is a typical dynamics of non-core
liabilities around financial crisis. While foreigners had reduced their holdings at the end of
2008 and maintained their position subsequently, financial institutions reduced their holdings
most dramatically after the first quarter of 2009. In contrast, the liabilities held by
households and by non-financial corporations increased steadily without much fluctuation
around the crisis, which is a typical feature of core liabilities.9


   9
       In the full version of our paper submitted to the Bank of Korea, we also conducted detailed analyses of
liabilities held by different claim holders for respective instrument categories. We find that even at the deposit
level, those deposits held by financial corporations show the typical dynamics of non-core liabilities, and that
the securities held by households show the typical pattern of core-liabilities. These findings suggest that the
                                                            36
    During the boom, as bank lending increases, the liabilities also increase.                                                                                                   Since the core
liabilities are quite stable, if the liabilities increase rapidly then the increase must be mainly
through the buildup of non-core liabilities, as shown above.                                                                                                     Hence the financial cycle
shows up in the composition of liabilities; the share of non-core liabilities increases rapidly
before the crisis, only to collapse with the crisis.



           Figure 4.6. The Non-Core to Core Ratio and the KRW/USD Exchange Rate

    1                                                                                                                                                                     1600

  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                          1400
  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                          1200
  0.7
                                                                                                                                                                          1000
  0.6

  0.5                                                                                                                                                                     800
                                                                                                                                                                                  Non Core/Core
  0.4                                                                                                                                                                             exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                          600
  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                          400
  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                          200
  0.1

    0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                Apr‐06
                                                                                         Sep‐06
                                                                                                  Feb‐07
                                                              Jun‐05




                                                                                                           Jul‐07
                                                                                                                    Dec‐07
        Dec‐02




                                                                                                                                               Mar‐09
                                   Mar‐04




                                                                                                                                      Oct‐08


                                                                                                                                                        Aug‐09
                          Oct‐03


                                            Aug‐04




                                                                                                                                                                 Jan‐10
                                                     Jan‐05


                                                                       Nov‐05




                                                                                                                             May‐08
                 May‐03




Source: Bank of Korea
Note: The non-core to core ratio is defined as the ratio of non-core liabilities held by financial corporations and
the foreign sector to core liabilities held by households and non-financial corporations. The exchange rate is
the quarterly average of the Korean Won/US Dollar exchange rate.




    Figure 4.6 exhibits the ratio of non-core to core bank liabilities. It is defined as the ratio
of non-core liabilities held by financial corporations and the foreign sector to core liabilities
held by households and non-financial corporations.                                                                                      The figure also illustrates the quarterly
average exchange rate of the Korean Won against the US Dollar. As foreign borrowings are
a major source of non-core liabilities, changes in the non-core to core ratio are expected to be


classification of bank liabilities by claim holders should be more informative for the purpose of macroprudential
policy analysis.
                                                           37
closely associated with the movement of the exchange rate as discussed in the previous
section. Indeed, the figure shows that the peak of the non-core to core ratio was followed by
a sudden plummet of the exchange rate.


Procyclicality of Bank Liability Aggregates

    As discussed in section 3, mitigating procyclicality is a key challenge in macroprudential
policies. However, for policy makers to apply any macroprudential tools, it is necessary to
monitor and identify the relevant stage of financial cycles.               We hypothesize that the degree
of financial procyclicality is amplified by the expansion and shrinkage of non-core liabilities.
During the boom, when bank lending increases, liabilities also increase but all the liabilities
do not increase evenly. Namely non-core liabilities will be more procyclical than core
liabilities.

    To confirm this claim, and in order to obtain the responsiveness of a bank liability over
the business cycle, we rely on the simplest possible measure: the elasticity of the liability
with respect to real GDP. The elasticity of each liability i with respect to real GDP is
calculated by through regressions of the following form:

                     ln                    ln         , τ       1,0,1                                           (1)


Here,          is bank liability i at date t, and i denotes core and non-core liabilities respectively.
        is real GDP at date          , where     takes values τ          1,0,1. In the regression the
estimated value of          represents the elasticity of liability i with respective to the current real
                                                                                         10
GDP (τ      0), the lagged real GDP (τ           1) and the lead real GDP (τ          1).




     10
        In this regression, both regressor and regressand may be subject to a nonstationarity problem. In particular,
it is well known that if both variables are nonstationary, this type of regression is vulnerable to a spurious
estimation problem. However, since our objective is to measure the percentage change of the liability in
response to one percent change in real GDP, estimating         in this double log from is the right way to proceed.
For a robustness check, however, we detrended both regressor and regressand by the Hodrick-Prescott filter, and
obtained qualitatively similar results.
                                                            38
                           Table 4.2. Real GDP Elasticity of Bank Liabilities

                                                     Real GDP Elasticity (02Q4~10Q1)

                                           -1                           0                            1
                                       1.75***                       1.74***                      1.68***
          Core liability
                                       (11.25)                       (11.88)                      (11.51)

                                       4.36***                       4.26***                      4.28***
        Non-core liability
                                       (17.75)                       (14.99)                      (12.62)
Note: T-values are reported in the parenthesis and the statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels is
denoted by *, ** and ***, respectively.




    In table 4.2 we present the estimated elasticity with respect to real GDP of core and non-
core bank liabilities as classified by claim holders.           As can be seen in the table, the non-core
liabilities provided by financial institutions and foreign sector are much more procyclical than
the core liabilities held by households and non-financial firms. The real GDP elasticity of
contemporaneous non-core liabilities is estimated to be 4.26 while the real GDP elasticity of
core liabilities is relatively low at 1.74.11       The estimation results suggest that bank liabilities
can be classified as core versus and non-core depending upon who holds the claim, and these
classification well captures differential degree of respective liabilities’ contribution to
financial procyclicality.


Responsiveness of Bank Liabilities to Policy Interest Rate

    Given the positive results, we proceed to estimate the responsiveness of bank liabilities
with respect to the stance of monetary policy as measured by the short-term policy interest
rate, and investigate whether core and non-core liabilities show a differential responsiveness.
For instance, a permissive monetary policy environment and low interest rates may lead to
amplification of financial cycles through expansion of short-term market-based borrowings.
Furthermore, from the perspective of financial stability policy, for central banks to use


   11
       We also conducted more detailed analyses to estimate real GDP elasticities of respective bank liabilities
classified by instruments and claim holders. We find that, when classified by instruments, the elasticity
estimates for securities, financial derivatives, and foreign claims are relatively high. When classified by claim
holders, elasticity measures for financial corporate and foreign sector are much higher. These results are
available upon request.
                                                            39
monetary policy to lean against excessive build-up of bank liabilities, a necessary condition is
that bank liabilities respond to the change in the policy interest rate.

    In this section, in order to examine this possibility, we estimate a semi-elasticity of bank
liabilities with respect to the policy interest rate by modifying the equation as follows:

                           ln                    ln                , τ         1,0,1                               (2)

Here,          is the policy interest rate at time t τ. In the regression the estimated value of
    represents a semi-elasticity of liability i with respective to the policy rate after controlling
the impact of real GDP.



          Table 4.3. Domestic Policy Interest Rate Semi-elasticity of Bank Liabilities

                                                      Interest Rate Elasticity (02Q4~10Q1)
                                            -1                             0                             1
                                        -3.88***                      -5.13***                      -5.55***
          Core liability
                                         (-3.29)                       (-6.08)                       (-8.83)

                                           4.25                           -0.92                     -5.99***
        Non-core liability
                                          (1.64)                         (-0.36)                     (-2.72)
Note: T-values are reported in the parenthesis and the statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels is
denoted by *, ** and ***, respectively.




    Table 4.3 reports estimates of the semi-elasticity with respect to the domestic policy
interest rate of core and non-core bank liabilities.            Interestingly, the semi-elasticity of core
liabilities with respect to the contemporaneous policy rate is -5.13 which is quite high and
very significant, while the semi-elasticity of contemporaneous non-core liabilities is not
statistically different from zero.12        While our regression results do not demonstrate any
causal relationship, if we take the policy rate to be exogenous, the results suggest that
domestic monetary policy may not be an effective macroprudential tool to lean against the
excessive growth of non-core liabilities while it may be able to contain core liabilities. This


   12   Quite interestingly only the lead policy rate is statistically significant with a negative sign. We will
revisit and discuss this issue below.
                                                             40
finding is consistent with the discussion in section 2 on the constraints on monetary policy
placed on the central bank of a country with open capital accounts.



            Table 4.4. US Policy Interest Rate Semi-elasticity of Bank Liabilities

                                                US Fed Fund Rate Elasticity (02Q4~10Q1)

                                        -1                          0                          1

                                     -3.14***                   -2.97***                   -2.55***
       Core liability
                                      (-8.30)                    (-8.09)                    (-5.99)

                                     -2.74**                    -3.49***                   -4.43***
     Noncore liability
                                     (-2.12)                     (-3.08)                    (-4.55)
Note: T-values are reported in the parenthesis and the statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels is
denoted by *, ** and ***, respectively.




    To explore the possibility of domestic bank liabilities being responsive to global liquidity
shocks, we now replace the domestic policy rate with the foreign policy rate.             For the
foreign policy rate, we use the US federal funds rate set by the Federal Reserve. Table 4.4
reports estimates of the semi-elasticity with respect to the US policy rate of core and non-core
bank liabilities.       Since US policy rates are exogenous to the Korean economy, these
estimates are more likely to provide information about causality and they are quite different
from those when we use the domestic policy rate. Now the semi-elasticity of non-core bank
liabilities with respect to the US policy rate is negative and statistically significant.          The
semi-elasticity of the non-core liabilities with respect to the current US policy rate is -3.49
while the semi-elasticity of the core liabilities is -2.97.

    Overall, Korean banks’ non-core liabilities are much more negatively related to the US
policy rate than to the domestic policy rate. One plausible interpretation is that, for
emerging economies such as Korea, banks’ non-core liabilities tend to build up more
vigorously when global liquidity conditions are lax. For instance, when foreign interest
rates are low, financial intermediaries are more engaged in the carry trade of borrowing from
the low foreign interest rate instruments and investing in higher domestic interest rate


                                                      41
instruments.    This carry trade leads to more foreign borrowings and thus larger bank
liabilities held by the foreign sector.

    The intermediaries with more funding coming from the foreign source are capable of
lending to other intermediaries as well as to ultimate borrowers. Hence banks’ liabilities
held by other financial corporations also increase.     Since these two non-core liabilities, held
by the foreign sector and by financial corporations, are the major source of rapid
accumulation of banks’ liabilities, it is not surprising to see that the foreign interest rate plays
such an important role in emerging market countries such as Korea. If the negative
relationship between bank liabilities and the US policy rate can be interpreted to reflect a
causal relationship, our results suggest that accumulation of Korean non-core bank liabilities
is much more affected by the US policy rate rather than the domestic policy rate. Namely,
there is not much scope for domestic monetary policy to play in controlling bank liabilities
for a prudential purpose.

    We have already alluded in Section 3 to a recent empirical study by Kim and Shin (2010)
that shows how Korean monetary policy is dependent on U.S. monetary policy even after
Korea officially adopted a floating exchange rate policy.      This fact is clearly reflected in
chart already given as Figure 3.2.    In Figure 3.2, we clearly saw that the Korean policy rate
follows very closely to the US policy rate with a few months lag.

    Our finding that the lead domestic policy rate in Korea is more negatively related to bank
non-core liabilities in Table 4.3 can also be understood by the fact that the domestic monetary
policy follows the US policy rate with a lag.     Since future domestic monetary policy is more
or less similar to the current US monetary policy, if bank liabilities respond to the current US
monetary policy, the semi-elasticity of bank liabilities will be more correlated to the lead of
domestic policy interest rate as shown in Tables 4.3.

    Overall, our results confirm that the accumulation of non-core bank liabilities in Korea is
more affected by the US policy rate than by the domestic policy rate.         This finding strongly
suggests that monetary policy has cross-border spillover effects and that the stages of
domestic financial cycle and thus buildup of financial risks cannot effectively be addressed
solely by domestic monetary policies in emerging economies.

                                                  42
      5. Macroprudential Policy Frameworks

    Our finding in the previous section suggests that central banks in open emerging
economies, even when they have a flexible exchange rate regime, may want tools additional
to the traditional policy interest rate in order to respond to the build-up of financial risks in a
pre-emptive manner.     A macroprudential policy framework is designed to complement
monetary policy in this respect. The policy framework would encompass a system of early
warning indicators that signal increased vulnerabilities to financial stability and a set of
associated policy tools that can address the increased vulnerabilities at an early stage.      The
surveys by the Bank of England (2009) and BIS (2010) give useful taxonomies. Hanson,
Kashyap and Stein (2011) provide further empirical context and support.


5.1. Macroprudential Indicators

    Excessive asset growth of the banking sector is at the core of increased financial sector
vulnerabilities.   The challenge for policy makers is knowing when asset growth is
“excessive” and finding policy tools that can address and counter the excessive asset growth
in a timely and effective manner.

    Simple rules of thumb such as the ratio of total credit to GDP may be useful, as
demonstrated by Borio and Lowe (2004), and this ratio has figured prominently in the
discussion of the countercyclical capital buffer under the Basel III framework, which
proposes a countercyclical capital buffer focused on the credit to GDP ratio as the measure of
procyclicality that would trigger increased capital requirements on banks (BCBS (2009).
The idea that the required capital buffer would vary with the financial cycle had been in
existence for some time, and had been argued in the Geneva Report on bank regulation
(Brunnermeier, Crockett, Goodhart, Persaud and Shin (2009)), but the Basel Committee’s
approach went one step further in selecting the credit to GDP ratio as the appropriate cyclical
indicator.

    It is natural that credit growth would be scaled by normalizing it relative to some
underlying fundamental measure.       Normalizing credit growth by GDP has many advantages,
since GDP is an aggregate flow measure of economic activity that reflects current economic

                                                  43
conditions.   However, more controversial is the choice of the measure of credit growth itself,
especially if such a choice entails decisions that are made on a discretionary basis by the
relevant authority that is in charge of banking sector oversight.

    Further research will be necessary to determine to what extent the simple credit to GDP
ratio can serve as a finely calibrated signal that can support the use of automatic tightening of
bank capital standards, as envisaged in the Basel III framework.

    Edge and Meisenzahl (2011) argue that using the credit to GDP ratio in real time as a
guide to policy may be fraught with difficulties due to measurement problems.       They
identify two types of measurement issues – the first to do with the underlying components of
GDP that may subsequently be revised, and the second to do with the difficulties of
estimating the gap between the current realization and the trend.    Since the trend itself must
be measured in real time, the gap measure turns out to be highly sensitive to measurement
problems.

    It would be uncontroversial to say that the less unanimity there is on the interpretation of
the signal, the greater will be the political economy challenges faces by policy makers in
acting decisively and in a timely fashion in heading off financial booms that build up
vulnerabilities.   Therefore, the use of the credit to GDP ratio in real time policy can be
expected to present formidable challenges.

    Given the potential difficulties of using the simple credit to GDP ratio as the appropriate
signal of the stage of the financial cycle, alternatives may be preferable.   Following on from
our discussion in previous sections, a more promising set of measures of the financial cycle
are those derived from the liabilities side of banking sector balance sheets.   In particular, the
growth of various components of non-core to core liabilities of the banking sector may be
especially useful in gauging the stage of the financial cycle.

    Although balance sheet aggregates are forms of monetary aggregates and liability
measures of the banking sector, there are important distinctions with the traditional approach
to monetary analysis. Traditional monetary aggregates have been examined by monetary
economists for their effect on future inflation through the quantity theory of money. The


                                                 44
recent lengthy study by the European Central Bank (ECB (2010)) is a comprehensive survey
of the traditional approach to the study of monetary aggregates.

   However, the macroprudential role of monetary aggregates has to do with the behavioral
and stability properties of such aggregates. As we have seen, the legal form of the claim
may not coincide with the behavioral properties of the claim. For instance, we have seen
that household deposits have empirical traits that differ from deposits held by other types of
owners, even though the legal form of the claims are identical.

   In particular, we have shown that a two-dimensional classification of bank liabilities in
terms of (1) the holder of the claim and (2) the type of claim provides a much richer texture
to the overall picture of banking sector fluctuations.   Further refinements of the two-way
classifications and further explorations of the predictive properties of the non-core liability
aggregates for financial spreads and exchange rate changes may shed light on the optimal set
of indicators.

   Measures of cross-exposures across intermediaries (such as the CoVaR measure due to
Adrian and Brunnermeier (2009)) may be useful complementary indicators, bearing in mind
that cross-exposures themselves are procyclical, and track non-core liabilities. The study of
cross exposures across financial institutions is still in its infancy, but there has been a growth
in interest on this issue, especially from researchers in central banks from those advanced
economies that were on the front line of the financial distress during the recent financial crisis.

   Among advanced economy central banks, the Bank of England has been one of the most
active in research into the systemic risk generated by cross exposures between financial
intermediaries. In November 2009, the Bank of England published a discussion paper on the
role of macroprudential policy (Bank of England (2009)). The report reflects the issues and
policy concerns that reflect the U.K.’s experience with the failure of Northern Rock bank and
the subsequent intervention and resolution in the U.K. banking system.       Although there is
some gap between the concerns of an advanced economy and those of an emerging economy,
many of the lessons on excessive asset growth and the growth of volatile market-based
liabilities are common themes.



                                                  45
   The Bank for International Settlements, especially its Committee for the Global Financial
System (CGFS) has also conducted extensive study of the role of macroprudential policy.
The CGFS published a discussion paper in May 2010 that gives an overview of the
instruments and frameworks of macroprudential policies.

5.2. Macroprudential Tools

   Macroprudential policy tools to mitigate vulnerabilities would ideally be designed to fit
closely with the early warning indicators and the conceptual underpinnings for the relevant
economic externalities.    We proceed to outline the variety of tools that have been used or
proposed, but we do not attempt to construct an encompassing framework that can gauge the
tradeoffs in a systematic way. A promising approach in providing a more systematic
framework is given by Goodhart, Kashyap, Tsomocos and Vardoulakis (2011) who examine
a micro-founded general equilibrium model with default.

   Examples of macroprudential policy tools include the following.


Loan-To-Value and Debt- Service-To-Income Caps

When monetary policy is constrained, administrative rules that limit bank lending such as
caps on loan-to-value (LTV) ratios and debt-service-to- income (DTI) ratios may be a useful
complement to traditional tools in banking supervision. Although LTV ratios are more
familiar to financial regulators, the use of DTI caps is less widespread. However, for Korea
and some Asian economies such as Hong Kong, the use of DTI ratios has been an important
supplementary tool for macroprudential purposes.In the case of Hong Kong, the use of DTI
rules takes on added significance due to the fact that Hong Kong has a currency board based
on the US Dollar, and hence does not have an autonomous monetary policy. As such,
monetary policy shocks are transmitted directly to Hong Kong.       The flexible use of LTV
and DTI rules are key elements of the macroprudential toolkit.

Capital Requirements that Adjust Over the Cycle

    Research has shown that the rise in asset values that accompanies a boom results in
higher capital buffers at financial institutions, supporting further lending in the context of an

                                                 46
unchanging benchmark for capital adequacy; in the bust, the value of this capital can drop
precipitously, possibly even necessitating a cut in lending.13 Capital requirements as
currently constituted therefore can amplify the credit cycle, making a boom and bust more
likely. Capital requirements that, instead, lean against the credit or business cycle, that is
rise with credit growth and fall with credit contraction can thus play an important role in
promoting financial stability and reducing systemic risk.           Research on how to design such
cyclical capital requirements needs to be a high priority both in academia and central banks.

    We have already commented on some of the measurement issues associated with the
implementation of countercyclical capital buffers. The framework for countercyclical
capital buffers as envisaged in the Basel III framework has focused on the ratio of credit
growth to GDP. There are two pre-conditions for the successful implementation of such
countercyclical measures. First, the quantitative signals that trigger actions would reflect
accurately the features (such as excessive asset growth) that are being targeted by policy
makers. Second, the implementation procedure would work better if it allows policy makers
to move decisively and in a timely manner in heading off the build-up of vulnerabilities. We
have already commented on the first point, and so here, we focus on the second point.

    If the triggering of the countercyclical capital requirements is predicated on the exercise
of discretion and judgment by the authorities, the political economy problems associated with
the exercise of such discretion put the authorities under pressure from market participants and
other interested parties. The political economy problem is similar to that of central banks
that tighten monetary policy to head off property booms. Since there are private sector
participants who are the beneficiaries of the short-term boom, they can be expected to exert
pressure against the policy makers. The political economy problems will be more acute if
there are controversies on the correctness or accuracy of the quantitative indicators used by
the authorities.

    Thus, the two issues mentioned above – the accuracy of the quantitative indicators and
the political economy problems – are in fact very closely related. One of the disadvantages
of the countercyclical capital buffer is that it relies on the triggering of additional capital


   13   For example, see Kashyap and Stein (2004), Goodhart (2008), Adrian and Shin (2009).

                                                       47
requirements in response to quantitative signals. Although such quantitative measures are
relatively straightforward in simple theoretical models, there may be considerable challenges
in the smooth and decisive implementation in practice.

Forward-Looking Provisioning

     Forward-looking provisioning operates in a similar manner to the countercyclical capital
requirements discussed above, although there are also important differences. The Bank of
Spain has pioneered the use of forward-looking (or dynamic) provisioning. A good early
reference to the specific rules and procedures as well as the empirical studies that underpin
the specific quantitative features of the scheme is given in Fernandez, Pages and Saurina
(2000).    A more recent update is provided by Saurina (2009) in a World Bank note.

     Forward-looking provisioning requires the build-up of loss absorbing buffer in the form
of provisions at the time of making the loan. In this sense, there is a similarity with the
countercyclical capital buffer.     However, the main difference between forward-looking
provisioning and the countercyclical capital requirement is the accounting treatment.             In the
case of forward-looking provisioning, the provision passes through the income statement as
reduced profit, and hence impacts the capital of the bank. By influencing the capital of the
bank it is likely to influence bank management that target a specific return on equity (ROE)
figure.

     Although forward-looking provisioning has been important in cushioning the Spanish
banking system from the initial stages of the global financial crisis, there is a question mark
on whether building up loss absorbing buffers, by itself, can be sufficient to cushion the
economy from the bursting of a major property bubble, as Spain is discovering to its cost
during the on-going European financial crisis.

Leverage caps and Loan-to-Deposit caps

     Caps on bank leverage may be used as a way to limit asset growth by tying total assets to
bank equity.14    The rationale for a leverage cap rests on the role of bank capital as a


14
    Morris and Shin (2008) “Financial Regulation in a System Context”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2008, http://www.princeton.edu/~hsshin/www/BPEA2008.pdf
                                                       48
constraint on new lending rather than the Basel approach of bank capital as a buffer against
loss.

        In June 2010, the Korean regulatory authorities introduced a new set of macroprudential
regulations to mitigate excessive volatility of foreign capital flows. Specific policy
measures included explicit ceilings on foreign exchange derivatives positions of banks,
regulations on foreign currency bank loans, and prudential regulations for improving foreign
exchange risk management of financial institutions. These policy measures are to limit
short term foreign currency denominated borrowings of banks. Along with these
regulations, short-term external debts of Korean banks have remained at approximately USD
200 billion level since early 2009, which is much less than 250 Billion at the peak in 2008.
Note that foreign borrowing is a key non-core funding source for Korean banks, and reining
in foreign borrowing has also contributed to the deleveraging of bank non-core liabilities.

        Korea’s leverage cap on bank FX derivative positions introduced in June 2010 is aimed
at limiting the practice of banks hedging forward dollar positions with carry trade positions in
Korean Won funded with short-term US dollar debt.         The leverage cap has moderated carry
trade capital inflows into Korea, but the primary rationale of the leverage cap is as a
macroprudential measure aimed at financial stability rather than as a capital control tool.

        Another related measure that is in place in Korea is the cap on the ratio of loans to
deposits.     The Korean supervisory authority announced in December 2009 that it will
reintroduce the loan-to-deposit ratio regulation which had been scrapped in November 1998
as a part of the government deregulation efforts. According to the new regulation, the KRW
denominated loans must be less than 100% of KRW denominated deposits, and negotiable
CDs will not be counted as deposits in computing the ratio.       The 100% ceiling must be met
by Korean banks by the end of 2013. As can be seen in Figure 5.1, the loan-to-value ratio of
Korean banks has continued to fall afterwards as banks shifted their funding structure away
from wholesale funding such as CDs and bank debentures towards taking deposits such as
time deposits.




                                                   49
                        Figure 5.1. Loan-to-Deposit Ratio of Korean Banks
               140.0%
               130.0%
               120.0%
               110.0%
               100.0%
                90.0%
                80.0%
                70.0%
                60.0%
                50.0%
                40.0%
                        2000   2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009

               Source: Korea Financial Supervisory Service




      However, the rule does not apply to the Korean branches of foreign banks.                By
capping the growth of lending to the same pace as the growth of deposit funding, the Korean
loan to deposit cap has two effects.         First, it restrains excessive asset growth by tying loan
growth to the growth in deposit funding.          Second, there is also the direct effect on the
growth of non-core liabilities, and hence on the build-up of vulnerabilities that come from the
liabilities side of the balance sheet.       In this respect, there are similarities between the loan to
deposit cap and the levy on non-core liabilities, to be discussed below.

      Indeed, at the theoretical level the loan-to-deposit cap can be seen as a special case of a
non-core liabilities levy where the tax rate is kinked, changing from zero to infinity at the
threshold point. However, the comparison with the non-core liabilities levy is less easy due
to the fact that the loan to deposit cap applies only to loans, not total assets or total exposures
(including off balance sheet exposures). Also, the fact that the loan to deposit cap does not
apply to the Korean branches of foreign banks means that there are limits on what might be
achieved in reining in excesses during booms.

Levy on Non-Core Liabilities.


                                                       50
     The stock of non-core liabilities reflects the stage of the financial cycle and the extent of
the under-pricing of risk in the financial system.         A levy or tax on the non-core liabilities
can serve to mitigate pricing distortions that lead to excessive asset growth. The Financial
Stability Contribution (FSC) recommended by the IMF in its report on the bank levy15 to the
G20 leaders is an example of such a corrective tax.             Korea announced its Macroprudential
Levy in December 2010, and began operation in August 2011. It is a levy on the foreign
exchange-denominated liabilities of the banking sector, with the rate initially set at 20 basis
points for short-term FX-denominated liabilities.

     The levy on non-core liabilities has many desirable features.           First, the base of the levy
itself varies over the financial cycle.      The levy bites hardest during the boom when non-core
liabilities are large, so that the levy has the properties of an automatic stabilizer even if the
tax rate itself remains constant over time. Given the well-known political economy
challenges to the exercise of discretion by regulators, the automatic stabilizer feature of the
levy has important advantages.

     Second, the levy on non-core liabilities addresses financial vulnerability while leaving
unaffected the essential functioning of the financial system in channeling core funding from
savers to borrowers.      By targeting non-core liabilities only, the levy addresses externalities
associated with excessive asset growth and systemic risk arising from interconnectedness of
banks.

     Third, the targeting of non-core liabilities addresses the vulnerability of open emerging
economies to sudden reversals in capital flows due to deleveraging by banks. Indeed, for
emerging economies, the levy on non-core liabilities could be aimed more narrowly at the
foreign currency denominated liabilities only. A levy on the FX liabilities of the banking
sector will have an impact on foreign currency flows, but such a policy is a
macroprudentialtool aimed at financial stability, rather than a tool for capital controls or a
tool to manage exchange rates.




15
    “A Fair and Substantial Contribution by the Financial Sector” Report by the IMF to the G20, June 2010
http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/062710b.pdf
                                                        51
    The revenue raised by the levy is a secondary issue. The main purpose of the levy is to
align incentives.   A good analogy is with the Congestion Charge used to control car traffic
into central London. Under this charge, car drivers pay a daily fee of 8 pounds to drive into
central London. The main purpose of the charge is to discourage drivers from bringing their
cars into central London, thereby alleviating the externalities associated with traffic
congestion.    In the same way, the non-core liabilities bank levy can be seen primarily as a
tool for aligning the incentives of banks closer to the social optimum.    The revenue raised
by the levy would also be of benefit (perhaps for a market stabilization fund) but the revenue
is a secondary issue.

Unremunerated Reserve Requirements.

   A traditional form of capital controls has been unremunerated reserve requirements, where
the central bank requires importers of capital to deposit a certain fraction of the sum at the
central bank. The deposit does not pay interest, and so constitutes a tax on the capital
inflow. In Korea, the reserve requirement for deposits is already in place, but there is no
similar reserve requirement for non-deposit liabilities.   The introduction of a reserve
requirement for the non-deposit liabilities of banks would raise the cost of non-deposit
funding for banks, and thereby restrain the rapid growth of such liabilities during booms. In
this respect, the reserve requirement on non-deposit liabilities would have a similar effect to a
tax or levy on such liabilities.

    However, there would also be important differences. The reserves would have to be
held on the central bank’s balance sheet, with implications for the fluctuations in the money
supply in line with the private sector’s use of non-deposit liabilities, and the selection of
counterpart assets on the central bank’s balance sheet.

   There are also differences in the revenue implications between the reserve requirement
and the levy. The reserve requirement would raise revenue to the extent that the net income
on the assets held by the central bank that is funded by the reserves would be positive.        The
bigger the interest spread, the larger would be the income.

   There is one advantage of the reserve requirement that is not shared by the levy, which is
that the banks would have access to a liquid asset in case there is a liquidity shortage or run in
                                                  52
the financial market.   In this respect, the reserve requirement would have some of the
features of the Basel III liquidity requirement on banks.

   However, a disadvantage of the reserve requirement is that it applies only banks, rather
than the wider group of financial institutions that use non-core liabilities.   When faced with
the possibility of arbitrage, or with structural changes that shift intermediation activity from
banks to the market-based financial intermediaries, the reserve requirement would be less
effective.   For Korea, this problem is less acute under the current market structure, but the
endogenous evolution of market structure cannot be ruled out.


6. Concluding Remarks

   The global financial crisis has spurred a fundamental review of the principles of
prudential regulation. While microprudential regulations with the objective of strengthening
individual financial institutions will have some beneficial effects on strengthening the
resilience of the financial system as a whole, such a firm-specific approach has been
demonstrated as being insufficient to ensure financial stability. Broader measures to
strengthen systems as a whole and reduce the buildup of risks over time are also needed.

   The centerpiece of Basel III is a strengthened common equity buffer of 7% together with
newly introduced liquidity requirements and a leverage cap, to be phased in over an extended
timetable running to 2019.    However, the elements that were most promising in living up to
the macroprudential aims of regulatory reform – the countercyclical capital buffer and the
capital surcharge for the systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) – proved most
controversial.

   In the case of the countercyclical capital buffer, disagreements between countries meant
that the countercyclical buffer will be introduced at the discretion of national regulators in the
range of 0% to 2.5%.     In other words, there has been a failure to agree on a uniform
international standard for countercyclical capital. In the case of the additional restrictions
against SIFIs, the G20 summit in Seoul in November 2010 pointed to a varied approach
where individual country regulators will be selecting policies from a large menu that includes
contingent capital, leverage caps or levies.

                                                  53
    Thus, under its common denominator that excludes countercyclical capital or SIFI
surcharges, Basel III is almost exclusively micro-prudential in its focus, concerned with the
solvency of individual banks, rather than being macro-prudential, concerned with the
resilience of the financial system as a whole.

    The language of Basel III is revealing in this regard, with repeated references to greater
“loss absorbency” of bank capital.      However, we have argued in this report that achieving
greater loss absorbency by itself is almost certainly inadequate in achieving a stable financial
system, for two reasons.

   Loss absorbency does not address directly excessive asset growth during booms.

   Preoccupation with loss absorbency diverts attention from the liabilities side of banks’
    balance sheets and vulnerabilities from the reliance on unstable short-term funding and
    short-term foreign currency debt.

    In this paper, we have given an overview of the policy options that can complement
traditional tools of bank regulation and the tools of monetary policy in reining in the excesses
in the financial system.   Macroprudential policies aim to constraint the excessive growth in
lending in booms, and thereby attain both a more viable long-term growth in lending and also
mitigate the emergence of vulnerabilities on the liabilities side.         The current global
conjuncture with global liquidity driven by expansive monetary policies pursued by advanced
economy central banks makes the topic of macroprudential policies in emerging market
economies even more important and pressing than usual.                Although the study of
macroprudential policy frameworks is in its infancy there is a quickly accumulating body of
work on the subject. We hope that this study makes a contribution in this direction.




                                                 54
References
Adrian, Tobias and Markus Brunnermeier,2009 “CoVaR” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Report No. 348.

Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench and Hyun S. Shin, 2009, “Macro Risk Premiums and
Intermediary Balance Sheet Quantities,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
428.

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin,2008 "Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary
Policy" paper for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole,
2008

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin,2009 “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy,” American
Economic Review, Vol 99, No. 2: 600-605

Adrian, T., E. Etula and H. S. Shin, 2009, “Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 361.

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin,2010, "Liquidity and Leverage" Journal of Financial
Intermediation 19 (3), 418-437

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin, 2011, "Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics"
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford (eds) chapter
12, 601-650

Bank of Canada, 2006, Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada), www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/press.

Bank for International Settlements, 2010, “Macroprudential instruments and frameworks: a
stocktaking of issues and experiences” CGFS discussion paper 38,
http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs38.htm

Bank of England, 2009, “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper”
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/financialstability/roleofmacroprudentialp
olicy091121.pdf

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2009, “Strengthening the Resilience of the
Banking Sector” December 2009http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs164.pdf

Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor, 2010, “Monetary Policy
After the Fall,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium

Bernanke, Ben S., 2010, “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” speech given at the
annual meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta Georgia, January 3, 2010,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100103a.htm.



                                              55
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1999, “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.
77-128, www.kc.frb.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/1999/sym99prg.htm.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 2001, “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 253-
57.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics,vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1341-93.

Bloxham, Paul, Christopher Kent and Michael Robson, 2010, “Asset Prices, Credit Growth,
Monetary and Other Policies: An Australian Case Study,” Reserve Bank of Australia,
Research Discussion Paper, RDP 2010-06 (September 2010).

Borio, C., W.B. English, and A.J. Filardo, 2003, “A Tale of Two Perspectives: Old or New
Challenges for Monetary Policy?” BIS Working Paper No. 127 (Basel: Bank for International
Settlements, February).

Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe, 2002, “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability:
Exploring the Nexus,” BIS Working Paper 114 (Basel: Bank for International Settlements,
July).

Borio, C. and P. Lowe, 2004, "Securing sustainable price stability: should credit come back
from the wilderness?", BIS Working Paper, No.157.

Borio, Claudio and Habin Zhu, 2008, “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy:
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Paper no. 268 (December).

Brunnermeier, M., A. Crockett, C. Goodhart, A. Persaud, H. S. Shin, 2009, Geneva Report on
the World Economy 11: The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117, 379–408.

Cecchetti , Steven., Genberg, Hans., Lipsky, John., and Sushil Wadhwani, 2000, “Asset
Prices and Central Bank Policy,” Geneva Reports on the World Economy No. 2 (London:
Centre for Economic Policy Research, July).

Delis, Manthos D. and Georgios Kouretas, 2010, “Interest Rates and Bank Risk-Taking,”
Munich Personal RePEc Archive, MRPA Paper No. 20132 (January).

Dupor, Bill, 2005, “Stabilizing Non-fundamental Asset Price Movements under Discretion
and Limited Information,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 727-47.

Edge, Rochelle M. and Ralf R. Meisenzahl, 2011, “The unreliability of credit-to-GDP ratio
gaps in real-time: Implications for countercyclical capital buﬀers” Federal Reserve Board
working paper, http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201137/201137pap.pdf
                                               56
Fernandez, S., J. Pages and J. Saurina, 2000, “Credit Growth, Problem Loans and Credit Risk
Provisioning in Spain” Bank of Spain working paper 18,
http://www.bde.es/informes/be/docs/dt0018e.pdf

Gambacorta, Leonardo, 2009, “Monetary Policy and the Risk-Taking Channel,” BIS
Quarterly Review, December, pg. 43-53.

Goodhart, Charles, Anil Kashyap, Dimitrios Tsomocos and Alexandros Vardoulakis, 2011,
“Financial Regulation in General Equilibrium” working paper,
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/anil.kashyap/research/papers/Financial-Regulation-in-
General-Equilibrium.pdf

Gorton, Gary, 2008, “The Subprime Panic” Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole

Greenspan, Alan, 2002, “Opening Remarks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Symposium Rethinking Stabilization Policy: 1-10.

Gruen, D., M. Plumb, and A. Stone, 2005, “How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Asset
Price Bubbles?” International Journal of Central Banking, Vol .1, No. 3 (December): 1-31.

European Central Bank, 2010, Enhancement of Monetary Analysis

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 2006, An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary
Policy Between 1995 and 2005 (Stockholm: SverigesRiksdag).

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King, 1997, “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,pp. 231-83.

Hahm, Joon-Ho, 2010, “Flow of Funds Analysis of the Financial Sector,” Chapter 2 in Part I
of The Transition and Future Prospects of Financial System in Korea, Seoul National
University.

Hanson, Samuel, Anil Kshyap and Jeremy C. Stein, 2011, "A Macroprudential Approach to
Financial Regulation," The Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1), pp.3-28.

Hoenig, Thomas, 2010, “The High Cost of Exceptionally Low Rates,” speech given at
Bartlesville Federal Reserve Forum, Bartlesville, Oklahoma (June 3)
http://www.kansascityfed.org/SpeechBio/HoenigPDF/Bartlesville.06.03.10.pdf

Issing, Otmar, 2003a, “Monetary and Financial Stability: Is There a Trade-off?” comments at
the Bank for International Settlements, March.

Issing, Otmar, 2003b, Introductory statement delivered at the European Central Bank
Workshop on “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy,” December 11.




                                              57
Ioannidou, Vasso, Stevem Ongena, and Jose Luis Peydro, 2009, “Monetary Policy, Risk-
Taking and Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment.” European Banking Centre
Discussion Paper no. 2009-04S.

Jimenez, Gabriel, Seven Ongena, Jose Luis Peydro and Jesus Saurina, 2008, “Hazardous
Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the
Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?” Bank of Spain, Working Paper no. 0833.

Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1994, “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending,” in N.
Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in
Business Cycles, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 221-56.

Keister, Todd, 2010, “Bailouts and Financial Fragility.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
unpublished manuscript.

Kim, Soyoung and Kwanho Shin, 2010, “Globalization of Capital Markets and Monetary
Policy Independence in Korea,” KDI Journal of Economic Policy, 32, Issue 2.

Kindleberger, Charles P., 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises
(New York: Basic Books).

King, Mervyn, 2004a, Remarks made in a panel discussion on Alan Greenspan's speech on
Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy delivered at the American Economic Association
Annual Meeting in San Diego, January 3,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech209.pdf.

King, Mervyn, 2004b, Speech delivered to the CBI Scotland Diner at the Glasgow Hilton
Hotel, June 14, www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech221.pdf.

Kohn, Donald, 2006, “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” speech delivered at “Monetary
Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice,” a European Central Bank Colloquium held in
honor of OtmarIssing, Frankfurt, March 16.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 2008, Whither Federal Reserve Communication, speech delivered at the
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, (July 28)
(www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080728a.htm)

Mishkin, Frederic S., 2010a, “Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial
Disruptions, Journal of Asian Economics 23 (June), pp. 242-246.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 2010b,, “Don’t Monetize the Debt,” Wall Street Journal, Thursday,
September 9, p. A7.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 2011a, “Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis,”
“Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons From the Crisis” in Marek Jarocinski, Frank Smets and
Christian Thimann, eds., 2011, Monetary Policy Revisited: Lessons from the Crisis, Sixth ECB
Central Banking Conference (European Central Bank: Frankfurt, 2011), pp. 67-118


                                              58
Mishkin, Frederic S., 2011b, “Over the Cliff: From the Subprime to the Global Financial
Crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Winter 2011), pp. 49-70.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin,2009, "Illiquidity Component of Credit Risk," working
paper.

Posen, Adam S.,2003, “It Takes More Than a Bubble to Become Japan,” in Anthony Richards
and Tim Robinson, ed. Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (Sydney: Reserve Bank of
Australia): 203-249.

Posen, Adam S.,2009, “Finding the Right Tool for Dealing with Asset Price Booms,” speech
to the MPR Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference, London, (December 1)
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech415.pdf

Rajan, Rhaguram G., 2005, “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” The
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future. (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City):
313-369.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2006, "Has Finance Made the World Riskier?" European Financial
Management 12(4), pg. 499-533.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2010, “Bernanke Must End Era of Ultra-Low Rates,” Financial Times
(July 28), http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2a19a706-9a7a-11df-87fd-00144feab49a.html

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent R. Reinhart, 2010, “After the Fall,” Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead,
manuscript, http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart-paper.pdf

Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press)

Rosenberg, Irma, 2006, “Monetary Policy in Sweden,” speech delivered at the Swedibank,
September 18.

Saurina, Jesus, 2009, “Dynamic Provisioning: Experience of Spain” World Bank Policy Brief
7, 2009, http://rru.worldbank.org/documents/CrisisResponse/Note7.pdf

Selody, Jack, and Carolyn Wilkins, 2004, “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy: A Canadian
Perspective on the Issues,” Bank of Canada Review (Autumn), pp. 3-14.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2009a, "Reflections on Northern Rock: The Bank Run that Heralded the
Global Financial Crisis" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1).

Shin, Hyun Song, 2009b, "Securitisation and Financial Stability" Economic Journal, 119, 309
- 332.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2010, Risk and Liquidity, 2008 Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford
University Press.

                                              59
Shin, Hyun Song, 2009d, “Global Imbalances, Twin Crises and the Financial Stability Role of
Monetary Policy”, in The World Economy with the G-20.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2009e, “Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System”,
paper prepared for the 8th BIS Annual Conference.

Shin, Hyun Song and Kwanho Shin, 2011, “Macroprudential Policy and Monetary
Aggregates”, NBER Working Paper No. 16836 (paper prepared for the 2010 Bank of Korea
Research Conference).

Stevens, G.R., 2004, “Recent Issues in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin, vol. 2004 (March).

Svensson, Lars E.O., 1997, “Optimal Inflation Targets, ‘Conservative’ Central Banks, and
Linear Inflation Contracts,” American Economic Review, vol. 87 (March), pp. 98-114.

Svensson, Lars E.O., 2002, “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization”, in Rethinking
Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 261-
312.

Taylorm John, 2007, “Housing and Monetary Policy,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City: 463-476.

Tinbergen, Jan, 1939, BusinessCycles in the United States of America: 1919-1932, Statistical
Testing of Business Cycle Theories, vol. 2. Geneva: League of Nations.

Tirole, Jean and Emmanuel Farhi, 2009, “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and
Systemic Bailouts.”NBER Working Paper Series 15138.

Turner, Phillip, 2010, “Central Banks and the Financial Crisis,” BIS Papers No. 51 (Basel:
Bank for International Settlements): 21-25.

Wessel, David, 2009, In Fed We Trust: Ben Bernanke’s War on the Great Panic, (New York:
Crown Business).

White, William, 2004, “Making Macroprudential Concerns Operational,” speech delivered at
a Financial Stability Symposium organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, October 26,
www.bis.org/speeches/sp041026.htm.

White, William R., 2009, “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?” Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas Working Paper No. 34. (August)

Wilson, L. and Y. W. Wu, 2010, “Common (Stock) Sense About Risk-Shifting and Bank
Bailouts,” Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, Vol. 24, no.1: 3-29.




                                               60
