                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GOVERNMENT SPENDING AND PRIVATE ACTIVITY

                                           Valerie A. Ramey

                                         Working Paper 17787
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17787


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2012




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the NBER conference "Fiscal Policy after the Financial
Crisis" in Milan in December 2011. I am grateful to Roger Farmer, Garey Ramey, and David Romer
for discussions that led to the questions analyzed in this paper and to Alberto Alesina, Francesco Giavazzi,
Roberto Perotti and participants in the conference for their comments. I thank Jonas Fisher for sharing
the Fisher-Peters defense excess returns variable. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Valerie A. Ramey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Government Spending and Private Activity
Valerie A. Ramey
NBER Working Paper No. 17787
January 2012
JEL No. E24,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper asks whether increases in government spending stimulate private activity. The first part
of the paper studies private spending. Using a variety of identification methods and samples, I find
that in most cases private spending falls significantly in response to an increase in government spending.
These results imply that the average GDP multiplier lies below unity. In order to determine whether
concurrent increases in tax rates dampen the spending multiplier, I use two different methods to adjust
for tax effects. Neither method suggests significant effects of current tax rate changes on the spending
multiplier. In the second part of the paper, I explore the effects of government spending on labor markets.
I find that increases in government spending lower unemployment. Most specifications and samples
imply, however, that virtually all of the effect is through an increase in government employment, not
private employment. I thus conclude that on balance government spending does not appear to stimulate
private activity.


Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
VRAMEY@UCSD.EDU
1     Introduction
The potential stimulus effects of fiscal policy have once again become an active area of
academic research. Before The Great Recession, the few researchers who estimated the
effects of government spending did so in order to understand which macroeconomic
models were the best approximation to the economy. Rather than analyzing differences
in estimated multipliers, most of the literature debated whether the movements of key
variables, such as real wages and consumption, were more consistent with Keynesian
or Neoclassical views of fiscal policy (e.g. Rotemberg and Woodford (1992), Ramey
and Shapiro (1998), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Burnside et al. (2004), and Perotti
(2008)). Starting with the stimulus debate, however, the focus shifted to empirical
estimates of multipliers. In Ramey (2011b), I surveyed the growing recent literature
that estimates government spending multipliers in aggregate national data as well as
in state panel data. Reviewing that literature, I found that the range of estimates of
the GDP multiplier is often as wide within studies as it is across studies. I concluded
that the multiplier for a deficit-financed temporary increase in government spending
probably lies somewhere between 0.8 and 1.5, but could be as low as 0.5 or as high as
2.
     Two of the key questions for deciding whether policy-makers should use govern-
ment spending for short-run stabilization policy are: (1) Can an increase in govern-
ment spending stimulate the economy in a way that raises private spending? and (2)
Can an increase in government spending raise employment and lower unemployment?
With respect to the first question, if an increase in government spending raises GDP
without raising private sector spending, then private welfare does not necessarily rise.
With respect to the second question, most economists and policy makers would agree
that job creation is at least as important a goal as stimulating output. In theory, one can
use Okun’s Law to translate GDP multipliers to unemployment multipliers. However,
because of variations in the parameters of this "law" over time, the advent of jobless re-
coveries, and the frictions involved in creating and filling jobs, the translation of output
multipliers to employment or unemployment multipliers is not straightforward. Thus,
it makes sense to devote as much attention to the employment effects of government
spending as to the output effects.
     Thus, this paper empirically studies the effect of government spending on private
spending, unemployment, and employment. I define private spending to be GDP less


                                             1
government spending. I show that whether one uses structural vector autoregressions
(SVARs) or expectational vector autoregressions (EVARS), whether the sample includes
WWII and Korea or excludes them, an increase in government spending never leads to
a significant rise in private spending. In fact, in most cases it leads to a significant fall.
These results imply that the government spending multiplier is more likely below one
rather than above one.
    These estimates are based on samples in which part of the increase in government
spending is financed by an increase in tax rates, so the multipliers are not necessarily
the ones applicable to current debates on deficit-financed stimulus packages. I thus
explore two different ways to adjust for the increase in taxes in order to determine a
deficit-financed government spending multiplier. One method uses the VARs to create
counterfactuals and the other uses more structural instrumental variables estimates.
Surprisingly, both methods suggest that the behavior of marginal tax rates does not
have a significant effect on the size of the spending multiplier.
    In the final part of the paper I investigate the effects of government spending on
unemployment and employment. I begin by conducting a case study of labor markets
during the WWII period. I then use the VAR methods on various samples and find
that an increase in government spending lowers unemployment. However, I find the
surprising result that in the great majority of time periods and specifications, all of
the increase in employment after a positive shock to government spending is due to
an increase in government employment, not private employment. There is only one
exception. These results suggest that the employment effects of government spending
work through the direct hiring of workers, not stimulating the private sector to hire
more workers.



2     Background

2.1    Output Multipliers
There has been a dramatic increase in research on the output multiplier in the last few
years. The aggregate studies that estimate the multiplier fit in two general categories.
The first are the studies that use long spans of annual data and regress the growth rate
of GDP on current and one lag of defense spending, or government spending instru-
mented by defense spending(e.g. Hall (2009) and Barro and Redlick (2011)). These


                                              2
studies tend to find multipliers that are less than one. The second type are the vector
autoregressions (VARs) estimated on quarterly data, such as those used by Ramey and
Shapiro (1998), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Mountford and Uhlig (2009), Fisher
and Peters (2010), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011), and Ramey (2011a). Some
of these papers calculate the multipliers based on comparing the peak of the govern-
ment spending response to the peak of the GDP response. Others compare the area
under the two impulse response functions. As I discuss in my forum piece for the
Journal of Economic Literature (Ramey (2011b)), the range of multiplier estimates are
often as wide within studies as across studies. An interesting, but unnoticed, pattern
arises from this literature. In particular, the Blanchard-Perotti style SVARs yield smaller
multipliers than the expectational VARs (EVARS), such as the ones used in my work.
This result is intriguing because the SVARs tend to find rises in consumption whereas
the EVARs tend to find falls in consumption in response to an increase in government
spending. Overall, most output multiplier estimates from the aggregate literature tend
to lie between 0.5 and 1.5.
   There are also numerous papers that use cross-sections or panels of states to esti-
mate the effects of an increase in government spending in a state on that state’s income.
These papers typically find multipliers of about 1.5. However, translating these state-
level multipliers to aggregate multipliers is tricky, as discussed in Ramey (2011b).
   While the explicit instrumental variables frameworks with few dynamics provide
statistical confidence bands around the implied multipliers, the VAR-based literature
does not. Typically, the VAR literature provides separate impulse responses of govern-
ment spending, GDP and the spending subcomponents, and then calculates an implied
multiplier by either comparing the peak response of GDP to the peak response of gov-
ernment spending, or comparing the integral under the two impulse response func-
tions. As I will show below, a simple permutation of the VAR makes it easy to provide
confidence intervals of the multiplier relative to unity.


2.2    Labor Market Effects of Government Spending
A few of the older papers and a growing number of recent papers have studied gov-
ernment spending effects on labor markets. Most of the studies that exploit cross-state
or locality variation focus on employment as much as income. For example, Davis,
Steven J. and Mahidhara (1997) and Hooker and Knetter (1997) were among the first


                                             3
to study the effects of defense spending shocks on employment in a panel of states.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2011) study similar effects in updated data. Fishback and
Kachanovskaya (2010) analyze the effects of various New Deal programs during the
1930s on states and localities. Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Woolston (2010) and Wil-
son (2010) estimated the effects of the recent American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) on employment using cross-state variation. As summarized by Ramey (2011b),
on average these and related studies produce estimates that imply that each $35,000
of government spending produces one extra job. However, some of these studies, such
as by Wilson (2010), find that the jobs disappear quickly.
   At the aggregate level, the recent paper by Monacelli, Tommaso and Trigari (2010)
analyzes the effects of government spending shocks on a number of labor market vari-
ables. In particular, they use a standard structural VAR to investigate the effects of
government spending shocks on unemployment, vacancies, job finding rates and sepa-
ration rates in the post-1954 period. Their point estimates suggest that positive shocks
to government spending lower the unemployment rate and the separation rate, and
increase vacancies and the job finding rate. However, their estimates are imprecise,
so most of their points estimates are not statistically different from zero at standard
significance levels. On the other hand, Bruckner and Pappa (2010) study the effects
of fiscal expansions on unemployment in a sample of OECD countries using quarterly
data. Whether they use a standard SVAR, sign restrictions, or the Ramey-Shapiro mili-
tary dates, they find that a fiscal expansion often increases the unemployment rate. In
most cases, these increases are statistically significant at the 5 percent confidence level.
   In sum, the studies using state or local panel data find more robust positive effects of
government spending on employment than the aggregate studies. As discussed above,
translating state-level multipliers to the aggregate is not straightforward.


2.3    The Distinction between Government Purchases and Govern-
       ment Value Added
To understand why there is not a one-to-one correspondence between output multipli-
ers and private employment multipliers, it is useful to consider the distinction between
government spending on private goods versus government output. In the National
Income and Product Accounts, government purchases "G" includes both government
purchases of goods from the private sector, such as aircraft carriers, and government


                                             4
value added, which is comprised of compensation of government employees, such as
payments to military and civilian personnel, and consumption of government capital.
Rotemberg and Woodford (1992) made this distinction in their empirical work by ex-
amining shocks to total defense spending after conditioning on lags of the number of
military personnel. Wynne (1992) was the first to point out the theoretical distinction
between government spending on purchases of goods versus compensation of govern-
ment employees. He used comparative statistics in a neoclassical model to demonstrate
the different effects. Finn (1998) explored the issue in a fully dynamic neoclassical
model. She showed that increases in G resulting from an increase in government em-
ployment and increases in G resulting from an increase in purchases of goods from the
private sector have opposite effects on private sector output, employment, and invest-
ment. Other authors exploring this distinction include Cavallo (2005), Pappa (2009),
and Gomes (2010).
    Figure 1 shows the two ways of dividing the output of the economy. The top panel
shows the usual way of dividing goods and services according to which entity pur-
chased the goods. "G" is the usual National Income and Product Account category of
"Government Purchases of Goods and Services." The rest of the output is purchased by
the private sector, either as consumption, investment or net exports. The middle panel
divides the economy according to who produces the goods and services. Production by
the government occurs when it directly hires workers and buys capital stock. The value
added is counted as production by this sector. Examples include education services,
police services, military personnel services, and other general government activities.1
All other production is done by the private sector. The third panel superimposes these
two ways of dividing the economy. As the panel illustrates, government purchases (G)
consists of the value added of government (Y Gov ), which the government itself pro-
duces and essentially "sells" to itself, and government purchases of goods and services
from the private sector (G P r iv ). During the typical military buildup, the government
both hires more military personnel, resulting in more government production, and
buys tanks from the private sector. Thus, both components of G rise.
    To see why different types of government spending can have different effects, con-
sider the following key equations from an augmented neoclassical model. Consider
first the production function for private value added:
  1. The output of government enterprises, such as the Post Office, are included in the private business
sector.



                                                   5
(1)                                 YPriv = F (N P r i v , K P r i v )

where YPriv is private value added, N P r i v is private employment, and K P r i v is the private
capital stock. The number of workers available for private employment is determined
by the labor resource constraint:



(2)                                 N P r i v = T̄ − N Gov − L

where T̄ is the time endowment, N Gov is government employment, and L is leisure.
Thus, one way that the government draws resources from the private sector is through
the labor resource constraint. Another way that the government draws resources from
the private sector is through its purchases of private goods. In this case, the affected
resource constraint is the one for private output, given by:



(3)                               YPriv = C + I + N X + GPriv

where G P r iv is government purchases from the private sector. Total G from the national
income and product accounts (NIPA) is:



(4)                                     G = GPriv + YGov

where YGov is government value added, created by combining government employment
with government capital as follows:



(5)                                 YGov = H(N Gov , K Gov )

Under reasonable assumptions about labor markets and production functions, the rel-
ative price of private and government output is one, so total GDP is given by:




                                                   6
(6)                                   Y = YPriv + YGov

      In the context of this type of model, an increase in government spending raises to-
tal employment. However, the extent to which government spending raises private em-
ployment depends on whether the increase in G is due more to an increase in purchases
of private sector output or more to an increase in government output and employment.
We would expect private sector employment to rise in the first case but to fall in the
second case. Thus, a rise in overall employment does not necessarily imply a rise in
private sector employment, so it is important to distinguish private versus government
employment in the data.



3      The Effects on Private Spending
In most studies using aggregate data and VARs, government spending multipliers are
usually calculated by comparing the peak of the output response to the peak of the gov-
ernment spending response or by comparing the integral under the impulse response
functions up to a certain horizon. Usually, no standard errors are provided, but given
the wide standard error bands on the output and government spending components,
the standard error bands on the multipliers are assumed to be large. Studies of the
subcomponents of private spending, such as nondurable consumption or nonresiden-
tial fixed investment, often give mixed results with wide error bands.
      As I will now show, a simple permutation of the variables in a standard vector au-
toregression (VAR) can lead to more precise estimates for the relevant policy question:
on average does an increase in government spending raise private spending? To an-
swer this question, I will use a standard set of VAR variables employed by many in the
literature with one modification: I will use private spending (Y - G) rather than total
GDP. Since previous VAR studies have shown that the peak of government spending
and the peak of total GDP are roughly coincident in the impulse response functions, I
do not distort the results by considering only the contemporaneous multiplier.




                                             7
3.1      Econometric Framework
To study the effects of government spending shocks on private spending, I will estimate
the following VAR system:



(7)                                X t = A(L)X t−1 + U t ,

where X t is a vector of variables that includes the log of real per capita government
spending on goods and services (G), the log of real per capita private spending (Y-G),
the Barro-Redlick average marginal tax rate, and the interest rate on 3-month Treasury
bills, as well as key variables for identification that I will discuss shortly. The interest
rate and tax variables are used as controls for monetary and tax policy. A(L) is a
polynomial in the lag operator. As is standard, I include four lags of all variables, as
well as a quadratic time trend.
      I consider several of the main identification schemes used in the literature. These
are as follows:

  1. Ramey News EVAR: Concerned that most changes in government spending are
        anticipated, Ramey and Shapiro (1998) used a dummy variable for military
        events that led to significant rises in defense spending as the exogenous shock.
        In more recent work in Ramey (2011a), I extended this idea and used sources
        such as Business Week to construct a series of changes in the expected present
        discounted value of government spending caused by military events. I divided
        this series by the previous quarter’s GDP to create a "news" series. This series
        augments the list of variables in the "X" matrix in the VAR above and the shock
        is identified as the shock to this series, using a standard Choleski decomposition
        with the news series ordered first. Perotti (2011) has termed VARs that incorpo-
        rate news "Expectational VARs" or "EVARs."

  2. Blanchard-Perotti SVAR: Blanchard and Perotti (2002) identify the shock to gov-
        ernment spending with a standard Choleski decomposition with total government
        spending ordered first. No news series are included in the VAR.

  3. Perotti SVAR: Perotti (2011) claims that the structural VAR (SVAR) equivalent
        to my news EVAR is one that replaces the news series with defense spending or


                                             8
      federal spending. Shocks are then identified as shocks to this variable ordered
      first. (Total government spending is also included in the VAR.) As my reply ar-
      gues (Ramey (2011c)), there is little difference between the impulse response
      functions generated by this scheme and the original BP scheme. For the sake of
      argument, though, I will also show the results from this scheme, where I aug-
      ment the system with defense spending. Since the results are so similar to the
      Blanchard-Perotti SVAR, these results are shown in the appendix.

  4. Fisher-Peters EVAR: Fisher and Peters (2010) develop an alternative measure of
      anticipated increases in government spending based on stock returns. They use
      the cumulative excess returns on stocks of defense contractors relative to the rest
      of the stock market as an indicator of anticipated increases in defense spending.
      This series is available for 1958 to 2008. Thus, this specification is the same as
      the first one, but with the Fisher-Peters news variable replacing the Ramey news
      variable.

   While some, such as Blanchard and Perotti (2002), have argued that one should
omit WWII and the Korean War from the sample, Hall (2009), Ramey (2011a), and
Barro and Redlick (2011) argue that there is not enough variation in government
spending after 1954 to identify the effects of government spending. Consider Fig-
ure 2, which updates the figure shown in numerous other papers. It is clear that the
movements in government spending during WWII and the Korean War are orders of
magnitude greater than any other movements. The notion that there is much less in-
formation in the post-1954 period is also supported by statistical analysis. As I demon-
strate in Ramey (2011a), the first-stage F-statistic for my news series is well above the
Staiger and Stock (1997) safety threshold of 10 for samples that include either WWII
or Korea. However, the F-statistic is very low for samples that exclude both periods.
Fisher and Peters’s (2010) excess returns measure has a first-stage F-statistic of 5.5 for
defense spending, but only 2.3 for total government spending. Both are below the
Staiger-Stock safety threshold. An addition concern about the Fisher-Peters measure of
news is raised in Ramey (2011a). Because exports of military goods constitute part of
the profits of defense companies, the Fisher-Peters’ variable might be capturing news
about exports as well as news about future U.S. government spending.
   Given the debate on this issue, I estimate the first three specifications on three
samples each: 1939:1 - 2008:4, 1947:1 - 2008:4, and 1954:1 - 2008:4. The Fisher-

                                            9
Peters EVAR is estimated from 1958:1 to 2008:4. In all cases, the shock is normalized
so that the peak of government spending is one percent of GDP. The response of private
spending is converted to percentage points of total GDP. The standard error bands are
95 percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.


3.2   VAR Results
Figure 3 shows results from the EVAR using my news variable. In the first two samples,
government spending rises significantly and peaks at around six quarters. The delayed
response of actual government spending to the news variable is consistent with my
hypothesis that government spending changes are anticipated at least several quarters
before they happen. In the 1939-2008 sample, private spending rises slightly on im-
pact, but then falls significantly below zero, troughing at around 0.5 percent of GDP.
In the 1947-2008 sample, private spending rises significantly on impact, to about 0.5
percent of GDP, but then falls below zero within a few quarters. These results are con-
sistent with the effects of anticipations discussed in the theoretical section of Ramey
(2009b). As that paper showed, in a simple neoclassical model, news about future
increases in government spending lead output to rise immediately, even though gov-
ernment spending does not rise for several quarters. Thus, the theory predicts that
private output should jump on impact and then fall. In addition, as discussed as well
in Ramey (2011a), the Korean War is influential in the post-WWII sample. As observed
in the consumer durable expenditure data and discussed in the press at that time, the
start of the Korean War led to panic buying of durable goods in the U.S. because many
feared WWII type of rationing was imminent. This is another likely source of the posi-
tive impact effect. For the post-Korean War period, the low first-stage F-statistic of my
news variables means that any results for that sample are questionable. Nevertheless,
they are shown for completeness. The standard error bands are much larger for this
sample. Private spending falls, but the estimates, though large, are not statistically
different from zero.
   Figure 4 shows the responses based on the Blanchard-Perotti SVAR. In contrast to
the EVAR, this specification implies that government spending jumps up immediately
in all three samples. Private spending declines significantly in response to a rise in
government spending in the first two samples. The declines are sizeable, suggesting
multipliers well below one. In the post-Korean War sample, private spending falls


                                           10
slightly below zero, but is not statistically significant. Appendix Figure A1 shows that
the results of the augmented SVAR advocated by Perotti (2011) are essentially the
same.
   Figure 5 shows the responses based the Fisher-Peters type SVAR, where government
spending shocks are identified as shocks to the excess stock returns for defense con-
tractors. In contrast to the three previous specifications in which government spending
peaks around quarter 6 and returns to normal between 12 and 14 quarters, this shock
leads to a more sustained increase in government spending. Government spending
barely falls from its peak even after 20 quarters. Private spending oscillates around
zero, but is only becomes statistically different from zero when it becomes negative at
longer horizons.
   Thus, the SVAR specifications give essentially the same answer to the question
posed as the EVAR specifications: a rise in government spending does not appear to
stimulate private spending. In fact, in many samples and specifications, it reduces
private spending.
   An interesting point to note is that the VAR results imply a time-varying multiplier
that shrinks as government spending hits its peak. This result is consistent with Gordon
and Krenn’s (2010) finding of a higher multiplier in samples ending in mid-1941 when
the increase in government spending was more modest than in samples ending later.


3.3     The Effects of Taxes and Implications for Multipliers
These results imply that for the types of changes in government spending identified by
the various schemes, the total GDP multiplier lies below unity. In every case, there is
evidence that government spending crowds out private spending. On average, though,
these increases in government spending were financed partly by a rise in distortionary
taxes. Figure 6 shows the impulse responses of the Barro and Redlick (2011) aver-
age marginal tax rate for the various samples for both the Ramey News EVAR and
Blanchard-Perotti SVAR specifications. In five of the six cases, the tax rate rises signifi-
cantly. It rises much more in the Ramey News EVAR.
   Romer and Romer (2010) construct a measure of exogenous tax shocks using a
narrative approach that summarizes tax legislation. They show that the reduced-form
effect of a tax shock equal to one percent GDP leads to a multi-year decline in GDP
equal to 2.5 to 3 percent of GDP by the end of the third year. These estimates sug-


                                            11
gest that the multiplier could potentially be greater for a deficit-financed increase in
government spending than for one in which taxes rise.
      To gauge how much the rise in taxes dampen the spending multiplier, I conduct
two different kinds of experiments. The first one uses the estimated VARs to conduct
counterfactual analysis and the second uses instrumental variables estimation of a more
structural model. In the first method using the estimated VARs, I compare the actual
estimated impulse response to one in which I assume counterfactually that the tax rate
did not change. That is, I set all of the coefficients in the tax rate equation to 0. I
then compute the alternative impulse response based on a dynamic simulation using
the actual estimated coefficients from the other equations and the 0 coefficients from
the tax rate equation.
      Figure 7 shows the results for government spending and private output. In both the
Ramey News EVAR and the Blanchard-Perotti SVAR, the response of neither govern-
ment spending nor private output changes much. The fact that the paths change little
implies that the coefficients on tax rates in the equations for the other variables are not
economically different from zero.
      Because VARs are essentially reduced form relationships, it is difficult to make struc-
tural interpretations. Thus, my second method uses instrumental variables to estimate
the separate effects of government spending and taxes on private output. I specify the
following baseline quarterly model, which is similar in structure to the one used by
Barro and Redlick (2011) on their long sample of annual data:


                     ∆S tP r iv               ∆G t
(8)                               = β0 + β1          + β2 ∆4 t ax t + β3 N ews t + ε t ,
                       Yt−1                   Yt−1

      S P r i v is real private spending (Y - G), Y is real GDP, G is real government spending
(deflated by the GDP deflator), tax is a measure of the tax rate, News is from Ramey
(2011a) and is equal to the change in the expected present discounted value of gov-
ernment purchases caused by military events, and ε is an error term. The four-quarter
difference of tax rates is used because the Barro-Redlick variable only changes once per
year. It is potentially important to include the current value of the news variable as a
control. According to the argument made in my earlier work, private agents respond to
news about future government spending before the spending even occurs. My earlier
work emphasized the negative wealth effect, but other possible factors include build-


                                                       12
ing up capital in anticipation of future government spending because of investment
adjustment costs and buying consumer goods because of fears of future rationing.
   Because both government spending and taxes are potentially affected by the state
of the economy, which also impacts private spending, we would expect these fiscal
variables and tax rates to be correlated with the error term ε. Thus, estimation calls
for instrumental variables. A natural instrument for the tax variable is the Romer and
Romer (2010) narrative series on exogenous tax changes. This variable calculates the
annualized change in tax liabilities due to legislation based on either deficit concerns
or long-run growth promotion. Thus, the identification assumption I am making is
that the tax legislation changes affect the economy only through changes in tax rates.
Because the Romer-Romer tax instruments are available only from 1945 to 2007, the
estimation must exclude the World War II sample. For government spending, I use lags
of my news variable as an instrument. Because the current value of news is an included
variable, my identification assumption is that while current news can independently
affect private spending, lagged values of news affect the economy only through current
changes in government spending. This assumption might be questionable if there are
additional lags in the effects. Thus, I will assess the robustness of the results to adding
lags of spending growth, government spending, and taxes to the specification. Using
the period 1948 to 2007, I explored various lags of the two instruments up to 12 lags.
I use four lags of each instrument since this number of lags maximized the Cragg and
Donald (1993) statistic.
   Table 1 shows the estimates from the model presented in equation 8. The top
panel shows the results when the tax rate is measured with the Barro-Redlick average
marginal tax rate and the bottom panel shows the results when the tax rate is measured
as the ratio of current tax receipts to GDP. The first column shows the results when tax
rate changes are excluded from the equation. The estimated effect of a change in gov-
ernment spending on private output is -0.7 with a standard error of 0.26. This estimate
implies a multiplier on total GDP of only 0.3. In contrast, news about future govern-
ment spending increases current private spending. An increase in the expected present
discounted value of future government spending of one dollar raises current private
spending by about five cents. The effect of this variable is estimated precisely. The
high Cragg and Donald (1993) statistics imply that we can reject the null hypothesis of
weak instruments at any relative bias level.
   The second column shows the results of the baseline model when tax rates are


                                            13
included. For both tax rate specifications, the coefficient on government spending im-
plies that a one dollar increase in government spending lowers private spending by 55
cents. The news variable continues to be positive and significant, while the tax variable
is negative, but is not statistically different from zero. The Cragg and Donald (1993)
statistics ranging from 7 to 8, imply that we can reject the null hypothesis of weak
instruments for a 15 percent maximal relative bias, according to the Stock and Yogo
(2005) critical values for instrument relevance. Thus, controlling for taxes reduces the
magnitude of the negative effect of government spending on private spending by 0.15
from -0.7 to -0.55. Given the size of the standard errors, though, the change is probably
not statistically significant.
    I also investigated the effect of omitting the current value of the news variable as
a regressor and instead including it as an instrument for government spending (results
not shown in the table). When the Barro-Redlick tax rate is used, the coefficient on
government spending is estimated to be -0.64 with a standard error of 0.29. Thus,
the negative effect of government spending on private spending becomes even more
negative if the news variable is omitted. The coefficient on the tax variable becomes
slightly positive but not different from zero
    The third column of Table 1 explores the effect of controlling for the lagged growth
of private spending. This variable is statistically significant, but it lowers the magni-
tude of the government spending coefficient only slightly, to about 0.5. Finally, the
last column also adds lags of government spending and taxes. This results in impre-
cise estimates for a number of the coefficients and leads to unacceptably low Cragg-
Donald statistics. Not shown in the table are the results of other explorations, which
either replace the four-quarter difference of tax rates with the one quarter difference of
tax rates or replace the one-quarter difference of government spending with the four-
quarter difference, or substitute the change in real tax receipts relative to lagged GDP
for the Barro-Redlick tax rate. The results do not change in any meaningful way in
these alternative specifications, except to become more imprecise and/or have inferior
first-stage statistics.
    My survey of the estimates in the literature in Ramey (2011b) concluded that the
multiplier for a deficit-financed short-run increase in government spending was proba-
bly between 0.8 and 1.5, but that reasonable people could argue for multipliers as low
as 0.5 or as high as 2. The main reason that I had placed the lower end of the prob-
able range at 0.8 was my belief, based on the Romer and Romer (2010) reduced-form


                                           14
results, that the tax effects on GDP were large. The results of this section suggest oth-
erwise. The counterfactuals constructed from the VAR estimates imply that accounting
for current tax rates has no impact on the estimated government spending multiplier.
The instrumental variables estimates imply that controlling for changes in tax rates
raises the multiplier slightly, by about 0.15 to 0.2. The instrumental variables esti-
mates imply a government spending multiplier on total GDP of about 0.5. This is very
close to the estimate obtained using annual data by Barro and Redlick (2011).



4     The Effects of Government Spending on Unemploy-
      ment and Employment
As we saw in the last section, no matter which identification scheme or which sample
period was used, an increase in government spending did not lead to an increase in
private sector spending. In most cases, it led to a significant decrease. Even in the
face of this result, though, policymakers might still want to use stimulus packages to
reduce unemployment. There is substantial microeconomic evidence that long spells
of unemployment lead to persistent losses of human capital. Thus, even if govern-
ment spending cannot stimulate private spending, it might still have positive effects by
raising employment.
    Thus, this section studies several aspects of the labor market. It begins with a
case study of the labor market during WWII because the dramatic changes of this era
highlight some useful points. In the second subsection, I use the VARs from above
to study the effects of government spending shocks on unemployment. In the third
subsection, I study their effects on private versus government employment.


4.1    A Case Study of the Labor Market During WWII
WWII is especially interesting from a labor market point of view because the economy
went from an unemployment rate of 12 percent (18 percent if one includes emergency
workers as unemployed) at the start of 1939 to an unemployment rate less than 1
percent by 1944. Thus, it is useful to conduct a case study before moving on to the
formal statistical analysis. To review the history briefly, Germany invaded Poland on 1
September 1939 and Britain and France declared war on 3 September 1939. Initially,



                                           15
the U.S. stock market increased, as exports to the belligerents increased business prof-
its. The stock market started to decline in Spring 1940, as Germany took Norway in
April 1940, invaded the low countries in May 1940, and took Paris in June 1940. As
discussed in Ramey (2009a), the U.S. began gearing up for war well before Pearl Har-
bor, which occurred on December 7, 1941. Figure 8 shows Gordon and Krenn’s (2010)
monthly interpolated data on real government spending (in 1937 dollars) from 1938
to 1945. Between January 1938 and September 1940 when the draft was enacted,
real government spending rose by 18 percent (measured in log differences), or by 2.6
percent of initial January 1938 GDP. Between September 1940 and December 1941,
real government spending increased 89 percent (in log differences), or by 20 percent
of initial September 1940 GDP. It increased another 113 percent (in log differences), or
56 percent of December 1941 GDP, between December 1941 and its peak in May 1945.
   Consider the labor market at the start of WWII. Based on new labor market data that
I have compiled for this period, we can track the flows of individuals between various
labor market states. I use September 1940 as the starting point, since that is when
the draft was instituted and because government spending started rising in the fourth
quarter of 1940. Figure 9 shows the behavior of various employment components
around this time and Table 2 presents the net changes. The first feature to note from
the figure is that, despite the fact that government spending rose by only 2.6 percent of
initial GDP, total employment rose by 8 percent from 1938 to September 1940, and that
most of the increase in total employment was due to an increase in private employment.
As the table shows, from September 1940 to the peak in March 1945, total employment
rose by 15.6 million, a 27 percent increase in log differences. Most of the rise was
due to the rise in military employment, though. Government civilian employment
(including New Deal emergency workers) declined slightly during this period. As the
figure shows, private employment was rising robustly from 1938 through most of 1941,
but then leveled off.
   Over this same time period, the population ages 14 and above rose by 5.4 million,
but the labor force rose by 11.1 million. Figure 10 shows the dramatic increase in
the labor force participation rate. Decennial data from before 1930 suggests a typical
labor force participation rate around 56 percent. It was a little lower during the 1930s
because of the Great Depression. As the graph shows, during WWII, the participation
rate was six percentage points higher than it was before or in the decade after. Thus,
70 percent of the increase in employment during WWII is accounted for by the rise in


                                           16
the labor force, with a large part of that increase due to an increase in the participation
rate. It is likely that an important part of that rise was due to the effects of the draft
and patriotism. The number in the military rose by 11.5 million during WWII. The rise
was only 2.2 million during Korea.
   Over this same period from 1940 to 1945, the number unemployed fell by 4.5
million. Thus, the remaining 30 percent of the increase in employment was due to
flows from unemployment to employment.
   These numbers omit one other important flow of workers. My unemployment num-
bers do not include "emergency workers," who were workers employed by the various
New Deal government programs. Like Darby (1976) and Weir (1992), I included those
workers in the "employed" category rather than as unemployed. The number of indi-
viduals employed as emergency workers decreased from 2.5 million in September 1940
to 0 by mid-1943. Thus, these workers represented an additional 2.5 million workers
available for other sectors.
   While total employment rose by 27 percent, real GDP rose by 58 percent (in log
points), meaning that labor productivity rose by 31 percent. Thus, during the five year
period from 1940 to 1945, labor productivity rose at an average annualized rate of
seven percent. This rate of growth is substantially greater than the growth of produc-
tivity in the decade before or the decade after. For example, from 1947 to 1960, labor
productivity growth was about 3.3 percent. In their study of the behavior of the econ-
omy during WWII, McGrattan and Ohanian (2010) find that the neoclassical model can
explain the data only if one also assumes large positive productivity shocks.
   Since the GDP multiplier is intimately linked to the effect of government spending
on employment and productivity, the combination of the unprecedented rise in the la-
bor force participation rate and the exceptionally high rate of productivity growth most
likely raised the GDP multiplier during WWII relative to more normal times. Some re-
searchers, such as Hall (2009), Gordon and Krenn (2010), and Perotti (2011), have
argued that the multiplier estimated from samples that include WWII may be lower be-
cause of price controls and rationing. While there is no denying that price controls and
rationing distorted allocations, their argument only makes sense if the price controls
and rationing depressed employment and productivity more than the other factors,
such as conscription and patriotism, raised it. The extraordinary increases in labor
force participation rates, employment and productivity that I have just documented
suggest that this argument is implausible.


                                             17
4.2   The Effects of Government Spending on Unemployment
Given the previous case study, it is interesting to use more formal analysis to determine
the effect of government spending on unemployment. To do this, I estimate the fol-
lowing modification of the VARs described in equation 7 in the earlier section. First, I
revert to using total GDP rather than just private GDP, as is common in the literature.
Second, I add the log of per capita unemployment to the VARs. For the impulse re-
sponse functions, I rescale unemployment so that it has the same scale as the civilian
unemployment rate, based on a long-run average unemployment rate of 5.5 percent.
   Figure 11 through Figure 13 show the impulse response functions. For the various
identification schemes and samples, the point estimates suggest that an increase in
government spending leads to a fall in unemployment. The fall is always statistically
significant in the period from 1939-2008 and sometimes significant in the other periods
for a number of the specifications. Most estimates imply that an increase in government
spending that peaks at one percentage point of GDP lowers the unemployment rate
by between 0.2 to 0.5 percentage points. The exception is the EVAR that uses the
Fisher-Peters stock market variable. In this case, the unemployment rate falls by a full
percentage point.
   As noted above, though, the Fisher-Peters experiment appears to involve a much
more sustained increase in government spending. However, even comparing the ra-
tio of the integral of unemployment to the integral of government spending over the
five-year period, the Fisher-Peters specification implies a much larger effect on unem-
ployment. In contrast, the Blanchard-Perotti SVAR implies the smallest effect.


4.3   The Effects of Government Spending on Employment
The bulk of evidence just presented suggests that a rise in government spending tends
to lower the unemployment rate. Given the earlier discussion about how much of
government spending is actually compensation of government employees, it is useful
to decompose the employment effects into rises in government employment versus rises
in private employment.
   To study this issue, I estimate the following modification of the VARs presented in
the last section. In each of the VARs, I omit the unemployment variable and instead
include both the log of per capita government employment and the log of per capita
private employment. Government employment includes civilian government workers,


                                           18
armed forces employment, as well as emergency worker employment during the late
1930s and early 1940s. The four identification schemes are the same ones discussed
above. In all cases, the employment numbers are converted so that they are a percent
of total employment.
   Figure 14 shows the results from the specification with my defense news variable.
In the full sample from 1939:1 - 2008:4, a rise in government spending equal to one
percent of GDP leads to a rise in government employment of close to 0.5 percent of total
employment. Private employment rises by about 0.2 percent of total employment, but
is never significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level. The story for the 1947:1
- 2008:4 sample is the same. For the post-Korean War sample, the estimates are even
less precise (note the change in scale). It appears that private employment initially
dips, then rises, but there is much uncertainty about that path.
   Figure 15 shows the responses based on the Blanchard-Perotti SVAR. Private em-
ployment falls in the first two sample periods for this specification. In the third sample
period, it rises, but the standard errors bands are very wide.2
   Figure 16 shows the responses based the Fisher-Peters type SVAR. In contrast to
the previous cases, this identification and sample suggest that increases in government
spending raise both government employment and private employment. Although gov-
ernment spending rises steeply throughout the first six quarters after the shock, private
employment does not begin to rise until after the fourth quarter. It peaks during the
third year at about 1.5 percent of total employment. Since this identification scheme
seems to pick up more persistent movements in government spending, it might be the
case that only sustained increases in government spending raise private sector employ-
ment. More research on this issue is required.
   To summarize, the EVAR using my defense news variable and the Blanchard-Perotti
SVARs suggest that for the most part, increases in government spending raise govern-
ment employment but not private employment. In contrast, the Fisher-Peters identifi-
cation scheme suggests that government spending shocks that lead to sustained rises
in government spending also raise private employment significantly, even more so than
government employment. One should be mindful of the caveat discussed above: since
exports of military goods have been an important part of profits of defense companies
during some time periods, the Fisher-Peters’ variable might be capturing news about
exports as well as news about future U.S. government spending. Because an increase
  2. The Perotti SVAR gives very similar results. The graphs are shown in the appendix.


                                                 19
in export demand would be expected to increase private sector employment, some of
the increase might be due to this factor.
    A question of interest is whether the employment effects depend on whether it is
government purchases of private goods or government value added that increases. As
shown earlier in the paper, both components of government spending typically increase
at the same time. Because separate shocks to each cannot be identified with my one
news instrument, I explore the effects of separate shocks using only the Blanchard-
Perotti SVAR. In particular, I estimate a system with the (log per capita) values of
real government purchases of private goods, real government value added, real GDP,
government employment, private employment, the 3-month Treasury bill rate and the
Barro-Redlick average marginal tax rate. The shocks are normalized so that in each
case the shock is equal to one percent of GDP. The employment responses shown are
rescaled to indicate the percentage of total employment.
    Figure 17 shows the responses to the two types of shocks for the period 1939 to
2008 and Figure 18 shows the responses for the period 1947 to 2008. Consider first
the period from 1939 to 2008. It is clear that shocks to government purchases of
private goods also raise government value added and vice versa. Thus, the data do not
allow us to disentangle the separate effects. In response to both shocks, government
employment rises, whereas private employment falls. The exception is the shock to
government value added, which leads private employment to fall in the short-run, but
then rise in the long-run, even after the government spending variable has returned
to normal. In the post-WWII period, the results differ in a few ways. First, a shock to
government purchases does not appear to raise government value added. Second, a
shock to government value added has a positive effect on private employment, but the
effect is never close to being statistically significant. Thus, separating the shocks into
the two components does not paint a different picture from that presented above.



5    Conclusion
This paper has investigated the effects of government spending on private spending,
unemployment, and employment. For the most part, it appears that a rise in gov-
ernment spending does not stimulate private spending; most estimates suggest that it
significantly lowers private spending. These results imply that the government spend-
ing multiplier is below unity. Adjusting the implied multiplier for increases in tax rates

                                            20
has only a small effect. The results imply a multiplier on total GDP of around 0.5.
   Increases in government spending do reduce unemployment. For all but one spec-
ification, though, it appears that all of the employment increase is from an increase in
government employment, not private employment. The only exception is in the speci-
fication using the Fisher-Peters measure of defense news for the 1958 to 2008 period.
This specification implies that a sustained increase in government spending has a ro-
bust positive effect on private employment. On balance, though, the results suggest
that direct hiring of workers by the government may be more effective than relying on
multiplier effects of government purchases.




                                          21
A     Data Appendix

A.1    Quarterly GDP Data
The quarterly GDP data from 1939 - 1946 are the same that were constructed in my
earlier work Ramey (2011a). The data from 1947 to the present are from bea.gov. The
only difference from the earlier work is that I deflated total government and defense
spending by the GDP deflator, rather than specific deflators, so that the multiplier is eas-
ier to interpret. Private spending is defined as nominal GDP less nominal government
spending, and the result is deflated by the GDP deflator. All variables are converted to
a per capita basis by dividing by total population, including the armed forces overseas.


A.2    Tax Data
The Barro-Redlick average marginal tax rate is from Barro and Redlick (2011). Annual
values are repeated for each quarter in the year. The average tax rate is calculated by
dividing current tax receipts from NIPA Table 3.1, line 2 by nominal GDP.


A.3    Instruments
The defense news variable is discussed in Ramey (2011a). The excess returns on de-
fense stocks is described in Fisher and Peters (2010). The data series were kindly
provided by Jonas Fisher. The Romer-Romer exgenous tax series is the variable labeled
EXOGENRRATIO in the Romer and Romer (2010) online data file.


A.4    Employment and Unemployment Data
The various employment and unemployment components are from monthly data and
are converted to quarterly. The Conference Board data are from the 1941-42 and
1945-46 editions of The Economic Almanac published by The Conference Board (see
The Conference Board (1941) and The Conference Board (1945).
    Civilian Employment Data. The data from 1930 through 1940 are based on em-
ployment data from The Conference Board. I seasonally adjusted these data using the
default X-12 features of Eviews. I then used the 12-month moving average of the ra-
tio of the annual average of Weir’s (1992) civilian employment series to the annual
average of these series to make the monthly series match Weir’s (1992) data. From

                                            22
1941 - 1947, I used the monthly series published in the 1947 and 1949 Supplement
to the Survey of Current Business. Again, I adjusted them so that the annual averages
matched Weir’s (1992). Data from 1948 to the present are from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics Current Population Survey.
   Civilian Government Employment The series from 1930 to 1938 are interpolated
from the annual series from the BLS’ establishment survey. The monthly data from
1939 to the present were from the establishment survey and were downloaded from
bls.gov.
   Armed Forces Employment The series from 1930 to 1937 was interpolated from
annual series from the 1942 Supplement to the Survey of Current Business. From 1938
to 1941, the series is reported monthly in the 1942 Supplement to the Survey of Current
Business. From 1942 to 1947, the numbers from the 1947 and 1949 Supplement to
the Survey of Current Business were spliced (using the difference in 1948:1) to the
unpublished BLS quarterly employment numbers (provided by Shawn Sprague), that
are available from 1948 to the present. (The 1947 and 1949 Supplement numbers that
were spliced to match the newer BLS numbers matched the older 1942 Supplement
numbers very closely at the overlap.)
   Emergency Workers Monthly data are from The Conference Board.
   Unemployment Monthly data from 1930 to February 1940 are from The Confer-
ence Board, and are available from the NBER Macro History Data Base. These data
were rescaled to match Weir’s (1992) annual series (with emergency workers added,
to be consistent). Data from March 1940 through 1946 were from the Bureau of the
Census. Both the Conference Board and Census data were seasonally adjusted with
Eviews. (For the case of the Conference Board unemployment data, the results us-
ing the default multiplicative seasonal factors looked odd, so I used additive factors
instead.)
   Population Total population was the same as used in my earlier work. The popula-
tion 14 and older was interpolated from annual data.




                                          23
References
Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2011. “Measuring the Output Responses
  to Fiscal Policy.” Working paper, University of California, Berkeley.

Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick, 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects from Govern-
  ment Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51–102.

Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti, 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of
  the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1329–1368.

Bruckner, Marcus and Evi Pappa, 2010. “Fiscal Expansions May Affect Unemploy-
  ment, but They May Increase It.” Working paper DP7766, Centre for Economic Policy
  Research.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 2004. “Fiscal Shocks
  and Their Consequences.” Journal of Economic Theory 115(1): 89–117.

Cavallo, Michele P., 2005. “Government Employment and the Dynamic Effects of
  Fiscal Policy Shocks.” Working Papers in Applied Economic Theory 2005-16, Federal
  Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Chodorow-Reich, Laura Feiveson Zachary Liscow, Gabriel and William Gui Wool-
  ston, 2010. “Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Ev-
  idence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” Unpublished paper,
  University of California, Berkeley.

Conference Board, The, 1941. The Economic Almanac 1941-42. New York, New York:
  National Industrial Conference Board, Inc.

Conference Board, The, 1945. The Economic Almanac 1945-46. New York, New York:
  National Industrial Conference Board, Inc.

Cragg, J.G. and S.G. Donald, 1993. “Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instru-
  mental Variables Models.” Econometric Theory 9: 222–240.

Darby, Michael R., 1976. “Three-and-a-Half Million U.S. Employees Have Been Mis-
  laid: Or, An Explanation of Unemployment, 1934-1941.” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 84(1): 1–16.

Davis, Prakash Loungani, Steven J. and Ramamohan Mahidhara, 1997. “Regional
  Labor Fluctuations: Oil Shocks, Military Spending, and Other Driving Forces.” Work-
  ing paper 578, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Finn, Mary G., 1998. “Cyclical Effects of Government’s Employment and Goods Pur-
  chases.” International Economic Review 39(3): 635–657.

                                          24
Fishback, Price V. and Valentina Kachanovskaya, 2010. “In Search of the Multiplier
  for Federal Spending in the States During the New Deal.” Working paper 16561,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fisher, Jonas D.M. and Ryan Peters, 2010. “Using Stock Returns to Identify Govern-
  ment Spending Shocks.” The Economic Journal 120: 414–436.

Gomes, Pedro, 2010. “Fiscal Policy and the Labour Market: The Effects of Public
  Sector Employment and Wages.” Working paper 5321, IZA.

Gordon, Robert J. and Robert Krenn, 2010. “The End of the Great Depression: VAR
  Insight on the Roles of Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” Working paper 16380, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hall, Robert E., 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
 Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall: 183–236.

Hooker, Mark A. and Michael M. Knetter, 1997. “The Effects of Military Spending on
 Economic Activity: Evidenced from State Procurement Spending.” Journal of Money,
 Credit and Banking 29(3): 400–421.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Lee E. Ohanian, 2010. “Does Neoclassical Theory Account
 for the Effects of Big Fiscal Shocks: Evidence from World War II.” International
 Economic Review 51(2): 509–532.

Monacelli, Roberto Perotti, Tommaso and Antonella Trigari, 2010. “Unemployment
 Fiscal Multipliers.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
 57: 531–553.

Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, 2009. “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
 Shocks?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 24: 960–992.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, 2011. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union:
  Evidence from U.S. Regions.” Technical report, Columbia University.

Pappa, Evi, 2009. “The Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Employment and the Real Wage.”
  International Economic Review 50(217–243): 400–421.

Perotti, Roberto, 2008. “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy.”
  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff,
  and Michael Woodford, pp. 169–226. University of Chicago Press.

Perotti, Roberto, 2011. “Expectations and Fiscal Policy: An Empirical Investigation.”
  Technical report, Bocconi.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2009a. “Defense News Shocks, 1939–2008: Estimates Based on
  News Sources.” Unpublished paper, University of California, San Diego.

                                         25
Ramey, Valerie A., 2009b. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the
  Timing.” Working paper 15464, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2011a. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the
  Timing.” Quarterly Journal of Economic 126(1): 51–102.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2011b. “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?” Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature 49(3): 673–85.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2011c. “A Reply to Roberto Perotti’s "Expectations and Fiscal Policy:
  An Empirical Investigation".” Unpublished paper, University of California, San Diego.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and
  the Effects of Government Spending.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Pub-
  lic Policy 48: 145–94.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax
  Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic
  Review 100(3): 763–801.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, 1992. “Oligopolistic Pricing and the
  Effects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity.” Journal of Political Economy
  100(6): 1153–207.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with
  Weak Instruments.” Econometrica 65(3): 557–586.

Stock, James H. and M. Yogo, 2005. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
  Regression.” In Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor
  of Thomas Rothemberg, edited by Donald W.K. Andrews and James H. Stock, pp. 80–
  108. Cambridge University Press.

Weir, David R., 1992. “A Century of U.S. Unemployment, 1890-1990: Revised Esti-
 amtes and Evidence for Stabilization.” In Research inEconomic History, edited by
 Roger L. Ransom, pp. 301–346. JAI Press.

Wilson, Daniel, 2010. “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009
 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” Working paper 2010-17, Federal Reserve
 Bank of San Francisco.

Wynne, Mark, 1992. “The Analysis of Fiscal Policy in Neoclassical Models.” Working
 paper 9212, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.




                                          26
Table 1. Instrumental-Variables Regressions for Private Spending
                                                        Dependent variable: ∆S tP r i vat e /Yt
Specification                                No Tax            Tax-1             Tax-2             Tax-3
                                                   Barro-Redlick Average Marginal Tax Rate
  ∆G t /Yt−1                               −0.705∗∗∗         −0.539∗          −0.506∗             −1.057∗
                                           (0.259)           (0.284)          (0.268)             (0.548)
  ∆G t−1 /Yt−2                                                                                     0.632
                                                                                                  (0.535)
  N ews t                                    0.056∗∗∗          0.059∗∗∗          0.038∗∗           0.042∗∗∗
                                            (0.016)           (0.017)           (0.016)           (0.017)
  ∆4 τ t                                                     −0.097           −0.057               0.215
                                                             (0.116)          (0.109)             (0.435)
  ∆4 τ t−1                                                                                        −0.293
                                                                                                  (0.388)
  ∆S t−1
     P r i vat e
                 /Yt−2                                                           0.319∗∗∗          0.346∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.060)           (0.069)
  Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic              51.80              8.13             8.16               0.98
                                                                 Average Tax Rate
  ∆G t /Yt−1                                                 −0.548∗∗         −0.483∗             −0.770
                                                             (0.278)          (0.263)             (0.540)
  ∆G t−1 /Yt−2                                                                                     0.294
                                                                                                  (0.521)
  N ews t                                                      0.067∗∗∗          0.043∗∗           0.045∗∗
                                                              (0.020)           (0.018)           (0.018)
  ∆4 τ t                                                     −0.194           −0.153              −0.271
                                                             (0.196)          (0.183)             (0.417)
  ∆4 τ t−1                                                                                         0.129
                                                                                                  (0.393)
  ∆S t−1
     P r i vat e
                 /Yt−2                                                           0.353∗∗∗          0.380∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.073)           (0.082)
  Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic                                 7.25             8.08               2.14


Notes: All regressions contain 240 quarterly observations, estimated from 1948:Q1 to 2007:Q4. S P r i vat e
denotes real private spending, Y denotes real GDP, G denotes real government spending (deflated by the
GDP deflator), and τ denotes the tax rate. The average tax rate is calculated as the ratio of current tax
receipts divided by GDP. ∆4 denotes the four-quarter difference. Current values of government spending
are instrumented with four lagged values of Ramey news and current values of tax rate changes are
instrumented with the current value and four lags of the Romer-Romer exogenous tax shock. When
lags are included, an extra lag of the instruments is used. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** indicates significance at 1-percent, ** at 5-percent, and * at 10-percent level.


                                                   27
Table 2. Labor Market Changes During WWII: September 1940 to March 1945
Component                                           Change (in millions)
Total Employment                                                      15.6
Military Employment                                                   11.5
Population Ages 14+                                                    5.4
Labor Force                                                           11.1
Unemployment                                                          -4.5
Emergency Workers                                                     -2.5

Source: Data compiled by the author. See data appendix for details.




                                                 28
Figure 1. Government Spending vs. Government Output Distinction




                               Division of Goods and Services by Purchaser


                                                                 Private Spending =
                    Government
                    purchases                       Consumption + Investment + Net Exports

                    G                                                    (Y – G)




                               Division of Goods and Services by Producer



              Government
              Production                             Private Sector Production
              YGov                                        YPriv = F(NPriv,KPriv)
              = H(NGov,KGov)                 (Y is output, N is employment, K is capital)




                                         Combined Categorization


                                 Government
              Government         Purchases                Private Sector Production
              Production         of Private
                                                                         YPriv
              Y   Gov            Sector
                                 Production

                                 GPriv



                          G = YGov + GPriv




Notes: The region sizes are not to scale.
                                                       29
Figure 2. Real Government Spending Per Capita, 1939:Q1 - 2010:Q4
       15 10
  thousands
       5
       0




               1940   1950      1960       1970    1980         1990       2000       2010
                                               year

                                         total                 defense

Notes: Data from the National Income and Product Accounts and the Census. Amounts are stated in
2010 dollars.




                                              30
Figure 3. Private Spending Responses: Ramey News EVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                           private spending
  1.5




                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
  .5




                                                            −.5
  0




                                                            −1
  −.5




        0    4        8             12   16       20                   0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                     quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                           private spending
  1.5




                                                            1
                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
  .5




                                                            −.5
  0




                                                            −1
  −.5




        0    4        8             12   16       20                   0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                     quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                           private spending
                                                            4
  2




                                                            2
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −6 −4 −2
  0
  −1




        0    4        8             12   16       20                   0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                     quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to the news variable, ordered first. The
shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Private GDP is denoted
as a percent of total GDP. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on bootstrap standard
errors.




                                                       31
Figure 4. Private Spending Responses: Blanchard-Perotti SVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              private spending
  1.5




                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
  .5




                                                            −.5
  0
  −.5




                                                            −1
        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                        quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              private spending
  1.5




                                                            .5
                                                            0
  1




                                                            −.5
  .5




                                                            −1
  0




                                                            −1.5




        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                        quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              private spending
  1.5




                                                            1
                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −1.5 −1 −.5
  .5
  0




        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                        quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to total government spending, ordered
first. The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Private GDP is
denoted as a percent of total GDP. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on bootstrap
standard errors.




                                                       32
Figure 5. Private Spending Responses: Fisher-Peters News EVAR

                                              1958:1 − 2008:4

                 government spending                                    private spending
  2




                                                           4
  1.5




                                                           2
  1




                                                           0
  .5




                                                           −2
  0




                                                           −4
  −.5




        0    4        8             12   16      20             0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                              quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to excess stock returns of top defense
contractors, ordered first. The shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one
percent of GDP. Private GDP is denoted as a percent of total GDP. The standard error bands are 95
percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                      33
Figure 6. Barro-Redlick Tax Rate Responses


                                             1939:1 − 2008:4
                  Ramey News EVAR                                        Blanchard−Perotti SVAR
  .8




                                                           .8
  .6




                                                           .6
  .4




                                                           .4
  .2




                                                           .2
  −.2 0




                                                           0
                                                           −.2
          0   4      8             12   16       20              0   4         8             12   16   20
                         quarter                                                   quarter



                                             1947:1 − 2008:4
                  Ramey News EVAR                                        Blanchard−Perotti SVAR
  1.5




                                                           1.5
                                                           1
  1




                                                           .5
  .5




                                                           0
  0




          0   4      8             12   16       20              0   4         8             12   16   20
                         quarter                                                   quarter



                                             1954:1 − 2008:4
                  Ramey News EVAR                                        Blanchard−Perotti SVAR
  6




                                                           6
  4




                                                           4
  2




                                                           2
  0




                                                           0
  −2




                                                           −2




          0   4      8             12   16       20              0   4         8             12   16   20
                         quarter                                                   quarter


Notes: The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. The response
of taxes is shown in percentage points. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on boot-
strap standard errors.




                                                      34
Figure 7. Estimating the Effects of Taxes on the Government Spending Multiplier,
1939:Q1 - 2008:Q4


            government spending, EVAR                                  government spending, SVAR
  1




                                                             1
  .5




                                                             .5
  0




                                                             0
  −.5




                                                             −.5
        0       4      8      12        16         20              0       4    8      12   16    20
                        quarter                                                  quarter


              private spending, EVAR                                     private spending, SVAR
  .2




                                                             .2




                                   with tax changes
                                   no tax change
                                                             0
  0




                                                             −.2
  −.2




                                                             −.4
  −.4




                                                             −.6
  −.6




                                                             −.8




        0       4      8      12        16         20              0       4    8      12   16    20
                        quarter                                                  quarter


Notes: In the EVAR the government spending shock is identified as the shock to the news variable,
ordered first. In the SVAR, the government spending shock is identified as the shock to total government
spending, ordered first. The line labeled "with tax changes" is the estimated effect of a government
spending shock, allowing taxes to change as estimated. The line labeled "no tax change" is the computed
counter-factual response in which taxes are not allowed to change.




                                                        35
Figure 8. Real Government Spending During World War II
           120
           100




                      Draft enacted
  Billions of $1937
       60  40
           20    80




                  1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947


Notes: Data from Gordon and Krenn (2010).




                                            36
Figure 9. Decomposition of Employment Changes during WWII

          15000
             10000




                        Draft enacted
   thousands
     5000 0
          −5000




                 1938   1939      1940            1941       1942         1943         1944     1945

                          total employment                                      private employment
                          civilian government employment                        military employment


Notes: Each employment component has been normalized to 0 in September 1940. Numbers are in
thousands. Employment data based on data compiled by V. Ramey. See data appendix for details.




                                             37
Figure 10. Labor Force Participation Rate
     62
     60
     58
     56
     54




        1930         1935          1940          1945          1950          1955          1960
                                                  year

Notes: Labor force participation rate of population ages 14 and above. Based on data compiled by V.
Ramey. See data appendix for details.




                                                38
Figure 11. Unemployment Responses: Ramey News EVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                                  unemployment




                                                            .2
  1.5




                                                            0
  1




                                                            −.2
  .5




                                                            −.4
  0
  −.5




                                                            −.6
        0    4        8             12   16       20                          0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                           quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                                  unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .2
                                                            0
  1




                                                            −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2
  .5
  0
  −.5




        0    4        8             12   16       20                          0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                           quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                                  unemployment
                                                            2
  2




                                                            1
  1




                                                            0
  0




                                                            −1
  −1




                                                            −2




        0    4        8             12   16       20                          0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                           quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to the news variable, ordered first.
The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Unemployment is
denoted as a percent of the civilian labor force. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based
on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                       39
Figure 12. Unemployment Responses: Blanchard-Perotti SVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .1
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −.1
  .5




                                                            −.2
  0
  −.5




                                                            −.3
        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                       quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .2
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −.2
  .5




                                                            −.4
  0




        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                       quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                              unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .4
                                                            .2
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −.6 −.4 −.2
  .5
  0




        0    4        8             12   16       20                      0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                       quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to total government spending, ordered
first. The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Unemployment
is denoted as a percent of the civilian labor force. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based
on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                       40
Figure 13. Unemployment Responses: Fisher-Peters News EVAR

                                              1958:1 − 2008:4

                 government spending                                    unemployment
  2




                                                           2
  1.5




                                                           1
  1




                                                           0
  .5




                                                           −1
  0




                                                           −2
  −.5




        0    4        8             12   16      20             0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                             quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to excess stock returns of top defense
contractors, ordered first. The shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one
percent of GDP. Unemployment is denoted as a percent of the civilian labor force. The standard error
bands are 95 percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                      41
Figure 14. Employment Responses: Ramey News EVAR


                                                                    1939:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                    government employment                         private employment
  1.5




                                       .8




                                                                                               .8
                                       .6




                                                                                               .6
  1




                                       .4




                                                                                               .4
  .5




                                       .2




                                                                                               .2
                                       0




                                                                                               0
  0
  −.5




                                       −.3




                                                                                               −.3
        0     4   8     12   16   20                           0      4   8     12   16   20                 0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                 quarter                                     quarter



                                                                    1947:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                    government employment                         private employment
  1.5




                                                                                               .2 .4 .6 .8
                                       −.4 −.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
  1
  .5




                                                                                               −.4 −.2 0
  0
  −.5




        0     4   8     12   16   20                           0      4   8     12   16   20                 0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                 quarter                                     quarter



                                                                    1954:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                    government employment                         private employment
                                       2.5




                                                                                               2.5
  2
  1.5




                                                                                               1.25
                                       1.25
  1




                                                                                               0
                                       0
  .5




                                                                                               −1
                                       −1
  0
  −.5




                                                                                               −2
                                       −2




        0     4   8     12   16   20                           0      4   8     12   16   20                 0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                 quarter                                     quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to the news variable, ordered first.
The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Each employment
response is rescaled to represent a percentage of total employment. The standard error bands are 95
percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                                          42
Figure 15. Employment Responses: Blanchard-Perotti SVAR



                                                                   1939:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                   government employment                                     private employment
  1.5




                                       .6




                                                                                              .6
  1




                                       .3




                                                                                              .3
  .5




                                       0




                                                                                              0
  0
  −.5




                                       −.3




                                                                                              −.3
        0     4   8     12   16   20                          0      4   8     12   16   20                             0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                quarter                                                 quarter



                                                                   1947:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                   government employment                                     private employment
  1.5




                                                                                              −1 −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2 0 .2
                                       .2
                                       −1 −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2 0
  1
  .5
  0




        0     4   8     12   16   20                          0      4   8     12   16   20                             0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                quarter                                                 quarter



                                                                   1954:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                                   government employment                                     private employment
  1.5




                                       1.2




                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                              .8
                                       .8
  1




                                                                                              .4
                                       .4
  .5




                                                                                              0
                                       0




                                                                                              −.4
                                       −.4
  0




        0     4   8     12   16   20                          0      4   8     12   16   20                             0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                                quarter                                                 quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to total government spending, ordered
first. The shock is normalized so that government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Each employ-
ment response is rescaled to represent a percentage of total employment. The standard error bands are
95 percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                                         43
Figure 16. Employment Responses: Fisher-Peters News EVAR

                                                1958:1 − 2008:4
            government spending             government employment                  private employment




                                       3




                                                                          3
  1.5




                                       2




                                                                          2
  1




                                       1




                                                                          1
  .5




                                                                          0
                                       0
  0
  −.5




                                                                          −1
                                       −1
        0     4   8     12   16   20        0     4   8    12   16   20        0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                            quarter                            quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to excess stock returns of top defense
contractors, ordered first. The shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one
percent of GDP. Each employment response is rescaled to represent a percentage of total employment.
The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                      44
Figure 17. Employment Responses to Shocks to Components of Government
Spending: 1939:1 - 2008:4


                              A. Responses to a Shock to Government Purchases of Private Goods
                              government purchases                                               government value added
  1 1.5




                                                                      4
                                                                      2
  .5




                                                                      0
  −.5 0




                                                                      −2
                      0   4         8             12   16   20                           0   4         8             12   16   20
                                        quarter                                                            quarter


                              government employment                                                private employment



                                                                      .2
  −.4−.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                      −.6 −.4 −.2 0


                      0   4         8             12   16   20                           0   4         8             12   16   20
                                        quarter                                                            quarter



                                    B. Responses to a Shock to Government Value Added
                              government purchases                                               government value added
                                                                      1 1.5
  −20−10 0 10 20




                                                                      .5
                                                                      −.5 0




                      0   4         8             12   16   20                           0   4         8             12   16   20
                                        quarter                                                            quarter


                              government employment                                                private employment
                                                                      −1−.5 0 .5 1 1.5
  −.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2




                      0   4         8             12   16   20                           0   4         8             12   16   20
                                        quarter                                                            quarter


Notes: The SVAR uses the Blanchard-Perotti methodology. The government purchases shock is identified
as the shock to real government purchases, ordered first. The government value added shock is identified
as the shock to real government value added, ordered second. The shocks are normalized so that the
government spending component peaks at one percent of GDP. Each employment response is rescaled to
represent a percentage of total employment. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on
bootstrap standard errors.




                                                                 45
Figure 18. Employment Responses to Shocks to Components of Government
Spending: 1947:1 - 2008:4


                             A. Responses to a Shock to Government Purchases of Private Goods
                             government purchases                                            government value added




                                                                     2
  1




                                                                     1
  .5




                                                                     −2 −1 0
  0




                     0   4         8             12   16   20                        0   4         8             12   16   20
                                       quarter                                                         quarter


                             government employment                                             private employment
  .2




                                                                     .5
                                                                     −1.5 −1 −.5 0
  0
  −.4 −.2




                     0   4         8             12   16   20                        0   4         8             12   16   20
                                       quarter                                                         quarter



                                   B. Responses to a Shock to Government Value Added
                             government purchases                                            government value added
                                                                     1.5
  20




                                                                     1
  10




                                                                     .5
  0
  −10




                                                                     0




                     0   4         8             12   16   20                        0   4         8             12   16   20
                                       quarter                                                         quarter


                             government employment                                             private employment
  −1−.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                     −2 −1 0 1 2 3




                     0   4         8             12   16   20                        0   4         8             12   16   20
                                       quarter                                                         quarter


Notes: The SVAR uses the Blanchard-Perotti methodology. The government purchases shock is identified
as the shock to real government purchases, ordered first. The government value added shock is identified
as the shock to real government value added, ordered second. The shocks are normalized so that the
government spending component peaks at one percent of GDP. Each employment response is rescaled to
represent a percentage of total employment. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on
bootstrap standard errors.




                                                                46
Figure A1. Private Spending Responses: Perotti SVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                       private spending
  1.5




                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
  .5




                                                            −.5
  0
  −.5




                                                            −1
        0    4        8             12   16       20               0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                 quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                       private spending
  1.5




                                                            .5
                                                            0
  1




                                                            −.5
  .5




                                                            −1
  0




                                                            −1.5




        0    4        8             12   16       20               0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                 quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                       private spending
  1.5




                                                            2
                                                            1
  1




                                                            0
  .5




                                                            −1
                                                            −2
  0




        0    4        8             12   16       20               0   4      8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                                 quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to defense spending, ordered first.
The shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Private GDP is
denoted as a percent of total GDP. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based on bootstrap
standard errors.




                                                       47
Figure A2. Unemployment Responses: Perotti SVAR


                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                      unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .1
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −.1
  .5




                                                            −.2
  0
  −.5




                                                            −.3
        0    4        8             12   16       20              0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                               quarter



                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                      unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .2
                                                            0
  1




                                                            −.2
  .5




                                                            −.4
  0




                                                            −.6




        0    4        8             12   16       20              0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                               quarter



                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
                 government spending                                      unemployment
  1.5




                                                            .5
  1




                                                            0
                                                            −.5
  .5




                                                            −1
  0




        0    4        8             12   16       20              0   4     8             12   16   20
                          quarter                                               quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to defense spending, ordered first. The
shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Unemployment is
denoted as a percent of the civilian labor force. The standard error bands are 95 percent bands based
on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                       48
Figure A3. Employment Responses: Perotti SVAR


                                                              1939:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                              government employment                             private employment
  1.5




                                       .6




                                                                                         .6
  1




                                       .3




                                                                                         .3
  .5




                                       0




                                                                                         0
  0
  −.5




                                       −.3




                                                                                         −.3
        0     4   8     12   16   20                     0      4   8     12   16   20                     0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                           quarter                                         quarter



                                                              1947:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                              government employment                             private employment
  1.5




                                       .5




                                                                                         .25 .5
                                       .25
  1




                                                                                         −.75 −.5 −.25 0
                                       −.75 −.5 −.25 0
  .5
  0
  −.5




        0     4   8     12   16   20                     0      4   8     12   16   20                     0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                           quarter                                         quarter



                                                              1954:1 − 2008:4
            government spending                              government employment                             private employment
  1.5




                                       1.4




                                                                                         1.4
                                       .8




                                                                                         .8
  1




                                       .4




                                                                                         .4
                                       −.8 −.4 0




                                                                                         −.8 −.4 0
  .5
  0




        0     4   8     12   16   20                     0      4   8     12   16   20                     0    4    8    12   16   20
                   quarter                                           quarter                                         quarter


Notes: The government spending shock is identified as the shock to defense spending, ordered first. The
shock is normalized so that total government spending peaks at one percent of GDP. Each employment
response is rescaled to represent a percentage of total employment. The standard error bands are 95
percent bands based on bootstrap standard errors.




                                                                    49
