                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               NOMINAL STABILITY AND FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION

                                      Michael B. Devereux
                                          Ozge Senay
                                       Alan Sutherland

                                       Working Paper 17796
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17796


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This research is supported by the UK Economic and Social
Research Council, Award Number ES/1024174/1. Devereux thanks SSHRC, the Royal Bank, and
the Bank of Canada for financial support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Michael B. Devereux, Ozge Senay, and Alan Sutherland. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nominal Stability and Financial Globalization
Michael B. Devereux, Ozge Senay, and Alan Sutherland
NBER Working Paper No. 17796
January 2012, Revised January 2012
JEL No. F3,F33,F4,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the one and a half decades prior to the global financial crisis, advanced economies experienced
a large growth in gross external portfolio positions. This phenomenon has been described as Financial
Globalization. Over roughly the same time frame, most of these countries also saw a substantial fall
in the level and variability of inflation. Many economists have conjectured that financial globalization
contributed to the improved performance in the level and predictability of inflation. In this paper, we
explore the causal link running in the opposite direction. We show that a monetary policy rule which
reduces inflation variability leads to an increase in the size of gross external positions, both in equity
and bond portfolios. This is a highly robust prediction of open economy macro models with endogenous
portfolio choice. It holds across many different modeling specifications and parameterizations. We
also present preliminary empirical evidence which shows a negative relationship between inflation
volatility and the size of gross external positions.


Michael B. Devereux                                 Alan Sutherland
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                      University of St. Andrews
997-1873 East Mall                                  St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9AL
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1                               UK
CANADA                                              ajs10@st-and.ac.uk
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Ozge Senay
Department of Economics
University of St. Andrews
St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9AL
UK
os12@st-andrews.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Data on external asset positions show that the gross size of country portfolios has increased
substantially over the past four decades. Over the same period the volatility of inflation
has declined in most countries as monetary authorities have shifted the focus of monetary
policy towards inflation stabilization and away from output stabilization. This paper
investigates whether these two phenomena are related. The question we address is: has
the increased monetary policy focus on nominal stability resulted in greater financial
globalization?
        We are not the first to explore the link between financial globalization and inflation.
But to our knowledge, all the literature has focused on the causation going in the other
direction. For instance, many authors have suggested that increasing globalization in
goods and financial markets has led to a decline in national inflation rates, either through
direct market mechanisms or by influencing the behavior of monetary authorities1 .
        We do not dispute the possibility that financial globalization may influence inflation,
either directly through trade eﬀects or indirectly through aﬀecting the conduct of mone-
tary policy. But we argue in this paper that there is a very strong theoretical case that the
link may also go the other way. We find that monetary policy which reduces the variability
of domestic inflation leads to an increase in the diversification of international portfolios,
generating higher gross external assets and liabilities. We show that this result is highly
robust across a wide variety of modeling specifications and parameter assumptions.2 In
addition, we provide some preliminary empirical evidence for this link.
        Our approach is to provide a theoretical investigation of the impact of monetary
policy and nominal stability on the size of external asset positions in a general theoretical
    1
        For instance, Rogoﬀ (2004, 2006) suggests that increasing economic openness may steepen the trade-
oﬀ between inflation and output, and reduce the equilibrium inflation rate chosen by monetary authorities.
Chen et al. (2004) find empirical evidence that increasing openness, by reducing non-competitive dis-
tortions in domestic markets, reduces the inflation bias in monetary policy. In addition, it has been
suggested that there are direct disinflationary forces imparted by international trade (Pain et al. 2006,
Borio and Filardo 2007). Alternatively, financial globalization could aﬀect inflation indirectly by imposing
a ‘disciplining eﬀect’ on domestic monetary policy. This link is explicitly tested in Tytell and Wei (2004).
They find evidence that financial globalization has led to lower inflation rates. Related research by Kose
et al. (2007) suggest that there are ‘collateral’ benefits of financial globalization coming from its eﬀect
on the quality of domestic economic policy. Stark (2011) also conjectures that financial globalization was
a contributing factor in improved monetary policy performance in OECD countries.
   2
     Note that we are not claiming that inflation stabilization is the only (or even the main) cause of
financial globalization. We are simply showing that it may be one (possibly) quite important factor.


                                                      1
model in which gross external financial positions are endogenous. The theoretical model
is a two-country DSGE structure with Calvo-style sticky prices. The home and foreign
countries produce diﬀerentiated baskets of final goods. Consumers display home-bias in
preferences. There are stochastic shocks to productivity, tastes and nominal interest rates.
Monetary policy in each country is modeled as a Taylor rule. There is international trade
in nominal bonds and equities, and following recent literature, we compute equilibrium
gross portfolios. The size of these portfolios will depend on the structure and stochastic
environment of the model, including the properties of the monetary rule.
   The benchmark model with a standard Taylor rule displays home bias in equity hold-
ings while each country holds a long position in bonds denominated in their own currency.
By varying the feedback coeﬃcient on inflation in the Taylor rule it is possible to ana-
lyze the relationship between the anti-inflation stance of monetary policy, the variance of
inflation and equilibrium portfolio positions.
   In the baseline parameterization of the model, as the policy feedback coeﬃcient on
inflation is increased, the variance of inflation falls and the absolute size of equilibrium
gross positions in both equities and bonds increase. So the model predicts a negative
relationship between the variance of inflation and the size of equity and bond portfolio
positions. This negative relationship appears to be very robust across a wide range of
parameter variations.
   The underlying cause of this negative relationship can be explained in terms of simple
expressions for equilibrium portfolios which show that the equilibrium gross portfolio
position in any asset is proportional to the variability of home income relative to foreign
income and inversely related to the variability of relative asset returns. Lower variability
of relative asset returns compared to the variability of relative income implies that gross
portfolios have to be larger in order to provide adequate hedging of income shocks. We
show that the model implies that, as the feedback coeﬃcient on inflation in the Taylor rule
is increased, the variability of relative asset returns decreases compared to the variability
of relative income. This leads to an increase in gross asset positions.
   We further show that the size of gross positions depends on the correlation between
relative asset returns and cross-country income shocks. The more relative asset returns
are correlated with income shocks, the larger are equilibrium gross holdings. Our model
shows that, when asset markets are incomplete (meaning there are fewer independent
assets than there are sources of uncertainty) a reduction in inflation variability increases
the correlation between relative asset returns and income shocks. In eﬀect, inflation
stabilization moves equilibrium closer to the complete markets outcome. This tends to

                                             2
raise the size of equilibrium gross holdings.
   There are thus two eﬀects which link a reduction in inflation variability to an increase
in the size of gross portfolio positions, a return variability eﬀect and a return-income
correlation eﬀect. The model shows that both eﬀects contribute to an expansion of gross
positions the more monetary policy focuses on inflation stabilization.
   The relationship between gross positions and inflation volatility can be investigated
empirically using the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2007) data on gross external portfolio
positions. In order to put our theoretical results in context, we first report panel regression
estimates for advanced economies for the period 1970-2007 which show a statistically
significant negative relationship between inflation variability and the size of gross portfolio
positions. This empirical result appears to be quite robust to diﬀerent specifications of
the regression equation and diﬀerent definitions of the variables. In particular the results
are robust for overall gross positions and also the gross positions in bonds and equities
separately.
   The paper is part of a large literature on the theoretical and empirical underpinnings
of international capital flows. On the theory side, Devereux and Sutherland (2010, 2011)
and Tille and Van Wincoop (2010) develop techniques for computing equilibrium port-
folios in DSGE models. Applications to the ‘home bias’ puzzle include Coeurdacier et
al (2010), Engel and Matsumoto (2009), Heathcote and Perri (2007), and Benigno and
Nistico (2009). Empirically, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008a, 2008b) and Lane and Sham-
baugh (2010) have explored the determinants of international portfolio positions. With
respect to the relationship between monetary policy rules and international portfolios,
Devereux and Sutherland (2008) show that a monetary policy focused on stabilizing PPI
inflation can increase nominal bond positions by enhancing the risk sharing properties
of nominal bonds.     De Paoli et al (2010) examine the implication of diﬀerent types of
monetary policy rules for international portfolio positions and welfare. Neither Devereux
and Sutherland (2008) nor De Paoli at al (2010) focus on the relationship between CPI
inflation volatility and gross international portfolio positions in the way that is addressed
in this paper.
   There is also a large empirical literature on the determinants of international finan-
cial globalization. Okawa and van Wincoop (2010) develop a gravity based model of
international financial linkages where bilateral financial holdings are determined by ba-
sic principles of portfolio diversification, adjusted for relative informational asymmetries
across countries. They show that their model allows for a theory-based estimate of the size
of financial frictions. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008a, 2008b) and Faruqee et al (2004)

                                                3
use simple models of portfolio diversification to examine the determinants of bilateral
cross border equity holdings. None of these papers explore the influence of inflation on
international financial holdings, however.
    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents a brief empirical analysis of the rela-
tionship between gross asset positions and inflation variability over the period 1970-2007.
Section 3 describes our theoretical model. Section 4 derives some useful relationships
which aid in the analysis of gross positions within the theoretical model. Section 5 de-
rives some simple analytical results based on a simplified version of the model. Section 6
presents the main numerical analysis of the general model. Section 7 discusses the results
and section 8 concludes the paper.


2     Empirical Evidence
In order to put our theoretical model in context we first report some basic panel regression
estimates of the relationship between gross positions and inflation variability.
    We estimate a panel regression of the following form

                     100 ln(GPi,t /GDPi,t ) = β 0 + β 1 σ i,t (π) + β 2 Openi,t          (1)

where GPi,t is a measure of the size of the gross portfolio position of country i in period
t and σi,t (π) is a measure of inflation variability for country i in period t.
    The theoretical model we describe below assumes that international asset markets are
completely open and unhindered by capital controls and that asset trade is not subject
to transactions costs. Empirically, however, asset markets are subject to a wide range of
frictions which have tended to change through time and vary across countries. We control
for these frictions by including Openi,t as a measure of financial openness in the above
regression equation.
    Our main results focus on the total gross position, GP , which we define as
                       (T otal External Assets + T otal External Liabilities)
              GP =
                                                 2
We also estimate several variants of our basic equations where the dependent variable is
the gross position in equity-type assets, and another where the dependent variable is the
position in debt-type assets, where again the gross position is defined as the average of
the asset and liability position in the relevant type of asset.
    We define σ i,t (π) to be the standard deviation of the CPI inflation rate of country i
for the period t − k to t where inflation is measured as the annual percentage change in

                                                 4
the CPI measured at quarterly intervals. In the main results we report below we choose
k to be 6 years, so σ i,t (π) is the standard deviation of annual inflation based on the 24
quarterly observations of the CPI up to and including the final quarter of year t. We also
estimate variants of our equation where k is equal 3, 4 or 5 years.
      Data on gross asset and liability positions is taken from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2007) who provide annual data for the period 1970-2007 on gross external positions for
178 countries for various classes of assets. Our measure of the variability of inflation is
based on CPI inflation data obtained from the IMF IFS database for the period 1965-
2007. The highest frequency available for all countries is quarterly. We measure financial
openness using the Chinn-Ito index (Chinn and Ito, 2007), which provides an annual de
jure measure of financial openness based on a consistent assessment of capital controls
and regulations for 181 countries for the period 1970-2008.
      Before discussing the estimation results it is useful to consider the general features of
the data. The three panels in Figure 1 plot the cross country averages of the data for the
G7 countries (excluding Germany), while Table 1 shows a cross-country comparison of
the data based on individual country averages for each country for two sub-periods (1970-
1989 and 1990-2007). Table 1 also shows the same data for a wider group of countries.
Figure 1 and Table 1 show a strong upward trend in the data for gross positions through
the sample period. This upward trend is common to all countries. Figure 1 and Table
1 also show a strong downward trend in inflation volatility through the sample. This
is also common to all countries. There is also a general trend towards greater financial
openness. There are no obvious country outliers in the G7 group of countries in terms of
the general behavior of the data, but the UK, because of its position as a major financial
center, tends to have a much larger gross positions than other countries in the G7.
      We begin our empirical analysis by focusing on the G7 group of advanced countries:
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK and USA. The results for this country group-
ing are presented in Table 2, Columns 1 to 4.
      Initially consider the simple pooled OLS estimates of (1) for the period 1970-2007.
Column 1 of Table 2 reports the estimated coeﬃcients for the case where country dum-
mies and a time trend are included in the list of regressors.3 For this version of the
estimation equation the estimated coeﬃcient on the variability of inflation is negative
and the coeﬃcient on the Chinn-Ito index is positive.
      The magnitude of the coeﬃcient on inflation variability suggests that inflation vari-
  3
      To save space, the estimated coeﬃcients on the country dummies are not reported.



                                                   5
              Table 1: Summary of data for G7 and G22


              Gross portfolio           StDev             Chinn-Ito
                % of GDP              of Inflation          Index
              70-89    90-07        70-89    90-07      80-89   90-07


Canada          50        91         2.02      1.06      2.50       2.50
France          36       149         2.33      0.58     -0.29       2.08
Germany         35       112                             2.50       2.50
Italy           27        83         3.93      0.86     -0.82       2.14
Japan           20        59         3.21      0.93      1.64       2.43
UK             117       277         3.92      1.44      0.84       2.50
USA             24        69         2.38      0.83      2.50       2.50


Australia       25        81         2.66      1.78      0.49       1.76
Austria         47       134         1.65      0.78      1.01       2.28
Belgium        100       293         2.37      0.73      0.99       2.28
Denmark         46       140         2.64      0.65      0.08       2.46
Finland         31       131         3.15      1.18      0.74       2.28
Greece          24        68         6.44      2.47     -1.14       1.02
Ireland         86       551         4.25      1.12     -0.36       1.99
Korea                     38                   1.78     -0.82   -0.32
Netherlands     79       259         1.87      0.84                 2.50
New Zealand     33        95         3.39      1.96      0.24       2.50
Norway          43       109         2.44      1.13      0.04       1.77
Portugal                 126         5.72      1.75     -1.03       1.92
Spain           23        93         3.41      0.96     -0.30       1.85
Sweden          31       147         2.23      1.83      1.17       2.13
Switzerland    139       375         2.16      1.09




                                6
                             Table 2: Panel regression results


                (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                G7          G7           G7              G7         G22         G22         G22
               Total       Total       Equities         Debt        Total     Equities      Debt
             portfolio   portfolio                                portfolio


Constant     -194.2***   -219.4***   -400.0***        -217.6***   -262.2***   -486.2***   -269.0***
             (30.45)     (8.71)      (14.33)          (7.62)      (12.02)     (15.10)     (10.56)


StDev        -5.12***    -3.20***    -2.06*           -3.45***    -1.11*      -0.72       -1.10*
Inflation    (4.36)      (3.94)      (1.65)           (3.92)      (1.85)      (0.83)      (1.74)


Chinn-Ito     7.20***     2.38         6.18**          1.87        2.77**      2.47        3.17**
Index        (4.18)      (1.36)      (2.32)           (0.98)      (2.14)      (1.33)      (2.33)


Trend         4.41***     6.16***      8.75***         4.42***     7.46***     11.66***    5.82***
             (24.35)     (10.02)     (12.13)          (6.39)      (18.13)     (19.25)     (12.31)


AR coeﬀ                    0.92          0.89           0.92        0.91        0.91        0.92


R2             0.94        0.99          0.99           0.99        0.99        0.99        0.98
St Err Est     20.62       7.73         11.77           8.38        10.07       14.51       10.58
F-stat        411.35       28.59        68.30           20.95       29.14       36.90       18.03
DW-stat        0.17        1.74         1.76            1.74        1.84        1.89        1.78




Column (1): simple OLS. Columns (2)-(7): OLS corrected for AR(1) residuals.
*** indicates significant at 1% level
** indicates significant at 5% level
* indicates significant at 10% level
t-stats in brackets



                                                  7
ability has quite a large eﬀect on the size of gross positions. For instance, a coeﬃcient
of -5.1 implies that a fall in the standard deviation of annual inflation by 1 percentage
point raises the size of gross portfolio positions by approximately 5% of GDP. The aver-
age range of the standard deviation of inflation over the sample period is approximately
5 percentage points, so these estimates suggest that changes in inflation variability might
account for a change in the size of gross positions of approximately 25% of GDP, which
is quite a large eﬀect.
   The coeﬃcient on the Chinn-Ito index is also quite large. The Chinn-Ito index varies
between -1 and +2.5 over the sample period, so a coeﬃcient of 7.2 implies a change in
gross portfolio positions of approximately 25% of GDP. Again this is a large eﬀect.
   While the results reported in Column 1 of Table 2 are strongly significant, the Durbin-
Watson statistic indicates the presence of strong positive auto-correlation in the residuals.
Column 2 of Table 2 reports the results for a variant of the model where we correct for this
auto-correlation. The estimated coeﬃcient on inflation variability continues to be negative
and significant, but is somewhat smaller than the coeﬃcient reported in Column 1. The
coeﬃcient on the Chinn-Ito index continues to be positive but is no longer significant.
   Columns 3 and 4 repeat the AR(1) corrected regression for cases where the dependent
variable is respectively equity-type assets and debt-type assets. The general message of
these results, in terms of the coeﬃcient signs, is similar to the results already reported
for the total gross position, i.e. the coeﬃcient on inflation variability is negative and the
coeﬃcient on the Chinn-Ito index is positive. But notice that the estimated coeﬃcient on
inflation variability appears to be smaller in absolute value (and marginally significant) in
the case of equities than it is in the case of debt. Also notice that the estimated coeﬃcient
on the Chinn-Ito index appears to be larger in absolute value in the case of equities than
it is in the case of debt (where it is insignificant). This suggests that inflation variability
has a larger eﬀect on gross positions in debt than it does on gross positions in equity-type
assets, while financial openness is more important for equity positions than it is for debt
positions.
   Columns 5 to 7 report results for an extended sample of countries which includes a
wider set of developed economies. The full list of 22 countries is given in Table 1.
   Column 5 of Table 2 shows that extending the analysis for the G7 to this group of 22
countries yields similar results. The coeﬃcients on inflation variability and the Chinn-Ito
index are significant, have the same signs and have a similar absolute size to those reported
for the G7. Columns 6 and 7 report results for equity assets and debt asset respectively for
the group of 22 countries. Compared to Column 5 (which shows the results for total gross

                                              8
positions), the general pattern of results in these two columns is similar but somewhat
less significant in the case of equities (Column 6) but more significant in the case of debt
assets (Column 7).
      The results reported in Table 2 are not intended to be a comprehensive empirical
investigation of the determinants of gross positions but they do appear to confirm that
inflation variability is a potentially important factor in the expansion of gross positions
over the past four decades. Inflation variability appears to have a significant negative
eﬀect on gross positions and this eﬀect appears to be reasonably robust across a range
of empirical specifications and a wide range of countries. In the following sections we
describe a two-county general equilibrium model and show that the model’s predictions are
consistent with the above empirical findings, at least in terms of its qualitative properties.


3       A Model of Monetary Policy and Gross Portfolio
        Positions
We analyze a model of two countries with multiple types of shocks. There are country
specific productivity shocks, shocks to preferences, which we call ‘demand’ shocks, as
well as shocks to monetary policy. In addition, we allow trade in equities and bonds.
Home and foreign equities represent claims on firm profits of each country, and home and
foreign nominal bonds are denominated in the currency of each country. This roughly
gives us a breakdown of gross asset and liability positions corresponding to the Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti database.


3.1       Households
We first describe the preferences and opportunity sets of home consumers. Agents in the
home country have a utility function of the form
                                        X
                                        ∞
                                                      Ct1−ρ  H 1+φ
                              U0 = E0          β t(         − t )                         (2)
                                         t=0
                                                      1−ρ 1+φ

where ρ > 0, φ > 0, C is composite consumption, H is labor supply and β is the discount
factor.
      We define Ct as a consumption index defined across home and foreign goods, given
by:
                                h 1 θ−1                  1  θ−1 i θ−1
                                                                   θ

                            Ct = γ tθ CH,tθ + (1 − γ t ) θ CF,tθ                          (3)

                                                  9
where CH and CF are aggregators over individual home and foreign produced goods. At
the level of individual goods, we assume a constant elasticity of substitution across goods
equal to λ > 1. The parameter θ in (3) is the Armington elasticity of substitution between
home and foreign goods. The parameter γ t measures the importance of consumption of
the home good in preferences over traded goods. For γ t > 1/2, we have ‘home bias’ in
preferences. We assume that γ t is aﬀected by a stochastic ‘demand’ shock, which aﬀects
the intensity of preferences for the home good relative to the foreign good. In particular,
we assume that
                                            γ t = γ exp(vt )

where vt = ψvt−1 + εv,t , where, 0 < ψ < 1 and εv,t , is a zero-mean normally distributed
i.i.d. shock with V ar[εv ] = σ 2v .
    The foreign consumption aggregator is defined as
                                    h          1 ∗ θ−1   ∗ θ1 ∗ θ−1
                                                                    i θ−1
                                                                       θ

                             Ct∗            ∗ θ
                                   = (1 − γ t ) CH,t + γ t CF,t
                                                    θ            θ
                                                                                       (4)

where γ ∗t = γ exp(−vt ).Thus, when γ > 1/2, there is on average home bias towards the
domestically produced good in both home and foreign preferences. But a positive shock
to vt will shift both home and foreign demand towards the home produced good, and
away from the foreign produced good.
    Given this specification, the aggregate CPIs for home and foreign agents are therefore
                                       £     1−θ
                                                                  ¤ 1
                                                              1−θ 1−θ
                                   Pt = γ t PH,t + (1 − γ t )PF,t                      (5)
                                    £                             ¤ 1
                               Pt∗ = (1 − γ ∗t )PH,t
                                                 ∗1−θ
                                                      + γ ∗t PF,t
                                                              ∗1−θ 1−θ
                                                                                       (6)

where PH and PF are the aggregate price indices for home and foreign goods. An asterisk
indicates that the price is denoted in the foreign currency.
    Home consumers supply labor and receive profits from the home firm. Define the
budget constraint of the home country consumer as

                                                                P
                                                                N
                         Pt Ct + Pt Ft = Wt Ht + Pt Πt + Pt          αk,t−1 rkt        (7)
                                                               k=1

where Ft denotes home country net external assets in terms of the home consumption
basket, Wt is the home nominal wage, Πt represents real profits of home firms, (defined
further below). The final term represents the total return on the home country portfolio
where αk,t−1 represents the real external holdings of asset k (defined in terms of home
country consumption, purchased at the end of period t − 1 for holding into period t) and

                                                   10
rk,t represents the gross real return on asset k.. We allow for trade in up to N = 4 assets;
home and foreign equity, as well as home and foreign nominal bonds.4
      Home nominal bonds represent a claim on a unit of home currency. The real payoﬀ
to a home nominal bond purchased at time t is therefore 1/Pt+1 . The real price of the
bond is denoted ZB,t . The gross real rate of return on a home nominal bond is thus
rBt+1 = 1/(Pt+1 ZB,t ). For the foreign nominal bond, the real return in terms of the
                                 ∗   ∗
foreign consumption good is 1/(Pt+1 ZB,t ). But this must be converted into home good
returns, so that the real return on foreign bonds, in terms of home consumption, is
                      ∗   ∗
rB∗ t+1 = Qt+1 /(Qt Pt+1 ZB,t ), where Qt = SPt∗ /Pt is the real exchange rate of the home
economy.
      Home equities represent a claim on home aggregate profits in the traded goods sector.
The real payoﬀ to a unit of the home equity purchased in period t is defined to be
Πt+1 +ZE,t+1 , where ZE,t+1 is the real price of home equity and Πt+1 represent real profits.
Thus the gross real rate of return on the home equity is rE,t+1 = (Πt+1 + ZE,t+1 )/ZE,t .
      Without loss of generality, we let the foreign nominal bond act as the Nth asset, so
                                    ∗   ∗
that rN,t+1 = rB∗ t+1 = Qt+1 /(Qt Pt+1 ZB,t ).
      Optimal consumption and labor supply choices for the home household imply:

                                         Ct−ρ = βEt Ct+1
                                                     −ρ
                                                         rN,t+1 ,                        (8)

                                                Wt = Ctρ Htφ Pt .                        (9)

Optimal portfolio choices imply:
                             −ρ
                         Et Ct+1 (rk,t+1 − rN,t+1 ) = 0,            k = 1..N − 1.       (10)

The foreign agent’s optimizing conditions are analogous to (8)-(9). The portfolio selection
equation for the foreign agent must take account of the fact that real exchange rate changes
alter the optimal relationship between marginal utility and excess returns, so that:

                             ∗−ρ   (rk,t+1 − rN,t+1 )
                         Et Ct+1                      = 0,          k = 1..N − 1.       (11)
                                         Qt+1

3.2       Firms
We make the following assumptions about the production structure of each economy.
Firms produce goods using labor. Each firm produces a single diﬀerentiated product. The
production function for firm i in the home country is Y (i) = At Lμ (i), where 0 < μ ≤ 1,
  4
                                        PN
      Note that Ft is defined as Ft =    k=1   αk,t .

                                                        11
At = exp(at ) and a is a common stochastic productivity shock across all firms. Home and
foreign productivity shocks follow a joint process of the form
                       "     # "               #"       # "         #
                         at        ς 1,1 ς 1,2    at−1        εa,t
                               =                         +
                         a∗t       ς 2,1 ς 2,2    a∗t−1      εa∗ ,t
where a∗t is the foreign productivity shock and εa,t and εa∗ ,t are zero-mean normally
distributed i.i.d. shocks with V ar[εa ] = V ar[εa∗ ] = σ 2a and Cov[εa , εa∗ ] = σ a,a∗ .
       Firms maximize profits. Sticky prices are modeled as Calvo-style contracts with a
probability of re-setting price given by 1 − κ. Initially we assume that firms set prices in
their own currency (PCP), but we will also consider a version of the model where there
is local currency pricing (LCP). Here we describe only the PCP case.
   If firms use the discount factor Ωt+i to evaluate future profits, then the dynamics of
the newly-set price PeHt and the home price index PHt are:5
                      P
                      ∞
                 Et         Ωt+s κs MCt,t+s Yt,t+s                      h                       i 1−λ
                                                                                                   1

       PeH,t =        s=0
                             P
                             ∞                        ,           PH,t = (1 − κ)PeH,t
                                                                                  1−λ     1−λ
                                                                                      + κPH,t−1       ,   (12)
                       Et         Ωt+s κs Yt,t+s
                            s=0

where Yt,t+s represents the period t + s output of firms which set prices in period t and
MCt,t+s is the period t + s marginal cost of firms that set prices in period t, where
                                                µ       ¶ 1−μ
                                        1 Wt+s Yt,t+s μ
                             MCt,t+s =
                                        μ At+s At+s
       Each home country firm i faces demand for its good from home consumers and foreign
consumers.            Using the properties of demand curves, we can define equilibrium in the
market for good i in the home country as
                                    µ          ¶−λ
                                      PH,t (i)              ∗
                           Yt (i) =                [CH,t + CH,t ].                                        (13)
                                       PH,t
Now, aggregating across all home firms, aggregate output of the home good is defined as
                                                    R1
                                           Yt = Vt−1 Yt (i)di = CH,t + CH,t
                                                                        ∗
                                                                                                          (14)
                                                          0

                                            R1 ³ PH,t (i) ´−λ
where we have defined Vt =                         PH,t
                                                                di. It follows that home country employment
                                            0
(employment for the representative home household) is given by
                                             µ      ¶1
                                    R1         Yt Vt μ
                              Nt = N(i)di =                                                               (15)
                                    0           At
   5
       We assume that each firm receives a subsidy, financed by lump-sum taxes, which oﬀsets the monopoly
mark-up in pricing.

                                                                12
   The profits of home firm i are

                              Πt (i)Pt = PH,t (i)Yt (i) − Wt Lt (i)

using (13) and aggregating implies
                         (         µ          ¶−λ                           )
                      R1             PH,t (i)              ∗
              Πt Pt =     PH,t (i)                [CH,t + CH,t ] − Wt Lt (i) di
                      0               PH,t


thus, using (14) and (15), aggregate home profits are

                                   Πt Pt = PH,t Yt − Wt Nt

   The pricing, output and profit equations for the foreign firm are analogous.


3.3    Monetary Authorities
Monetary authorities follow a policy that targets the path of, it , the nominal rate of return
on the gross nominal bonds of their respective currencies. We assume that the target for
it is governed by a Taylor rule. For the home country, this is described by
                                       "µ      ¶χ µ ¶δ           #1−ϑ
                              1            Pt      Yt
                      it = β ϑ−1 iϑt−1                 exp(εm,t )                         (16)
                                          Pt−1     Ỹt

where 0 < ϑ < 1, χ > 1, and δ > 0, and Ỹt represents potential output of the home
country. εm,t is a random monetary policy disturbance which is zero-mean, i.i.d. and
normally distributed with V ar[εm ] = σ2m . The foreign monetary disturbance, εm∗ , has a
similar form with V ar[εm∗ ] = σ 2m and Cov[εm , εm∗ ] = 0.
   Note that the rule (16) determines the nominal interest rate as a function of the
historic CPI inflation rate. We choose the CPI inflation rate because this represents a
better description of the actual practice in countries that have been explicitly following
inflation targeting policies. More generally, even outside of the explicit inflation targeters,
the CPI is by far the most visible and relevant price index for guiding monetary policy.
Finally, while our focus is not on optimal policy, in the presence of local currency pricing,
it has been established that targeting CPI inflation may be preferable to PPI inflation
targeting (Engel, 2011).
   We will assume that potential output, Ỹt , is constant. This assumption would not be
justified if we were modeling the optimal choice of policy rule since shocks to productivity
and preferences clearly change the welfare relevant measure of potential output. As our

                                               13
purpose is to represent actual rather than optimal monetary policymaking, we ignore the
impact of shocks on Ỹt . In practice policymakers are not able directly to observe shocks
aﬀecting potential output and therefore tend to measure potential output using a moving
average measure of actual output. This tends not to change much in the short run in
response to shocks.
    Rule (16) allows for a degree of partial adjustment in monetary policy, which is deter-
mined by the parameter ϑ.
    The feedback parameter on inflation, χ, will be a key parameter in the analysis which
follows. A higher value of χ implies that monetary policy is more focused on inflation
stabilization. In equilibrium this will result in lower variability of inflation. The central
issue we will investigate is the relationship between χ and the size of equilibrium gross
holdings of equities and bonds.


4     Portfolio Choice
Our main interest is in the characteristics of the portfolio positions, and their relationship
to the stance of monetary policy. In this vein, we follow Devereux and Sutherland (2011)
in computing the characteristics of the portfolios using a second order approximation
to the portfolio selection equations for the home and foreign country (10) and (11), in
conjunction with a first order approximation to the home and foreign budget constraints
and the vector of excess returns.
    The Devereux and Sutherland (2011) approach allows us to derive reduced-form so-
lutions for gross portfolio holdings of equities and bonds. In order to interpret these
solutions we now derive some useful expressions which show how portfolio holdings are
related in equilibrium to the second moments of income and asset returns. These expres-
sions are not reduced-form solutions in the sense that the second moments of income and
asset returns themselves depend on portfolio holdings. They do however highlight some
of the underlying intuition for the link between inflation variability and gross portfolio
positions.
    In all the cases we analyze below the home and foreign economies are entirely symmet-
ric. If it is assumed that assets 1 and 2 are respectively home and foreign equities then
it follows that α1 = −α2 in equilibrium. Likewise, if assets 3 and 4 are home and foreign
bonds then in equilibrium it follows that α3 = −α4 . It is useful to define αe = −α1 = α2
and αb = −α3 = α4 . Thus αe is a measure of the gross external position in equities and
αb is a measure of the gross external position in bonds, where “gross external position” is

                                             14
defined to be the position that one country holds in the assets issued by the other country.
                             e
It is also useful to define rx,t = rt∗e − rte to be the return on foreign equities relative to the
                             b
return on home equities and rx,t = rt∗b − rtb to be the return on foreign bonds relative to
the return on home bonds.
       Following Devereux and Sutherland (2011), we obtain the condition
                               µ                   ¶
                                        ∗     1
                             Et ct+1 − ct+1 − qt+1 rx,t+1 = 0                                            (17)
                                              ρ
                Z−Z̄                                                    e      b 0
where z =        Z̄
                     ,   except for rx,t , which is defined as rx,t = [rx,t , rx,t ].
       Note that using the definition of Ft and home country profits we may write the home
country budget constraint as
                                                                          P
                                                                          N−1
                           Pt Ct + Pt Ft = PH,t Yt + Pt rN,t Ft−1 + Pt          αk,t−1 rxt               (18)
                                                                          k=1

Taking a first order approximation around the initial point where F = 0, we obtain

                                                                        e 0 rx,t
                                 ct + ft = yt + pH,t − pt + β −1 ft−1 + α                                (19)

where f is measured in terms of level deviations from the steady state (of zero), relative
                              αe αb 0
                        e = [ βY
to steady state GDP and α        , βY ] = [α̃e , α̃b ]0 represents the zero order (or steady
state) portfolio, relative to steady state GDP.6
       Using the equivalent condition for the foreign country, and leading by one period, we
arrive at the condition

                                                                       α0 rx,t+1
                            ∆ct+1 = ∆yt+1 + qt+1 + β −1 2ft − 2ft+1 + 2e                                 (20)

where ∆c = c − c∗ , ∆y = y − y ∗ − τ and τ = p∗F + s − pH is the home terms of trade. Now
iterating forward on (20), using the appropriate transversality constraint, gives
                    X
                    ∞                          X
                                               ∞
             Et+1         β j ∆ct+1+j = Et+1                                               α0 rx,t+1
                                                     β j (∆yt+1+j + qt+1+j ) + β −1 2ft + 2e             (21)
                    j=0                        j=0

       From the Euler equations for consumption growth for the home and foreign country,
we have
                                                               Et qt+1 − qt
                                        Et ∆ct+1 = ∆ct +                                                 (22)
                                                                     ρ
   6
       To simplify notation in this expression (and those which follow) we omit the residual of approximation.
Note that, unlike in Devereux and Sutherland (2011) where shock processes are assumed to have finite
support, the shock processes in this model are normally distributed. This implies that the appropriate
interpretation of the order of approximation is in terms of “order in probability”.

                                                         15
Now, using (21) with (22) we arrive at the expression for real exchange rate adjusted
relative consumption in period t + 1 as
                           1              £                               ¤
                                                                α0 rx,t+1
                    ∆ct+1 − qt+1 = (1 − β) Γy,t+1 + β −1 2ft + 2e                             (23)
                           ρ
where                                       µ                         ¶
                                       X
                                       ∞
                                                       (ρ − 1)
                                              j
                       Γy,t+1 = Et+1       β ∆yt+1+j +         qt+1+j
                                       j=0
                                                          ρ
represents the present value of expected innovations to relative income, plus the present
value of expected innovations to the real exchange rate. Note that in the case of ρ = 1,
the second term drops out, and innovations in current and expected future real exchange
rates do not directly aﬀect the value of ∆ct+1 − ρ1 qt+1 .
   Putting (23) together with the orthogonality condition (17), we may compute the
expressions characterizing the equilibrium portfolio as
                                       1
                                 α̃ = − Σ−1 covt (rx,t+1 , ζ y,t+1 )                          (24)
                                       2 r
where ζ y,t+1 = Γy,t+1 −Et Γy,t+1 and where Σr is the co-variance matrix of rx,t+1 − Et rx,t+1 .
Thus, the optimal portfolio position is determined by the way in which innovations in the
excess return vector co-vary with innovations in the expected present discounted value of
relative income (adjusted by the real exchange rate). Note that expression (24) is not a
reduced form because the second moments on the right-hand side depend on α̃.
   The Appendix shows that equation (24) is equivalent to the following expressions for
equilibrium asset holdings
                                                                 ¡          b
                                                                               ¢
                                1    ¡         e     b
                                                         ¢ StDev   ζ y,t |rx,t
                         α̃e = − corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t         ¡ e b ¢                      (25)
                                2                          StDev rx,t    |rx,t
                                                                 ¡          e
                                                                               ¢
                                1    ¡         b     e
                                                         ¢ StDev ζ y,t |rx,t
                         α̃b = − corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t         ¡ b e ¢                      (26)
                                2                          StDev rx,t    |rx,t
These expressions show that the size of the gross position in asset i depends on two factors:
      ¡         i     j
                          ¢
1 corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t   , the correlation of the return diﬀerential of asset i with innovations
      in the present value of relative income (conditional on the return diﬀerential of asset
      j)
       ¡        j ¢       ¡ i j ¢
2 StDev ζ y,t |rx,t /StDev rx,t |rx,t , the standard deviation of innovations in the present
      value of relative income (conditional on the return diﬀerential of asset j) relative to
      the standard deviations of returns on asset i (conditional on the return diﬀerential
      of asset j)

                                                   16
Again note that (25) and (26) are not reduced form expressions because the second mo-
ments on the right-hand side depend on α̃.
    Expressions (25) and (26) will prove useful in interpreting the impact of inflation
variability on portfolio positions. These expressions have a very intuitive explanation.
Agents wish to hold a portfolio of assets which hedge against shocks to relative income,
ζ y . The extent to which asset i provides a good hedge against relative income shocks
depends on the correlation between the return on asset i and relative income shocks,
         ¡         i     j ¢
i.e. corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t . An asset which is (negatively) correlated with income shocks is a
good hedging instrument and so will be held in the equilibrium portfolio with a positive
gross position. The stronger the correlation the more of that asset will be held. But the
amount of the asset that needs to be held to hedge income shocks also depends on the
size of fluctuations in income relative to the size of fluctuations in the return on asset
              ¡       j
                          ¢       ¡ i j ¢
i, i.e. StDev ζ y,t |rx,t   /StDev rx,t |rx,t . The larger are fluctuations in income relative to
fluctuations in the return on asset i the larger must be the gross position in asset i in
order to provide the desired degree of hedging.
                                                                            ¡      i   j ¢
   These two eﬀects, (i.e. the correlation eﬀect measured by corr ζ y,t , rx,t       |rx,t , and
                                       ¡        j   ¢       ¡ i     j   ¢
the variability eﬀect measured by StDev ζ y,t |rx,t   /StDev rx,t |rx,t  ), will prove useful in
interpreting the link between inflation variability and the size of gross positions.


5     Monetary Policy and Gross Portfolios: A Simple
      Example
In the quantitative analysis below, we show that gross portfolio positions are sensitive
to monetary policy, and in particular that a tighter monetary policy rule - associated
with a higher value of χ (the feedback coeﬃcient on inflation in the Taylor rule) - leads
to an expansion of gross bond and equity positions. Here, we develop a special case to
demonstrate the intuition for this result. To do this, we examine a drastically simplified
version of the above model.
    In this case, rather than Calvo-style pricing, we assume that all prices are re-set period
by period with fraction κ of firms setting prices in each period in advance of shocks being
realized for that period and fraction (1 − κ) setting prices after shocks have been realized.
In addition, we assume that there are shocks only to productivity and that these shocks
are i.i.d. (i.e. ς 1,1 = ς 2,2 = ς 2,1 = ς 1,2 = 0).   For transparency, assume that there are
only relative shocks, so that a∗ = −a.         We also assume that there is no home bias in


                                                 17
preferences, i.e. γ = 1/2, and that utility is linear in work eﬀort, i.e. φ = 0. Finally, we
assume that the production function is linear in labor input, i.e. μ = 1 and there is no
inertia in interest rate setting, i.e. ϑ = 0.
      With only one source of stochastic shocks, perfect risk sharing can be achieved with
just two assets. We therefore consider separately the case where there are two equities
(home and foreign) and two nominal bonds (denominated in home and foreign currency).
      Using the assumptions just stated, we may derive an expression for the present value
of innovations in expected relative home income, ζ yt , as follows

                                             (χ/δ)(θ − 1)(1 − κ)
                                    ζ yt =                       2εat                                 (27)
                                                  χ/δ + κθ
Thus a shock to home productivity (relative to foreign productivity) raises the expected
present value of relative home income, for θ > 1. This expression holds for both the
equities-only and bonds-only cases.


5.1       Equities only
Again, using the assumptions specific to this example, we can establish that the excess
return on home equity relative to foreign equity is

                        e              κ(λ − 1)θ + (χ/δ)[θ − 1 + κ(λ − θ)]
                       rxt = (1 − β)                                       2εat                       (28)
                                                    χ/δ + κθ
Thus a shock to home productivity (relative to foreign productivity) raises the excess
relative return on home equity (assuming θ > 1).
      Since markets are complete in this example, households can fully insure against shocks
by holding a portfolio of home and foreign equities. By definition, the full insurance
portfolio has a payoﬀ which perfectly oﬀsets innovations to expected relative home income,
ζ yt . The optimal portfolio must therefore satisfy

                                                    e
                                               α̃e rxt = −ζ yt

                                                       e
Using this condition and the expressions for ζ yt and rxt given in (27) and (28) the equity
portfolio is
                                1 1               (χ/δ)(θ − 1)(1 − κ)
                        α̃e =                                                                         (29)
                                2 (1 − β) κ(λ − 1)θ + (χ/δ)[θ − 1 + κ(λ − θ)]
Thus the home country takes a long position in foreign equity, α̃e > 0 (assuming θ > 1
and λ > θ).7
  7
                  e e measures the gross external position in equities, where the “gross external position”
      Recall that α

                                                     18
    The key feature of (29) is that gross holdings of equities depend on the parameters
of the monetary rule. It is simple to show that (provided λ > θ) as the weight on CPI
inflation in the monetary rule rises (i.e. as χ rises), the size of the gross equity position
rises.
    Further insight into the underlying determinants of gross positions can be gained by
considering the expressions for asset positions stated in (25) and (26). For the equities-
only case in the current model the following expressions can be derived
                                  ¡ ¢ (χ/δ)(θ − 1)(1 − κ)
                             StDev ζ y,t =                    2σ a
                                                     χ/δ + κθ
                                           ¡         e
                                                         ¢
                                       corr ζ y,t , rx,t   =1
                     ¡ e ¢           κ(λ − 1)θ + (χ/δ)[θ − 1 + κ(λ − θ)]
                StDev rx,t = (1 − β)                                     2σ a
                                                  χ/δ + κθ
Note that these expressions are for unconditional moments since there is only one type of
asset traded.
    These expressions show that χ aﬀects portfolio holdings through its impact on the
                                 e
standard deviation of ζ y,t and rx,t . More specifically, it can be shown that, as χ rises,
      ¡ ¢                        ¡ e ¢
StDev ζ y,t increases and StDev rx,t decreases.
   The link between inflation variability and the standard deviation of relative income,
     ¡ ¢
StDev ζ y,t , can be explained as follows. The presence of sticky nominal prices implies
that, as monetary authorities adopt a monetary stance which is focused on inflation
stabilizing, the volatility of real output increases. This translates into more volatility in
                                                         ¡ ¢
relative income, as indicated by the behavior of StDev ζ y,t .
    The impact of inflation variability on equity returns can also be explained in simple
economic terms. Sticky nominal prices imply that profit margins are aﬀected by variability
in nominal marginal costs. A reduction in the volatility of CPI inflation tends to reduce
the variability of nominal marginal costs and thus tends to stabilize profits and equity
                                                                           ¡ ¢
returns. This, combined with the eﬀect of inflation stabilization on StDev ζ y,t implies
that the size of gross equity holdings increase as χ is increased.
    This simple example illustrates how the variability eﬀect (which operates via the im-
                                       ¡ ¢           ¡ e ¢
pact of inflation variability on StDev ζ y,t /StDev rx,t  ) links inflation variability to the
                                                                                   ¡       e
                                                                                               ¢
size of gross positions. Note that the correlation eﬀect (which operates via corr ζ y,t , rx,t   )
is defined to be the position that one country holds in the equities issued by the other country. It is
reasonable to assume that the elasticity of substitution between goods for sale within a country (λ) is
higher than the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign hoods (θ).



                                                  19
does not arise in this example because, in a complete markets case, this correlation is
equal to unity regardless of the parameters of the monetary policy rule.


5.2          Bonds only
Now consider the case where financial trade is restricted to home and foreign bonds.
Using the assumptions outlined above for this special case the excess return on home
bonds relative to foreign bonds is

                                               b      θ(1 − κ)
                                              rxt =            2εat                                      (30)
                                                      χ/δ + κθ

Given the form of the monetary rule (16), a productivity shock leads to a rise in the home
nominal interest rate, which causes an appreciation of the home currency, so there is a
positive excess return on home bonds relative to foreign bonds.
         In the bonds-only case the optimal bond portfolio must satisfy

                                                      b
                                                 α̃b rxt = −ζ yt

so
                                      1 (χ/δ)(θ − 1)
                                             α̃b =                                 (31)
                                      2       θ
Thus the home country takes a long position in foreign bonds, α̃b > 0 (assuming θ > 1).8
         Again, the key feature of (31) is that gross holdings depend on the parameters of the
monetary rule. As the weight on CPI inflation in the monetary rule, χ, rises, the absolute
size of the gross bond position rises.
         As in the equities-only case, further insight into the underlying determinants of gross
positions can be gained by considering the expressions for asset positions stated in (25)
and (26). For the bonds-only case the following expression can be derived
                                       ¡ ¢ (χ/δ)(θ − 1)(1 − κ)
                                  StDev ζ y,t =                    2σ a
                                                          χ/δ + κθ
                                                ¡         b
                                                              ¢
                                            corr ζ y,t , rx,t   =1
                                             ¡ b ¢   θ(1 − κ)
                                        StDev rx,t =          2σ a
                                                     χ/δ + κθ
These expressions show that the standard deviation of ζ y,t increases, and the standard
              b
deviation of rx,t decreases, as χ increases.
     8
                            e b measures gross external position in bonds, where the “gross external position”
         Again, recall that α
is defined to be the position that one country holds in the bonds issued by the other country.

                                                        20
        The underlying economic explanation for the link between inflation variability and
the variability of relative income is identical to the equities-only case, i.e. the presence of
sticky nominal prices implies that, as monetary authorities adopt a monetary stance which
is focused on inflation stabilizing, the volatility of real output increases. This translates
                                                                                 ¡ ¢
into more volatility in relative income, as indicated by the behavior of StDev ζ y,t .
        The link between χ and the variability of relative bond returns is also easily under-
stood. The nominal return on nominal bonds is fixed by assumption.9 Unanticipated
shocks which aﬀect CPI inflation therefore directly impact on the real return on nominal
bonds. A monetary policy stance which stabilizes inflation must by definition stabilize
the real return on nominal bonds. This is the eﬀect captured by the above expression for
      ¡ b ¢
StDev rx,t   .
        In the case of bond holdings the variability of relative income increases and the vari-
ability of bond returns decreases as χ is increased. Both these eﬀects contribute to the
increase in the absolute size of gross bond holdings. This is again an example of the return
                                                                                 ¡         b
                                                                                               ¢
variability eﬀect. Again note that the correlation eﬀect (which operates via corr ζ y,t , rx,t   )
does not arise in this example because, as before, when markets are complete, this corre-
lation is equal to unity regardless of the parameters of the monetary policy rule.


6         Monetary Policy and Gross Portfolios: The Gen-
          eral Case
The simple example model discussed above shows that, in the presence of sticky nominal
prices, a monetary policy which stabilizes inflation tends to reduce the variability of real
asset returns. This implies that gross portfolio positions in equities and bonds increase
as inflation is stabilized.
        We now turn to the general model (with Calvo price setting and a range of shocks)
and show that this basic result continues to hold. We show that the underlying intuition
for the basic result remains true, i.e. a reduction in inflation volatility tends to reduce
the variability of asset returns, which tends to increase equilibrium gross positions in
equities and bonds. We also demonstrate however, that when markets are incomplete,
the correlation eﬀect comes into play and can reinforce the negative relationship between
inflation variability and the size of gross positions.
    9
        Nominal returns vary from period to period, but at the time portfolio allocations are made the
nominal returns on bonds between the current period and the following period are known with certainty.


                                                   21
       The general model is too complex to analyze explicitly so we focus on numerical
simulations for plausible parameter values.


6.1        Benchmark parameter values
We start with a benchmark case where there are just productivity and monetary shocks.
The benchmark parameter values are listed in Table 3. Because there are only two sources
of shocks, trade in equities and bonds allows full risk sharing.
       The values for β, θ, and γ and the stochastic process for productivity shocks are
consistent with the benchmark parameterization of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994).
The values of λ and μ are chosen to yield a steady state monopoly markup of 11% and
share of profits in output of 0.63 (which is fairly standard). The Calvo parameter is
chosen to yield an average frequency of price changes of 4 quarters (again which is quite
standard). The values of φ and ρ are consistent with the estimates of Smets and Wouters
(2003). The values of the Taylor rule parameters δ and ϑ are consistent with the estimates
of Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000).10 The standard deviation of monetary policy shocks
is chosen to imply that relative monetary policy shocks are approximately the same size
as innovations in relative productivity.
       Results are reported for a range of variations around this benchmark parameterization.


6.2        Gross portfolios in the benchmark case
The eﬀect of varying the coeﬃcient on inflation in the Taylor rule, χ, on equilibrium
portfolio holdings of equities and bonds is illustrated in Figure 2. Panels (a) and (b) plot
the equilibrium holdings of foreign equities and bonds by the home country for a range
of values of χ. These figures show that the external position in foreign equities by the
home country is positive and rising while the external position in bonds is negative and
declining in χ. In other words the absolute size of gross positions increase as monetary
policy becomes more focused on inflation stabilization.11 For reference, panel (i) shows
  10
       Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000) report estimates of δ which are in the range 0.3 to 0.4. However,
these estimates are based on an estimating model which allows for variations in capacity output. We
choose a lower value of δ to reflect the fact that policymaker’s estimates of changes in capacity output
(which are not explicitly captured by our model) may dampen the impact of output on monetary policy.
  11
     The portfolio positions shown in these plots show external asset holdings relative to GDP. It is
apparent that the model is predicting very large gross positions in both equities and bonds. Portfolio
positions of this magnitude are not realistic (for most countries) so the model is clearly not a good
match for the data in this respect. The model, however, assumes that international asset trade is costless


                                                    22
                        Table 3: Benchmark Parameter Values



Discount factor                                           β = 0.99
Elasticity of substitution for individual goods           λ = 10
Elasticity of work eﬀort in utility function              φ=1
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution                  ρ=1
Average share of home goods in consumption basket         γ = 0.85
Elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods θ = 1.5
Production function                                       μ = 0.7
Calvo price adjustment parameter                          κ = 0.75
Taylor rule: coeﬃcient on output                          δ = 0.2
Taylor rule: interest rate smoothing                      ϑ = 0.7
Demand shocks                                             ψ = 0.0, σv = 0.0
                                                                     √
Monetary shocks                                           σm = 0.01/ 2
Productivity shocks                                       ς 1,1 = ς 2,2 = 0.9,
                                                          ς 1,2 = ς 2,1 = 0.1,
                                                          σa = 0.008, σa,a∗ = 0.25σ 2a




                                           23
the eﬀect of varying the inflation feedback parameter on the variability of inflation. This
figure shows that inflation variability declines as χ is increased.
    Figure 2 shows that the basic result demonstrated in the simple example model holds
in the general model for the benchmark set of parameter values.
    The portfolio expressions (25) and (26) can again be used to investigate the intuition
for the relationship between inflation stabilization and the size of equilibrium asset hold-
ings. Panels (c) to (h) of Figure 2 plot the relevant conditional moments. These figures
show that some of the basic properties of conditional moments are similar to those found
in the simple example model. Thus the conditional standard deviations of both bond and
equity returns decline as monetary policy becomes more focused on inflation stabilization.
The behavior of the conditional standard deviation of relative income is somewhat more
complicated than in the simple model. The conditional variability of relative income in-
creases in the case of equities but is non-monotonic in the case of bonds, first increasing
and then decreasing as χ increases. But even when the conditional standard deviation
of relative income is decreasing, the conditional standard deviation of bond returns is
decreasing more quickly, so the net result is that equilibrium bond holdings are increasing
in absolute value as χ increases.
    Panels (c) to (h) of Figure 2 demonstrate that the underlying explanation for the
increase in gross positions is the same as in the simple example model, i.e. as the volatility
of inflation is reduced it is necessary for households to hold larger (in absolute size) gross
positions in equities and bonds in order to achieve the desired degree of risk sharing. This
is again an example of the volatility eﬀect.
    Notice from panels (c) and (d) of Figure 2 that the correlation between both bond and
equity returns and relative income is unity regardless of the value of χ. The correlation
eﬀect therefore does not arise in this example. This again reflects the fact that markets
are complete.
    The benchmark configuration of our model is very similar to the model used by Engel
and Matsumoto (2009) to analyze equity home bias. Our model diﬀers only in the form
of price setting (i.e. we have Calvo price setting rather than one period fixed prices) and
monetary policy (i.e. we have a Taylor rule rather than a money targeting rule). For the
benchmark parameter set the total value of home equity is 37 times steady state GDP,
and unhindered by capital controls or other market frictions. Tille and van Wincoop (2010) show that
it is straightforward to incorporate small transactions costs into a portfolio choice problem of the type
analyzed here. If such costs were introduced into the current model it is likely equilibrium gross portfolios
would be reduced to more realistic levels.


                                                     24
so the equity position illustrated in Figure 2, panel (a) is consistent with a substantial
degree of equity home bias for the full range of χ.12 Our model therefore reproduces the
main Engel and Matsumoto result. But notice that one of the implications of the results
illustrated in Figure 2 is that the degree of equity home bias is sensitive to the variability
of inflation. More specifically, equity home bias is stronger when inflation is relatively
volatile but declines as inflation is stabilized.
       Figure 2 shows that bond holdings in the benchmark case are negative, i.e. each coun-
try is a net borrower in the currency of the other country. This pattern is contradicted by
the data for most advanced economies. Typically advanced economies hold positive posi-
tions in foreign-currency bonds. The benchmark configuration of our model is therefore
not realistic in this respect. This aspect of the benchmark model is, however, corrected
when demand shocks are introduced.
       Figure 3 illustrates the case with demand shocks with the parameters of the demand
shock process given by ψ = 0.8 and σ v = 0.01. This parameterization implies that demand
shocks are roughly as volatile and persistent as relative productivity shocks. All other
parameter values are identical to their benchmark values. Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows
that bond holdings have now switched sign and are positive for all values of χ. This more
closely corresponds to the typical position for advanced countries.
       The other panels of Figure 3 illustrate further details of how demand shocks aﬀect the
behavior of equilibrium portfolios. Panels (a) and (b) show that the size of equity and bond
holdings continue to be increasing in χ. Panel (i) of Figure 3 shows that the volatility of
CPI inflation is declining in χ and panels (g) and (h) show that the conditional standard
deviation of equity and bond returns is again declining in χ. The main contrast with
the benchmark case (without demand shocks) is that the conditional standard deviation
of relative income is now declining in χ. But the standard deviation of relative income
declines less quickly than the standard deviation of both equity and bond returns, so
the basic intuition discussed above continues to hold, i.e. as inflation is stabilized larger
gross positions in equities and bonds are required in order to achieve the desired level
risk sharing. So the volatility eﬀect continues to be an important part of the underlying
explanation for the link between inflation variability and the size of gross positions.
  12
       At χ = 6 panel (a) of Figure 1 shows equity holdings of 2.5 times steady state GDP. This implies
that the home country holds approximately 93% of home country equity. The Foreign country holds the
same percentage of Foreign equity.




                                                   25
6.3        The correlation between relative income and asset returns
Devereux and Sutherland (2008) analyze a model very similar to the benchmark model and
show that the size of the equilibrium gross position in bonds increases as the coeﬃcient on
inflation in the Taylor rule is increased. They however emphasize a diﬀerent intuition for
this result. They argue that inflation volatility causes extraneous noise in the real return
on bonds which partly undermines the eﬃciency of bonds as a hedge against productivity
shocks. A monetary rule which focuses on inflation stabilization will reduce the extraneous
noise in bond returns and therefore imply that bonds become a better hedge against
productivity shocks. Inflation stabilization therefore encourages an expansion of gross
holdings of bonds.
       Given the similarities between the model described above and the model used by
Devereux and Sutherland (2008) it is important to trace the links between the intuition
oﬀered in Devereux and Sutherland (2008) and the intuition emphasized in this paper.13
In fact the links between the two papers can be easily understood in terms of the variability
eﬀect and the correlation eﬀect. The result emphasized in Devereux and Sutherland (2008)
is an example of the correlation eﬀect.
       Figure 4 illustrates the Devereux and Sutherland (2008) result using the model of this
paper. This figure illustrates the eﬀect of χ on bond holdings in the benchmark model
where there are shocks to productivity and monetary policy, but no shocks to demand,
and asset trade is restricted to trade in home and foreign currency bonds. Panel (a) of
Figure 4 shows that the absolute size of the gross position in bonds is increasing in χ.14 As
already explained, Devereux and Sutherland (2008) argue that the underlying explanation
for the increase in the (absolute) size of the gross position in bonds is that bonds become
a better hedge against productivity shocks as inflation is stabilized. In other words, as
χ increases, the correlation between relative income and bond returns tends towards +1
or -1. Panel (b) of Figure 4 shows that in fact the correlation tends towards -1. And
(26) shows that, other things being equal, this will cause an increase in the (absolute)
size of the gross bond position. The results illustrated in Figure 4 are therefore entirely
  13
       While Devereux and Sutherland (2008) analyze a model with many similarities to the model of the
current paper, they only comment very briefly on the eﬀect of inflation stabilization on the size of gross
positions. In particular they only consider this issue in passing in a special case of the model. They do
not decompose portfolio holdings using (25) and (26) and they oﬀer only a brief intuition for the eﬀect
of inflation stabilization on the size of gross positions.
  14
     In order to oﬀer a clear illustration of the Devereux and Sutherland (2008) result, Figure 6 shows a
much wider range for χ than used in Figures 1 and 2.



                                                   26
consistent with the intuition oﬀered by Devereux and Sutherland (2008).15
       But notice from Figure 4 that the eﬀect of inflation stabilization that works through
the correlation between bond returns and relative income is only one channel that links
inflation stabilization to the gross bond position. Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 4 show that
inflation stabilization also reduces the volatility of bond returns relative to the volatility
of relative income. This is exactly the variability eﬀect emphasized above in relation to
Figures 2 and 3. Equation (26) shows that, just as in the cases illustrated in Figures
2 and 3, a reduction in the standard deviation of bond returns relative to the standard
deviation of relative income implies that the gross bond position must increase in order
to achieve the desired degree of risk sharing.
       Figure 4 shows therefore that the variability eﬀect emphasized above (i.e. the impact
of inflation stabilization on the variability of asset returns) reinforces the correlation eﬀect
emphasized by Devereux and Sutherland (2008) (i.e. the impact of inflation stabilization
on the correlation between asset returns and relative income).
       Now re-consider the general case illustrated in Figure 3, where there are shocks to
productivity, monetary policy and demand and where there is trade in both equities
and bonds. Previously we emphasized the link between inflation stabilization and gross
asset positions that operates through the variability eﬀect (i.e. the eﬀect of inflation
stabilization and the variability of asset returns). However, notice from panels (c) and (d)
of Figure 3, that inflation stabilization also aﬀects the correlation between asset returns
and relative income. In fact, as χ increases, the correlation between both equity returns
and bond returns and relative income increases from zero towards +1. In other words,
both bonds and equities become better hedging instruments as inflation is stabilized. As
can be seen from (25) and (26), this reinforces the impact of inflation stabilization on gross
positions. This is the correlation eﬀect identified by Devereux and Sutherland (2008) and
panels (c) and (d) of Figure 3 show that this eﬀect generalizes from the bonds-only case
considered by Devereux and Sutherland (2008) to the case where there is trade in both
equities and bonds.16
  15
       Devereux and Sutherland (2008) further emphasized that, if monetary policy were to stabilize inflation
completely, bonds would become a perfect hedge for productivity shocks. In other words perfect risk
sharing would be possible. In terms of the case illustrated in Figure 4, this would be the limiting case
where χ tends to infinity and there is perfect negative correlation between bond returns and relative
income.
  16
     Notice that, in the limiting case, when χ tends to infinity and inflation is perfectly stabilized, the
correlations between both equity returns and bond returns and relative income tend to +1. In this
limiting case complete risk sharing is achieved.


                                                      27
   Note that, while the correlation eﬀect illustrated in panels (c) and (d) of Figure 3
reinforces the asset return volatility eﬀect illustrated in panels (g) and (h), the correlation
eﬀect only arises when markets are incomplete. In the case illustrated in Figure 2, where
there are only productivity and money shocks and trade in both equities and bonds,
markets are complete. This implies that both bond returns and equity returns are perfectly
correlated with relative income regardless of the level of χ. In this case the correlation
eﬀect is not present. The return volatility eﬀect nevertheless continues to operate, as
shown in panels (g) and (h) of Figure 2.


6.4    Generalizations
Figures 5 to 20 illustrate the relationship between χ and asset holdings for a range of
parameter variations.
   Figure 5 shows the case where the elasticity between home and foreign goods, θ, is
reduced from 1.5 to 0.8. The absolute size of both bond and equity positions is higher
than in the benchmark case, but the basic qualitative features of the relationship remain
the same. Gross positions continue to be increasing in χ.
   Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the eﬀect of assuming local currency pricing, LCP, (in
contrast to the benchmark case, where producer currency pricing, PCP, is assumed).
Figure 6 shows the case of LCP and θ = 1.5, while Figure 7 is the case of LCP and
θ = 0.8. The general qualitative features of the relationship between χ and gross positions
continue to hold in these cases, except that in Figure 6 (LCP and θ = 1.5) the gross bond
position is now only very slightly upward sloping.
   Figure 8 illustrates the case where there are only shocks to productivity and demand,
but no shocks to monetary policy. Again the general features of the relationship between
χ and gross portfolio positions is similar to the benchmark case.
   Figures 9 to 20 illustrate the eﬀects of varying, respectively, the elasticity of labor
supply (1/φ), risk aversion (ρ), consumption home bias (γ), the Taylor rule coeﬃcient on
output (δ), the interest rate smoothing coeﬃcient (ϑ), the persistence of demand shocks
(ψ), the Calvo price adjustment parameter (κ) and the variance of demand shocks and
monetary shocks. In all these cases the general qualitative properties of the relationship
between χ and gross positions in equities and bonds is largely unchanged by the parameter
variations. In some cases, the gross equity becomes negative (i.e. the home country holds
a short position in foreign equity) or the gross bond position is negatively related to χ
for low values of χ. These eﬀects are however quantitatively quite small. The dominant


                                              28
property is that gross positions are positive and increasing in χ.
    The eﬀects of these parameter variations on the conditional standard deviations of
asset returns and relative income and the conditional correlation of asset returns with
relative income are not illustrated, but the general properties illustrated in Figures 2 and
3 continue to hold for the parameter variations illustrated in Figures 5 to 20.
    We conclude that the general properties illustrated for the benchmark parameter set
(with productivity, money and demand shocks) are robust across a wide range of para-
meter variations.


7     Discussion
Our model suggests that a more aggressive monetary policy which reduces the variability
of inflation in almost all cases leads to an increase in gross external assets and liabilities.
As we mentioned in the introduction, previous researchers have argued that the causation
may go in the other direction. Econometric evidence such as Tytell and Wei (2004) finds
that measures of financial globalization have significantly negative coeﬃcient estimates in
cross country inflation (level) equations. By contrast, our empirical evidence finds that
inflation variability is significant in panel regressions of financial globalization. Sorting
out the full set of causal links between the level of inflation, the variability of inflation,
and financial globalization is beyond the scope of this paper. Both inflation and interna-
tional portfolio positions are endogenous and aﬀected by all aspects of the macroeconomy,
and it is diﬃcult to obtain robust instruments for either variable. Moreover, our theory
by no means precludes the possibility that there may be additional forces leading from
international financial globalization to inflation either directly or indirectly through en-
dogenous monetary policy. Our main point is that evidence suggesting that increased
capital market openness has been associated with reductions in average inflation rates
does not necessarily establish the direction of causation, since we have shown that there
are strong theoretical reasons to think that there may also be a link between inflation
stability and the size of gross external financial positions.
    The eﬀect of inflation variability on gross external assets depends on the correlation
and variability channels defined above. Are these channels empirically relevant? Our
model predicts that a fall in the variance of the relative returns on bonds and equity
will lead to a rise in gross external positions. The relative return on nominal bonds is
represented by the variance of expected exchange rate changes. In fact, over the major
period of financial globalization discussed in this paper, as noted by Rogoﬀ (2006), there

                                              29
was a decline in variability in nominal exchange rates between the major economies.
Likewise, there is evidence of an increase in the co-movement of major world stock markets
since the mid 1990s (see e.g. Kizys and Pierdzioch, 2009). This should be associated with
a fall in the variability of relative equity returns.
    The second component of the variability eﬀect is determined by the conditional vari-
ance of relative income across countries. One way to measure this would be to look at
business cycle co-movement across countries. Here, the results of the literature are quite
ambiguous. Heathcote and Perri (2002) and Stock and Watson (2003) find that business
cycle co-movement among the major economies fell in the 1990’s relative to earlier peri-
ods. In principal, this should lead to an increase in the conditional variance of relative
income across countries. However, using a wider sample of countries, Kose et al (2003)
find that correlations tended to increase over time during the 1960-99 period.
    Note however, that in the case of demand shocks, our model predicts that a fall in
inflation variability will still lead to a rise in financial globalization, even though it will
cause a decline in the conditional variance of relative income. This is because the rise in
gross holdings coming from the fall in the conditional variance of asset returns dominates
the eﬀect of the fall in the conditional variance of relative income. Thus, establishing the
importance of inflation variability in gross external assets does not necessarily require a
fall in business cycle co-movements across countries.


8     Conclusions
This paper investigates the relationship between inflation variability and the size of ex-
ternal asset positions. Panel regression results based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti’s data
on gross portfolios show a fairly robust negative relationship between inflation variability
and the size of gross positions. Using a general two-country dynamic general equilib-
rium model, we solve for gross positions and show that the model predicts a relationship
between inflation variability and the size of gross positions which has the same general
features as the data. Our solutions show that the link between inflation variability and
the size of gross positions can be explained by a combination of a return variability eﬀect
and a return-income correlation eﬀect. A reduction in inflation variability tends to reduce
the variability of returns for both bonds and equities. It is therefore necessary to hold
larger positions in bonds and equities in order to achieve the desired level of risk sharing.
Lower inflation variability also reduces the amount of extraneous noise in bond and equity
positions and thus increases the correlation between asset returns and relative income.

                                              30
This increases the hedging eﬃciency of both bonds and equities and therefore increases
equilibrium gross positions in bonds and equities.
     The paper thus shows that there are strong theoretical reasons to think that there may
be a link between inflation stability and the size of gross external financial positions, this
suggests that evidence that capital market openness has been associated with reductions
in average inflation rates does not necessarily establish the direction of causation.


Appendix
The unconditional one-period ahead covariance matrix of the vector [ rxe rxb ζ y ]0 can
be written as follows           ⎡                  ⎤
                                   σ2e σ e,b σ e,ζ
                                ⎢                  ⎥
                                ⎢ σ e,b σ 2 σ b,ζ ⎥
                                ⎣          b       ⎦
                                  σ e,ζ σ b,ζ σ 2ζ
Equation (24) implies
                                                                            "                    #−1 "            #
                         1                                1                     σ 2e     σ e,b            σ e,ζ
                   α̃ = − Σ−1
                           r covt (rx,t+1 , ζ y,t+1 ) = −                                                                            (32)
                         2                                2                     σ e,b     σ 2b            σ b,ζ

So
                                                            1 σe,ζ σ 2b − σ e,b σ b,ζ
                                                 α̃e = −                                                                             (33)
                                                            2 σ 2e σ 2b − σ 2e,b
                                                            1 σb,ζ σ 2e − σ e,b σ e,ζ
                                                 α̃b = −                                                                             (34)
                                                            2 σ 2e σ 2b − σ 2e,b
     Following Eaton (2007) Section 3.4 it is possible to show that the covariance matrix
of the vector [ rxe ζ y ]0 conditional on rxb is given by
       "                   #         "           #                          ⎡                                                    ⎤
                                                                                    σ2e σ 2b −σ2e,b      σ e,ζ σ 2b −σe,b σb,ζ
           σ 2e    σ e,ζ         1       σ e,b       h                i
                                                                                           σ 2b                     σ2b
                               − 2                       σe,b σ b,ζ       =⎣            2
                                                                                 σe,ζ σ b −σ e,b σ b,ζ       σ2ζ σ2b −σ2b,ζ
                                                                                                                                 ⎦
           σ e,ζ   σ 2ζ         σb       σ b,ζ                                             σ 2b                     σ2b

from which it follows that
                                    ¡         e      b
                                                        ¢           σ σ2b −σe,b σb,ζ
                                corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t   = (σ2 σ2 −σe,ζ
                                                                     2 )1/2 (σ 2 σ 2 −σ 2 )1/2
                                                               e b   e,b         ζ b    b,ζ
                                                   ¡       b
                                                             ¢     (σζ σ2b −σ2b,ζ )1/2
                                                                     2
                                       StDev ζ y,t |rx,t =                 σ
                                                   ¡ e b ¢ (σ2e σ2b −σb 2e,b )1/2
                                       StDev rx,t |rx,t =                  σb

Substituting these expressions into (25) and simplifying yields (33).


                                                                 31
   Likewise the covariance matrix of the vector [ rxb ζ y ]0 conditional on rxe is given by
      "                   #              "           #                         ⎡                                                   ⎤
                                                         h                i           σ2e σ 2b −σ2e,b      σ e,ζ σ 2b −σe,b σe,ζ
          σ2b     σ b,ζ           1          σe,b
                              −                              σe,b σ e,ζ       =⎣             σ 2e
                                                                                   σe,ζ σ2b −σ e,b σ e,ζ
                                                                                                                      σ2e
                                                                                                               σ2ζ σ2b −σ2b,ζ
                                                                                                                                   ⎦
          σ b,ζ   σ 2ζ            σ 2e       σ e,ζ                                           σ 2e                     σ2e


from which it follows that
                                      ¡         b      e
                                                          ¢           σ σ 2b −σe,b σe,ζ
                                  corr ζ y,t , rx,t |rx,t   = (σ2 σ2 −σe,ζ
                                                                        2 )1/2 (σ 2 σ 2 −σ 2 )1/2
                                                                 e b    e,b         ζ b    b,ζ
                                                     ¡       e
                                                               ¢     (σ 2 σ 2 −σ 2 )1/2
                                                                        ζ b      b,ζ
                                         StDev ζ y,t |rx,t =                  σ
                                                     ¡ b e ¢ (σ2e σ2b −σe2e,b )1/2
                                         StDev rx,t |rx,t =                   σe

Substituting these expressions into (26) and simplifying yields (34).




                                                                    32
References
Bacchetta, P. and E. van Wincoop (2000) “Trade in nominal assets and net international
capital flows” Journal of International Money and Finance, 19, 55-72.

Backus, D., P. Kehoe and F. Kydland (1994) “Dynamics of the trade balance and the
terms of trade: the J-curve?” The American Economic Review, 84, 84-103.

Benigno, P. and S. Nistico (2009) “International portfolio allocation under model uncer-
tainty” NBER Working Paper No. 14734.

Borio, C. V. and A. J. Filardo (2007) “Globalization and inflation: new cross-country
evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation” BIS Working Paper No. 227.

Chen, N., J. Imbs, and A. Scott (2004) “Competition, globalization, and the decline of
inflation” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4695.

Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito (2007) “A new measure of financial openness” unpublished
manuscript, University of Wisconsin.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, M. Gertler (2000) “Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic sta-
bility: evidence and some theory” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147-180.

Coeurdacier, N., R. Kollmann, and P. Martin (2010) “International portfolios, capital
accumulation, and foreign asset dynamics” Journal of International Economics, 80, 100-
112.

De Paoli, B., H. Kucuk-Tuger and J. Sondergaard (2010) “Monetary policy rules and
foreign currency positions” Bank of England Working Paper No. 403.

Devereux, M. and A. Sutherland (2008) “Financial globalization and monetary policy”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 1363-1375.

Devereux, M. and A. Sutherland (2010) “Country portfolio dynamics” Journal of Eco-
nomic Dynamics and Control, 34, 1325-1342.

Devereux, M. and A. Sutherland (2011) “Solving for country portfolios in open economy
macro models” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9, 337-369.

Eaton, M. (2007) Multivariate Statistics: A Vector Space Approach, Institute of Mathe-
matical Statistics, Lecture Notes — Monograph Series Volume 53.

                                          33
Engel, C. (2011) “Currency misalignments and optimal monetary policy:                a re-
examination” American Economic Review, 101, 2796-2822.

Engel, C. and A. Matsumoto (2009) “The international diversification puzzle when goods
prices are sticky: It’s really about exchange-rate hedging, not equity portfolios” Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 155-188.

Faruqee, H. S. Li, and I.K. Yan (2004) “The determinants of international portfolio
holdings and home bias” IMF Working Paper No. 04-34.

Heathcote, J. and F. Perri (2002) “Financial autarky and international business cycles”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 423-51.

Heathcote, J. and F. Perri (2007) “The international diversification puzzle is not as bad
as you think” NBER Working Paper No. 13483.

Kizys, R. and P. Pierdzioch (2009) “Changes in the international co-movement of stock
returns and asymmetric macroeconomic shocks” Journal of International Financial Mar-
kets, Institutions and Money, 19, 289-305.

Kose, A., E. Prasad, and M. Terrones (2003) “How does globalization aﬀect the syn-
chronization of business cycles?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
93, 57-62.

Kose, A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoﬀ, and S-J Wei (2007) “Financial globalization: beyond
the blame game ” Finance and Development, 44, 1.

Lane, P. and G-M. Milesi-Ferretti (2001) “The external wealth of nations: Measures of
foreign assets and liabilities for industrial and developing countries” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics. 55, 263-94.

Lane, P. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007) “The external wealth of nations mark II: Re-
vised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970—2004” Journal of
International Economics. 73, 223—250.

Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008a) “The drivers of financial globalization” Amer-
ican Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 98, 327-332.

Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008b) “International investment patterns” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 90, 538-49.

                                             34
Lane, P. and J. Shambaugh (2010) “The long or short of it: determinants of foreign
currency exposure in external balance sheets” Journal of International Economics, 80,
33-44.

Okawa, Y. and E. Van Wincoop (2010) “Gravity in international finance” unpublished
manuscript, University of Virginia.

Pain, N., I. Koske, and M. Sollie (2006) “Globalization and inflation in the OECD
economies” OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 524.

Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (2004) “Globalization and global disinflation” in Monetary Policy and
Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, Papers and Proceedings of 2003 Jackson
Hole Symposium.

Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (2006) “Impact of globalization on monetary policy” Jackson Hole
Conference Paper.

Smets F. and R. Wouters (2003) “An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
model of the euro area” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 1123-1175.

Stark, J. (2011) “Globalization and monetary policy: from virtue to vice?” unpublished
manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Stock, J. and M. Watson (2003) “Understanding changes in international business cycles”
NBER Working Paper No. 9859.

Svensson, L. (1989) “Trade in nominal assets” Journal of International Economics, 26,
1-28.

Tille, C. and E. van Wincoop (2010) “International capital flows” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics, 80, 157-175.

Tytell, I. and S-J. Wei (2004) “Does financial globalization induce better macroeconomic
policies?” IMF Working Paper No. 04-84.




                                          35
         Figure 1: Average of G7 data (excluding Germany)

                        Gross portfolio (% of GDP)
220

200

180

160

140

120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20
  1970    1975   1980   1985        1990         1995   2000   2005   2010




                          StDev of CPI inflation
  5

4.5

  4

3.5

  3

2.5

  2

1.5

  1

0.5
 1970     1975   1980   1985        1990         1995   2000   2005   2010




                               Chinn-Ito index
  3


2.5


  2


1.5


  1


0.5


 0
 1970     1975   1980   1985        1990         1995   2000   2005   2010
      Figure 2: Inflation stabilization and gross portfolio holdings. Benchmark parameter values
      with shocks to productivity and monetary policy.


                               (a) Equity holdings                                               (b) Bond holdings
       3                                                               -0.3

     2.5
                                                                       -0.4
       2




                                                                  ˜E
˜H




                                                                       -0.5





                                                                  
     1.5
                                                                       -0.6
       1

     0.5                                                               -0.7
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                                (c) Corr(rE,]y | rB)                                              (d) Corr(rB,]y | rE)

       1                                                                 1

     0.5                                                               0.5

       0                                                                 0

     -0.5                                                              -0.5

      -1                                                                -1
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                   -3           (e) StDev(]y | rB)                                   -3           (f) StDev(]y | rE)
            x 10                                                              x 10
       5                                                                 5

                                                                       4.8
     4.5
                                                                       4.6
       4
                                                                       4.4
     3.5
                                                                       4.2

       3                                                                 4
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                   -3           (g) StDev(rE | rB)                                   -3           (h) StDev(rB | rE)
            x 10                                                              x 10
     1.6                                                               5.5

                                                                         5
     1.4
                                                                       4.5
     1.2
                                                                         4
       1
                                                                       3.5

     0.8                                                                 3
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                              (i) StDev of inflation                                             (j) StDev of output
     1.5                                                                 1


       1                                                               0.8


     0.5                                                               0.6


       0                                                               0.4
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F
      Figure 3: Inflation stabilization and gross portfolio holdings. Benchmark parameter values
      with shocks to productivity, monetary policy and demand.


                               (a) Equity holdings                                               (b) Bond holdings
      30                                                               5.5

                                                                         5
      20
                                                                       4.5




                                                                  ˜E
˜H




      10





                                                                  
                                                                         4
       0
                                                                       3.5

     -10                                                                 3
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                                (c) Corr(rE,]y | rB)                                              (d) Corr(rB,]y | rE)

       1                                                                 1

     0.5                                                               0.5

       0                                                                 0

     -0.5                                                              -0.5

      -1                                                                -1
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                                (e) StDev(]y | rB)                                                (f) StDev(]y | rE)
 0.14                                                              0.15

                                                                   0.14
 0.12
                                                                   0.13

                                                                   0.12
     0.1
                                                                   0.11

 0.08                                                                  0.1
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                   -3           (g) StDev(rE | rB)                                   -3           (h) StDev(rB | rE)
            x 10                                                              x 10
     1.6                                                               7.5

                                                                         7
     1.4
                                                                       6.5
     1.2
                                                                         6
       1
                                                                       5.5

     0.8                                                                 5
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                              (i) StDev of inflation                                             (j) StDev of output
     1.5                                                               1.2
                                                                       1.1
       1                                                                 1
                                                                       0.9
     0.5                                                               0.8
                                                                       0.7
       0
            1           2           3         4           5   6               1           2           3         4           5   6
                         Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                 Inflation feedback coefficient: F
Figure 4: Inflation stabilization and gross bond holdings. Benchmark parameter values
with shocks to productivity and monetary policy. (cf. Devereux and Sutherland, 2008)



                                                     (a) Bond holdings
                0

              -0.5

               -1
         ˜E
         
              -1.5

               -2

              -2.5
                                 5   10   15        20       25     30        35   40   45   50
                                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                                                       (b) Corr(rB,]y)

                1


              0.5


                0


              -0.5


               -1
                                 5   10   15        20       25     30        35   40   45   50
                                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                            -3                          (c) StDev(]y)
                     x 10
               12

               11

               10

                9

                8

                7
                                 5   10   15        20       25     30        35   40   45   50
                                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F

                            -3                          (d) StDev(rB)
                     x 10
                7

                6

                5

                4

                3

                2

                1
                                 5   10   15        20       25     30        35   40   45   50
                                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F
                               Figure 5: Lower trade elasticity (T=0.8)                                                                    Figure 6: LCP (and T=1.5)
                 50                                                                 10                                     50                                                         10

                 40                                                                 8                                      40                                                         8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                                    ˜H )
                                                                                                ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ˜E )
                 30                                                                 6                                      30                                                         6
Equities (




                                                                                                          Equities (
                                                                                         Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                           Bonds (
                 20                                                                 4                                      20                                                         4

                 10                                                                 2                                      10                                                         2

                  0                                                                 0                                       0                                                         0

                      1           2           3         4           5           6                                               1       2           3         4           5       6
                                   Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                     Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                           Figure 7: LCP and lower trade elasticity (T=0.8)                                                                Figure 8: No money shocks
                 50                                                                 10                                     50                                                         10

                 40                                                                 8                                      40                                                         8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                                    ˜H )
                                                                                                ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ˜E )
                 30                                                                 6                                      30                                                         6
Equities (




                                                                                                          Equities (
                                                                                         Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                           Bonds (
                 20                                                                 4                                      20                                                         4

                 10                                                                 2                                      10                                                         2

                  0                                                                 0                                       0                                                         0

                      1           2           3         4           5           6                                               1       2           3         4           5       6
                                   Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                     Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                          Figure 9: Lower elasticity of labour supply (I=1.5)                                                         Figure 10: Higher risk aversion (U=2)
                 50                                                                 10                                     50                                                         10

                 40                                                                 8                                      40                                                         8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                                    ˜H )
                                                                                                ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ˜E )
                 30                                                                 6                                      30                                                         6
Equities (




                                                                                                          Equities (
                                                                                         Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                           Bonds (
                 20                                                                 4                                      20                                                         4

                 10                                                                 2                                      10                                                         2

                  0                                                                 0                                       0                                                         0

                      1           2           3         4           5           6                                               1       2           3         4           5       6
                                   Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                     Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                          Figure 11: Lower consumption home bias (J=0.75)                                                   Figure 12: Lower Taylor rule coefficient on output (G=0.1)
                 50                                                                 10                                     50                                                        10

                 40                                                                 8                                      40                                                         8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                                    ˜H )
                                                                                                ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ˜E )




                 30                                                                 6                                      30                                                         6
Equities (




                                                                                                          Equities (
                                                                                         Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                           Bonds (




                 20                                                                 4                                      20                                                         4

                 10                                                                 2                                      10                                                         2

                  0                                                                 0                                       0                                                         0

                      1           2           3         4           5           6                                               1       2           3         4           5       6
                                   Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                     Inflation feedback coefficient: F




                                                   Equities                                            Bonds
                 Figure 13: Lower degree of interest rate smoothing ( -=0.5)                                       Figure 14: Lower persistence of demand shocks (\=0.7)
                 50                                                       10                                      50                                                   10

                 40                                                        8                                      40                                                          8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                           ˜H )
                                                                                       ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                          ˜E )
                 30                                                        6                                      30                                                          6
Equities (




                                                                                                 Equities (
                                                                                Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                   Bonds (
                 20                                                        4                                      20                                                          4

                 10                                                        2                                      10                                                          2

                  0                                                        0                                       0                                                          0

                      1       2           3         4           5      6                                               1         2           3         4           5     6
                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                  Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                  Figure 15: Higher persistence of demand shocks (\=0.9)                                               Figure 16: Lower Calvo adjustment parameter ( N=0.6)
                 50                                                    10                                         50                                                          10

                 40                                                        8                                      40                                                          8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                           ˜H )
                                                                                       ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                          ˜E )
                 30                                                        6                                      30                                                          6
Equities (




                                                                                                 Equities (
                                                                                Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                   Bonds (
                 20                                                        4                                      20                                                          4

                 10                                                        2                                      10                                                          2

                  0                                                        0                                       0                                                          0

                      1       2           3         4           5      6                                               1         2           3         4           5     6
                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                  Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                   Figure 17: Higher variance of money shocks (VM=0.01)                                            Figure 18: Lower variance of money shocks (VM=0.005)
                 50                                                        10                                     50                                                          10

                 40                                                        8                                      40                                                          8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                           ˜H )
                                                                                       ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                          ˜E )
                 30                                                        6                                      30                                                          6
Equities (




                                                                                                 Equities (
                                                                                Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                   Bonds (
                 20                                                        4                                      20                                                          4

                 10                                                        2                                      10                                                          2

                  0                                                        0                                       0                                                          0

                      1       2           3         4           5      6                                               1         2           3         4           5     6
                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                  Inflation feedback coefficient: F



                  Figure 19: Higher variance of demand chocks (VQ=0.015)                                          Figure 20: Lower variance of demand shocks (VQ=0.0075)
                 50                                                        10                                     50                                                          10

                 40                                                        8                                      40                                                          8
          ˜H )




                                                                                                           ˜H )
                                                                                       ˜E )




                                                                                                                                                                                          ˜E )




                 30                                                        6                                      30                                                          6
Equities (




                                                                                                 Equities (
                                                                                Bonds (




                                                                                                                                                                                   Bonds (




                 20                                                        4                                      20                                                          4

                 10                                                        2                                      10                                                          2

                  0                                                        0                                       0                                                          0

                      1       2           3         4           5      6                                               1         2           3         4           5     6
                               Inflation feedback coefficient: F                                                                  Inflation feedback coefficient: F




                                               Equities                                       Bonds
