                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES, TECHNOLOGY SHOCKS, AND ASSET PRICES

                                           Leonid Kogan
                                        Dimitris Papanikolaou

                                        Working Paper 17795
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17795


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2012




The authors would like to thank Hengjie Ai, Lorenzo Garlappi, Burton Holli field, Roberto Rigobon,
and seminar participants at Boston University, University of Texas at Austin, 2009 SITE Conference
at Stanford University, and 2009 SQA Meeting in New York for helpful comments and discussions,
as well as Giovanni Violante and Ryan Israelsen for sharing with us the quality-adjusted investment
goods price series. Dimitris Papanikolaou thanks the Zell Center for Risk Research for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Leonid Kogan and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Growth Opportunities, Technology Shocks, and Asset Prices
Leonid Kogan and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 17795
January 2012
JEL No. E22,E32,G12,O3,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

We explore the impact of investment-specific technology (IST) shocks on the crosssection of stock
returns. IST shocks reflect technological advances embodied in new capital goods. Using a structural
model, we show that IST shocks have a differential effect on the two fundamental components of firm
value, the value of assets in place and the value of growth opportunities. This differential sensitivity
to IST shocks has two main implications. First, risk premia on firms with abundant growth opportunities
are different from those on firms with limited growth opportunities. Second, firms with similar levels
of growth opportunities comove with each other, giving rise to the value factor in stock returns. Our
model replicates the failure of the conditional CAPM to capture the value premium. Our empirical
tests confirm the model's predictions for asset returns and investment rates.


Leonid Kogan
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-636
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
lkogan@mit.edu

Dimitris Papanikolaou
Department of Finance
School of Management
Northwestern University
Office Jacobs 433
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17795
Introduction

Technological innovation is a key determinant of economic growth. In many cases, tech-

nological innovations affect aggregate output and consumption only to the extent that

they are implemented through the formation of new capital stock. Such innovations are

termed investment-specific, since they are embodied in new capital goods. The magnitude of

investment-specific technical progress can be inferred from the decline in the quality-adjusted

price of investment goods.1 The recent literature on real determinants of economic growth

has emphasized the role of investment-specific shocks as an important driver of long-run

growth and business cycle fluctuations. In this paper, we argue that investment-specific

(IST) shocks are helpful in understanding the patterns of risk premia and comovement in

the cross-section of firms.

       We start with the standard decomposition of firm value into the value of assets in place

and the value of growth opportunities. Firms that are relatively rich in growth opportunities

have higher demand for new capital goods. As a result, a positive IST shock, manifesting as

a reduction in the quality-adjusted price of new capital goods, has a larger positive impact

on the market value of such firms. This mechanism produces two important patterns in

asset returns. First, firms with a higher ratio of growth opportunities to their market value

(high-growth firms) earn different risk premia from firms with fewer growth opportunities

(low-growth firms). Second, returns on high-growth firms comove with each other, which

creates a systematic factor in stock returns distinct from the market portfolio. Both of these

patterns replicate the well-documented properties of value and growth stocks (e.g., Fama and

   1
    A classic example of investment-specific technological change is computers. In 2011, a typical computer
server costs $5,000. In 1960, a state of the art computer server (e.g., the Burroughs 205), cost $5.1 million
in 2011 dollars. Furthermore, adjusting for quality is important: a modern computer server would cost
$160.8 million in 1960, using the quality-adjusted NIPA deflator for computers and software. Greenwood
(1999) offers numerous additional examples of investment-specific technological change since the industrial
revolution: Watt’s steam engine, Crompton’s spinning mule, and the dynamo. These innovations were
embodied in new vintages of capital goods, hence they required substantial new investments before they
could affect the production of consumption goods.




                                                     1
French (1993)), because in our model firms’ market-to-book ratios are positively correlated

with their growth opportunities.

   The premise that IST shocks affect assets in place and growth opportunities differently is

at the heart of our argument, and distinguishes our theory from other proposed explanations

of return comovement and the value premium in stock returns. We test two main implications

of this core mechanism. First, a firm’s stock return exposure to IST shocks is increasing in

the share of growth opportunities in firm value. Second, since firms must invest to realize

their growth opportunities, high-growth firms increase investment relatively more following

a positive IST shock. Since growth opportunities are not directly observable, we test these

implications jointly using the firm’s stock return beta on the IST shock as a measure of

its growth opportunities. As an alternative strategy, we test both predictions using the

market-to-book ratio as an approximate measure of growth opportunities.

   Firms’ growth opportunities change over time, thus we need to estimate time-varying

stock return sensitivities to IST shocks. The macroeconomic literature typically measures

IST shocks using the quality-adjusted price of equipment. However, this price series is

available only at low frequencies. Our model suggests a natural mimicking portfolio for IST

shocks: the difference between stock returns of investment-good producers and consumption-

good producers (IMC). The key benefit of this stock-return based measure of IST shocks

is that it is available at high frequency. In our tests, we use the IMC portfolio to estimate

the conditional stock return betas with respect to the IST shocks. We find that firms with

high IST betas tend to have higher Tobin’s Q, have higher investment rates in physical

capital, hold more cash, pay less in dividends, and invest more in R&D. The tests of the

model’s mechanism show that, following a positive IST shock, firms with higher IST betas

increase their investment relative to firms with low IST betas. The same pattern holds

for high and low book-to-market firms. This pattern is both statistically and economically

significant. The difference in IST shock sensitivity between the investment of high-growth

and low-growth firms is in most cases substantially larger than the sensitivity of investment


                                             2
of an average firm. These results show that cross-sectional differences in IST risk exposures

are linked to differences in growth opportunities among firms.

   Sorting firms on their IST betas results in a declining profile of average stock returns

and an increasing profile of market betas. Hence, the CAPM significantly misprices these

portfolios. The difference in average annualized returns and CAPM alphas between the high

and low IST-beta decile portfolios is −3.2% and −7.1% respectively. This finding implies

that IST shocks are a systematic risk factor that carries a negative risk premium. In addition,

we find that firms with higher market-to-book ratios are more exposed to IST shocks. This

confirms that heterogeneous exposure to IST shocks generates co-movement among stocks

with similar book-to-market ratios.

   Our model replicates the dispersion in risk premia and comovement associated with

differences in growth opportunities, and the failure of the CAPM to price the cross-section

of expected returns. The model generates lower average returns for high IMC-beta and high

market-to-book firms, assuming a negative price of risk for IST shocks. We verify that our

calibration is consistent with the data by estimating the stochastic discount factor implied

by the model using three different cross-sections of assets: portfolios of firms sorted on IMC-

beta, book-to-market portfolios, and industry portfolios. We find that a higher exposure to

IST shocks is associated with lower risk premia, across the discount factor specifications and

test assets. Furthermore, differences in IST shock exposure account for a significant fraction

of the heterogenity in risk premia among the test assets.

   Our model also replicates the dynamics of cash flows and profitability of value and growth

firms documented by Fama and French (1995). In the year of portfolio formation, growth

firms have higher average profitability than value firms. In the years following portfolio

formation, the average profitability of growth firms declines, whereas the average profitability

of value firms rises. Despite the fall in average profitability, the earnings of growth firms

grow faster than the earnings of value firms. In the model, this pattern of mean reversion in




                                               3
profitability is driven partly by the fact that growth firms invest relatively more on average.

As growth firms accumulate capital, they become similar to value firms.

        In summary, our analysis highlights that IST shocks are an important source of systematic

risk. IST shocks naturally lead to patterns of stock return comovement among firms with

different growth opportunities, and thus give rise to the value factor. Heterogenous exposure

to IST shocks is an important source of cross-sectional heterogeneity in risk premia. Our

mechanism has a number of implications for stock returns and firm investment behavior,

which we confirm empirically. We verify that a parsimonious structural model is able to

account for several key empirical patterns quantitatively, providing additional support for

our theory.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we relate our work to the

existing literature. In Section 2 we develop our theoretical model. In Section 3, we discuss

the data construction and the calibration of our model. In Section 4 we test its empirical

predictions. We conclude in Section 5.


1         Related Research

Our paper bridges and complements two distinct strands of the finance and macroeconomic

literature. The first argues for the importance of investment-specific shocks for aggregate

growth and fluctuations, and the second argues that differences in a firm’s mix between

growth opportunities and assets in place are important for understanding the cross-section

of expected stock returns.

        Investment-specific (IST) shocks capture the idea that technical change is embodied in

new equipment. Starting with Solow (1960), a number of economists have proposed embodied

technical change as an alternative to the unrealistic disembodied technology shocks in most

macroeconomic models.2 Cummins and Violante (2002) document significant instances of

    2
    Solow (1960, p 91) is sceptical of disembodied technology shocks: “...This conflicts with the casual
observation that many, if not most, innovations need to be embodied in new kinds of durable equipment


                                                   4
investment-specific technical change in numerous industries. In macroeconomics, a number of

studies have shown that IST shocks can account for a large fraction of the variability of output

and employment, both in the long run and at business cycle frequencies (e.g., Greenwood,

Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997, 2000); Christiano and Fisher (2003); Fisher (2006); Justiniano,

Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010)). Given that IST advances lead to improvements in the

real investment opportunity set in the economy, they naturally have a differential impact on

growth opportunities of firms and their assets in place. Papanikolaou (2011) demonstrates

that in a general equilibrium model, IST shocks are positively correlated with the stochastic

discount factor under plausible preference specifications, implying a negative price of risk for

IST shocks.

   In financial economics, the idea that growth opportunities may have different risk charac-

teristics than assets in place is not new (e.g., Berk, Green, and Naik (1999); Gomes, Kogan,

and Zhang (2003); Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004); Zhang (2005)). In these studies,

assets in place and growth opportunities have different exposures to systematic risk, which

is summarized by firms’ market betas. Our work complements this literature by illustrating

how investment-specific shocks affect both the differences in risk premia and return comove-

ment between assets in place and growth opportunities. Most of the existing models focus

on the risk premia but not on return comovement, and thus feature a single aggregate shock.

In models with a single systematic shock, risk premia of firms are closely aligned with their

conditional market betas. As a result, such models have limited ability to account for the

empirical failures of the conditional CAPM (e.g. Lewellen and Nagel (2006)). The model

of Berk et al. (1999) is one of the few exceptions, it incorporates shocks to both aggregate

productivity and discount rates.

   Our work is also connected to the literature relating asset prices and firm investment. In

this literature, Tobin’s Q is commonly used as a stock-market based predictor of investment

before they can be made effective. Improvements in technology affect output only to the extent that they
are carried into practice either by net capital formation or by the replacement of old-fashioned equipment
by the latest models...”


                                                    5
(e.g., Hayashi (1982); Abel (1985); Abel and Eberly (1994, 1996, 1998); Eberly, Rebelo, and

Vincent (2008)). Tobin’s Q measures the valuation of capital installed in the firm relative

to its replacement cost. Thus, Tobin’s Q is commonly considered an observable proxy for

growth opportunities. We use an alternative empirical measure of growth opportunities that

is a unique implication of our model, that is, the stock return beta with respect to IST shocks.

Our tests demonstrate that our measure is incrementally informative when controlling for

Tobin’s Q and other standard empirical predictors of investment.

    A growing branch of asset pricing literature in finance relates Q-based theories of in-

vestment to stock return behavior (e.g., Cochrane (1991, 1996); Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang

(2008); Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009); Li, Livdan, and Zhang (2009); Chen, Novy-Marx,

and Zhang (2010); Li and Zhang (2010)). This literature focuses on the relation between

expected stock returns and firms’ investment decisions, which follows from firms’ optimizing

behavior. Our focus is instead on the mechanism behind the joint determination of invest-

ment behavior and risk premia. Thus, our work complements the existing studies and offers a

potentially fruitful way of improving our understanding of the links between real investment

and stock returns.


2     The Model

In this section we develop a structural model of investment. We show that the value of assets

in place and the value of growth opportunities have different sensitivity to IST shocks. As

a result, the relative weight of growth opportunities in a firm’s value can be identified by

measuring the exposure of its stock returns to IST shocks.

    There are two sectors in our model: the consumption-good sector, and the investment-

good sector. IST shocks manifest as changes in the cost of new capital goods. We focus on

heterogeneity in growth opportunities among consumption-good producers.




                                               6
2.1       Consumption-Good Producers

There is a continuum of measure one of infinitely-lived firms producing a homogeneous

consumption good. Firms behave competitively, and there is no explicit entry or exit in this

sector. Firms are financed only by equity, hence the firm value is equal to the market value

of its equity.

Assets in Place

Each firm owns a finite number of individual projects. Firms create projects over time

through investment, and projects expire randomly.3 Let F denote the set of firms and Jtf

the set of projects owned by firm f at time t.

       Project j managed by firm f produces a flow of output equal to


                                          yf jt = εf t ujt xt Kjα ,                                    (1)


where Kj is physical capital chosen irreversibly at project j’s inception date, ujt is the project-

specific component of productivity, εf t is the firm-specific component of productivity, such

as managerial skill of the parent firm, and xt a disembodied productivity shock affecting the

output of all existing projects. We assume decreasing returns to scale at the project level,

α ∈ (0, 1). Projects expire independently at rate δ.

       The three components of projects’ productivity evolve according to

                                                            √
                              dεf t = −θε (εf t − 1) dt + σε εf t dBf t                                (2)
                                                          √
                              dujt = −θu (ujt − 1) dt + σu ujt dBjt                                    (3)

                               dxt = µx xt dt + σx xt dBxt ,                                           (4)

   3
    Firms with no current projects can be viewed as firms that temporarily left the sector. Likewise, idle
firms that begin operating a new project can be viewed as new entrants. Thus, our model implicitly captures
entry and exit by firms.




                                                     7
where dBf t , dBjt and dBxt are independent standard Brownian motions. All idiosyncratic

shocks are independent of the aggregate shock: dBf t · dBxt = 0 and dBjt · dBxt = 0. The

firm and project-specific components of productivity are stationary processes, while the

process for aggregate productivity follows a Geometric Brownian motion, generating long-

run growth.

Investment

Firms acquire new projects exogenously according to a Poisson process with a firm-specific

arrival rate λf t . At the time of investment, the project-specific component of productivity

is at its long-run average value, ujt = 1.

   The firm-specific arrival rate of new projects is


                                         λf t = λf · λ̃f t                                  (5)


where λ̃f t follows a two-state, continuous-time Markov process with transition probability

matrix between time t and t + dt given by
                                                              !
                                       1 − µL dt   µL dt
                               P =                                 .                        (6)
                                         µH dt   1 − µH dt

We label the two states as [λH , λL ], with λH > λL . Thus, at any point in time, a firm can

be either in the high-growth (λf · λH ) or in the low-growth state (λf · λL ), and µH dt and

µL dt denote the instantaneous probability of entering each state respectively. Without loss

of generality, we impose that E[λ̃f t ] = 1, which translates to the restriction

                                               µH
                                 1 = λL +            (λH − λL ).                            (7)
                                             µH + µL

   When presented with a new project at time t, a firm must make a take-it-or-leave-it

decision. If the firm decides to invest in a project, it chooses the associated amount of

capital Kj and pays the investment cost zt−1 xt Kj . The cost of capital relative to its average



                                                 8
productivity depends on the stochastic process zt , which follows a Geometric Brownian

motion

                                            dzt = µz zt dt + σz zt dBzt ,                                              (8)

where dBzt · dBxt = 0. The z shock is the embodied, investment-specific (IST) shock in our

model, representing the component of the price of capital that is unrelated to its current

level of average productivity x. A positive realization of z reduces the cost of new capital

goods and thus leads to an improvement in investment opportunities.

Valuation

Let πt denote the stochastic discount factor. For simplicity, we assume that the aggregate

productivity shocks xt and zt have constant prices of risk, γx and γz respectively, and the

risk-free interest rate r is also constant. Then,

                                     dπt
                                         = −r dt − γx dBxt − γz dBzt .                                                 (9)
                                     πt

This form of the stochastic discount factor is motivated by a general equilibrium model

with IST shocks in Papanikolaou (2011). IST shocks endogenously affect the representative

household’s consumption stream, and hence they are priced in equilibrium.

   Firms’ investment decisions are based on a tradeoff between the market value of a new

project and the cost of physical capital. Given (9), the time-t market value of an existing

project j, p(εf t , ujt , xt , Kj ), is equal to the present value of its cashflows
                                           Z    ∞                                        
                                                         −δ(s−t) πs
           p(εf t , ujt , xt , Kj ) = Et             e                εf s ujs xs Kjα   ds = A(εf t , ujt )xt Kjα ,   (10)
                                             t                  πt

where

                           1                1                         1
          A(ε, u) =              +                   (ε − 1) +                 (u − 1)
                      r + δ − µX r + δ − µX + θ ε              r + δ − µX + θu
                               1
                    +                      (ε − 1)(u − 1).                                                            (11)
                      r + δ − µX + θε + θu


                                                                9
   Firms’ investment decisions are straightforward because the arrival rate of new projects

is exogenous and does not depend on their previous decisions. Thus, optimal investment

decisions are based on the NPV rule. Firm f chooses the amount of capital Kj to invest in

project j to maximize

                                       p(εf t , 1, xt , Kj ) − zt−1 xt Kj                             (12)


Proposition 1 The optimal investment Kj in project j undertaken by firm f at time t is

                                                                           1
                                 K ∗ (εf t , zt ) = (αzt A(εf t , 1)) 1−α .                           (13)


   The scale of the firm’s investment depends on firm-specific productivity, εf t , and the IST

shock zt . Because the marginal productivity of capital in (1) is infinite at zero, it is always

optimal to invest a positive and finite amount.

   The value of the firm can be computed as the sum of market values of its existing projects

and the present value of its growth opportunities. The former equals the present value of

cash flows generated by existing projects. The latter equals the expected discounted NPV of

future investments. Following the standard convention, we call the first component of firm

value the value of assets in place, V APf t , and the second component the present value of

growth opportunities, P V GOf t .

   The value of a firm’s assets in place is the value of its existing projects:

                               X                                       X
                   V APf t =           p(εf t , ujt , xt , Kj ) = xt           A(εf t , uj,t )Kjα .   (14)
                               j∈Jtf                                   j∈Jtf


The present value of growth opportunities is the net present value of all future projects,

which is given by the following proposition.


Proposition 2 The value of growth opportunities for firm f is

                                                       α
                                  P V GOf t = zt1−α xt G(εf t , λf t ),                               (15)



                                                       10
where
                                 Z     ∞                                        
                                                                       1
                                            −ρ(s−t)
        G(εf t , λf t ) = C · Et     e                λf s A(εf s )   1−α   ds
                                   t
                                                                            
                                                    µL
                           λf G1 (εf t ) +
                                                  µL +µH
                                                         (λH − λL ) G2 (εf t ) ,             λ̃f t = λH
                        =        
                                                    µH
                                                                                                           (16)
                           λf G1 (εf t ) −              (λH − λL ) G  (ε
                                                                     2 ft    )  ,            λ̃f t = λL ,
                                                  µL +µH


and
                                         α                         α2 σz2
                            ρ=r−            (µz + σz2 /2) − µx −           ,                                (17)
                                        1−α                      2(1 − α)2

and
                                                   1
                                            C = α 1−α α−1 − 1 .
                                                             
                                                                                                            (18)

The functions G1 (ε) and G2 (ε) solve the following differential equations

                                 1                        d                          1 2 d2
                    C · A(ε, 1) 1−α − ρ G1 (ε) − θε (ε − 1)  G1 (ε) +                 σ ε     G1 (ε) = 0,   (19)
                                                          dε                         2 ε d ε2
                1                                         d                          1 2 d2
   C · A(ε, 1) 1−α   − (ρ + µH + µL ) G2 (ε) − θε (ε − 1)    G2 (ε) +                 σ ε     G2 (ε) = 0.   (20)
                                                          dε                         2 e d ε2

   Examining equation (15), the value of growth opportunities depends on two systematic

sources of risk. In addition to aggregate productivity x, the present value of growth opportu-

nities depends on the IST shock, z, because the net present value of future projects depends

on the cost of new investment.

   Putting the two pieces together, the total value of the firm is equal to

                                        X                              α
                           Vf t = x t       A(εf t , ujt )Kjα + zt1−α xt G(εf t , λf t ).                   (21)
                                        j


Risk and Risk Premia

Both assets in place and growth opportunities have constant exposure to the systematic

shocks dBxt and dBzt . However, their betas with respect to the IST shock z are different. In

particular, the value of assets in place is independent of the IST shock z and loads only on

the aggregate productivity shock x. In contrast, the present value of growth option depends


                                                          11
positively on aggregate productivity x and the IST shock z. Thus, the firm’s stock return

beta with respect to the IST shock is time-varying, and depends linearly on the fraction of

firm value accounted for by growth opportunities:

                                       ∂ ln Vf t    α P V GOf t
                              βfzt =             =                                        (22)
                                        ∂ ln zt    1−α   Vf t

   Since, by assumption, the price of risk of aggregate shocks is constant, the expected

excess return of a firm is an affine function of the weight of growth opportunities in firm

value, as shown in the following proposition:


Proposition 3 The expected excess return on firm f is

                                                  α         P V GOf t
                          ERf t − rf = γx σx +       γz σ z           .                   (23)
                                                 1−α           Vf t

   Many existing models of the cross-section of stock returns generate an affine relation

between expected stock returns and firms’ asset composition similar to (23) (e.g., Berk et al.

(1999), Gomes et al. (2003)). The distinguishing feature of our model is the presence of two

aggregate shocks x and z. Thus, realized returns have a conditional two-factor structure,

and as a result the conditional CAPM fails to price the cross-section of stock returns.

   Whether the relation (23) gives rise to a value (or growth) premium depends on the

risk premia attached to the two aggregate shocks, γx and γz . Most equilibrium models

imply a positive price of risk for disembodied technology shocks, so γx > 0. The price

of risk of the IST shock γz depends on preferences. Papanikolaou (2011) shows that under

plausible preference parameters, states with low cost of new capital (high z) are high marginal

valuation states, which is analogous to a negative value of γz . In Papanikolaou (2011),

households attach higher marginal valuations to states with a positive IST shock because in

those states households substitute resources away from consumption and into investment.

   We infer the price of risk of IST shocks from the cross-section of stock returns. In

particular, firms’ market-to-book (M/B) ratios are positively correlated with the share of


                                                12
growth opportunities to firm value P V GOf /Vf . Empirically, growth firms have relatively

high exposure to IST shocks and relatively low expected excess returns. This suggests that

the market price of IST shocks is negative.


2.2        Investment-Good Producers

There is a continuum of firms producing new capital goods. We assume that these firms

produce the demanded quantity of capital goods at the current unit price zt . Furthermore,

profits of investment firms are a fraction φ of total sales of new capital goods.4 Consequently,
                                                                  R                     R
profits accrue to investment firms at a rate of Πt = φ zt xt λ F Kf t df , where λ = F λf t is

the average arrival rate of new projects among consumption-good producers.5

Proposition 4 The price of the investment firm satisfies

                                                                        α
                                                 VIt = Γ xt zt1−α ,                                      (24)


where the constant Γ equals
                                                              Z                              
                                                1                                   1
                                                         −1
                                   Γ ≡ φλα     1−α   ρ                 A(ef , 1)   1−α   df       .      (25)
                                                                   F


       The value of the investment firms equals the present value of their cash flows. If we

assume that these firms incur proportional costs of producing their output, and given that

the market price of risk is constant for the two shocks, the value of the investment firms is

proportional to the aggregate investment expenditures in the economy. The stock returns of

the investment firms then load on the IST shock z as well as the disembodied productivity

shock x.
   4
     These assumptions are made for simplicity. Alternatively, we could specify z as the productivity shock to
the investment sector, which produces capital goods using a fixed factor of production. The two formulations
are equivalent.
   5
       The firm-level arrival rate λf t has a stationary distribution, so λ is a constant.




                                                              13
    A positive IST shock z benefits the investment-good producers. Even though the price

of their output declines, the elasticity of investment demand with respect to price is greater

than one, so their profits increase. Hence, we can use the relative stock returns of the

investment and consumption good producers to create a factor-mimicking portfolio for the

IST shock.

    We define the IMC portfolio in the model as the portfolio that is long the investment

sector and short the consumption sector. The instantaneous return on the IMC portfolio

RtI − RtC is given by

                                                                α
                           RtI − RtC = Et [RtI − RtC ] dt +        β0t dBzt ,                 (26)
                                                               1−α
              R               R              
where β0t ≡       F
                    V f t df  / F
                                  V AP f t df   is a term that depends on the fraction of aggregate

value that is due to growth opportunities, which affects the IMC portfolio’s beta with respect

to the z-shock. The beta of firm f with respect to the IMC portfolio return is given by

                                   covt (Rf t , RtI − RtC )
                                                                                   
                                                                        P V GOf t
                         βfimc
                            t    ≡                          = β0t                       .     (27)
                                     vart (RtI − RtC )                     Vf t

    Equation (27) is the basis of our empirical approach to measuring growth opportunities.

The beta of firm f ’s return with respect to the IMC portfolio return is proportional to

its beta with the investment shock defined in equation (22), and is thus proportional to the

fraction of firm f ’s value represented by its growth opportunities. Firms that have few active

projects but expect to create many projects in the future derive most of their value from

their future growth opportunities. These firms are anticipated to increase their investment

in the future, and their stock price reflects that.


3     Data and Calibration

Here, we describe the construction of our main variables and the calibration of our model.




                                                     14
3.1    Data

We focus our analysis on firms in the consumption-good sector, following our theoretical

analysis above. We relegate the details to Appendix A.

Investment-specific shocks

We focus on four measures of capital-embodied technical change directly implied by the

model. The first measure of IST shocks is based on the quality-adjusted price of new capital

goods, as in Greenwood et al. (1997, 2000). Similar to real business cycle models with IST

shocks, in our model the cost of capital goods relative to their productivity z −1 is directly

related to the IST shock.

   We use the quality-adjusted price series of new equipment constructed by Gordon (1990),

and extended by Cummins and Violante (2002) and Israelsen (2010). We normalize the price

of new equipment by the NIPA consumption deflator. As Fisher (2006) points out, the real

equipment price experiences an abrupt increase in its average rate of decline in 1982, which

could be due to the effect of more accurate quality adjustment in more recent data (see

e.g., Moulton (2001)). To address this issue, we remove the time trend from the series

of equipment prices and define investment-specific technological changes as negative of the

change in the de-trended log relative price of new equipment goods. Specifically, we construct

a de-trended equipment price series ztI by regressing the logarithm of the quality-adjusted

price of new equipment pI relative to the NIPA personal consumption deflator on a piece-wise

linear time trend:

                            pIt = a0 + b0 11982 + (a1 + b1 11982 ) · t − ztI                  (28)

where 11982 is an indicator function that takes the value 1 post 1982. We measure investment-

specific technology shocks as ∆ztI . Our results are similar when we use residuals from an

AR(1) model or simple first differences of the relative price series. The series ∆ztI is positively




                                                  15
correlated with the series of returns on the IMC portfolio. The historical correlation between

the two series is 22.3% with a HAC-t-statistic of 2.31.

   Our second measure is based on the stock return spread between investment- and consumption-

good producers (IMC portfolio). As we see from equation (26), the IMC portfolio is spanned

by the IST shock. Hence, we use returns to the IMC portfolio as a factor-mimicking portfo-

lio for IST shocks. To construct the IMC portfolio, we first classify industries as producing

either investment or consumption goods according to the NIPA Input-Output Tables. We

then match firms to industries according to their NAICS codes. Gomes, Kogan, and Yogo

(2009) and Papanikolaou (2011) describe the details of this classification procedure.

   As a robustness test, we also consider an additional proxy for IST shocks based on real

variables, that is, the ratio of aggregate investment to consumption. In our model, a positive

IST shock leads to an improvement in investment opportunities, and therefore to an increase

in aggregate investment relative to the output of the consumption sector. As a result, the

aggregate log investment-to-consumption ratio is positively correlated with the IST shock z:
                       
                   It    α
          ln     =χt +        ln zt ,                                                  (29)
                   Ct   1−α
                                                                             
                                     Z                    Z
                            1                       1               X
        where χt ≡ ln λ α 1−α ρ−1     A(εf t , 1) 1−α df    εf t    ujt Kjα  df  =
                                                             F
                                                                  j∈Jtf
                                         Z         
                            a0 + a1 ln         Kjα dj ,                                     (30)
                                          Jt


where a0 and a1 are constants, and Jt denotes the set of all existing projects at time t.

   Since χt is a locally deterministic process, innovations in the investment-to-consumption

ratio are driven by the IST shock z. Hence, we construct our alternative proxy for the

IST shock z as the first difference of the log ratio of non-residential private investment to

consumption of non-durables plus services. Using residuals from an AR(1) model rather

than first differences leads to similar results. The correlation between the two real proxies
                                        
for the investment shock z and ∆ ln CItt is equal to 34%.
                            I




                                                        16
      To illustrate the connection in our model between the value factor and IST shocks, we

construct the equivalent of the HML portfolio as in Fama and French (1993). To be consistent

with our model, we focus on firms producing consumption goods.6 Our HM L portfolio with

consumption-sector firms has a correlation of 92% with the Fama and French (1993) HM L

factor.

      In the left panel of Table 1 we show the moments of the two portfolios, IMC and HML

constructed using consumption firms only. The IMC portfolio has a negative average return

of -1.9% and a standard deviation of 11%, while our version of the value factor has an

average return of 3.4% and a standard deviation of 9.3%. In our model, the value factor

is negatively correlated with the IST shock z, because firms’ market-to-book ratios are

positively correlated with the ratio of growth opportunities to firm value. In the data, the

correlation between IMC and HML is -56%.

      The IMC and HML portfolios are both mispriced by the CAPM, having alphas of -2.9%

and 4.1% respectively. Importantly, even though both portfolios are diversified, they have

low correlation with the market portfolio (R2 of 6.7% to 9.9%). Hence, these two portfolios

are correlated with a source of systematic risk distinct from the market portfolio. Investment

firms tend to be on average smaller than consumption firms, thus the IMC portfolio has a

positive size tilt. Its alpha with the market portfolio and the size (SMB) factor is -3.7%.

Finally, and consistent with our model, the Fama and French (1993) model prices both

portfolios.

Growth opportunities

Here, we construct measures of growth opportunities that are motivated by our model. The

firm’s asset composition between growth opportunities and assets in place changes over time,
  6
    We construct a 2 × 3 sort, sorting firms first on their market value of equity (CRSP December
market capitalization) and then on their ratio of Book-to-Market (Compustat item ceq). We construct
the breakpoints using NYSE firms only. We construct our value factor in the consumption sector as
1/2(SV − SG) + 1/2(LV − LG), where SG, SV, LG and LV refer to the corner portfolios.




                                                17
as new projects are acquired, old projects expire, or investment opportunities change. Thus,

it is important that our empirical proxies for growth opportunities capture these fluctuations.

       Our first empirical measure of growth opportunities is directly implied by our model.

Equation (22) shows that the firm’s ratio of the value of growth opportunities to total firm

value is proportional to the sensitivity of its stock return to the IST shock z. Thus, given our

high-frequency proxy for the IST shock (IMC portfolio), we estimate time-varying IST-betas

for each firm,

                           rf tw = αf t + βfimc imc
                                             t rtw + εf tw ,       w = 1 . . . 52.                       (31)

Here rf tw refers to the log return of firm f in week w of year t, and rfimc
                                                                          tw refers to the log

return of the IMC portfolio in week w of year t. Thus, βfimc
                                                          t is constructed using information

only in year t. The slope estimate of equation (31) is the direct counterpart of equation (27)

in the model. To evaluate the accuracy of a firm’s estimated IMC-beta as a measure of

growth opportunities, we also use equation (31) to estimate β imc in simulated data.

       Our second measure of growth opportunities is the firm’s market-to-book ratio. The

value of growth opportunities enters the market value of the firm but not the book value of

capital. Hence, a firm’s market-to-book ratio is positively correlated with the ratio of growth

opportunities to firm value in our model. We construct the firm’s market-to-book ratio as

the ratio of the market value equity to the book value of equity.7

       Both of these measures of growth opportunities are noisy measures of P V GO/V . The

firm’s IMC beta contains estimation noise. The firm’s market to book ratio is a noisy measure

of growth opportunities because it is influenced by the productivity u of existing projects.8

Hence, in our empirical analysis we report results using both measures.
   7
    In our model firms are financed entirely by equity. Hence, the ratio of market-to-book equity and Tobin’s
Q are the same. In our empirical work, we use the ratio of market-to-book equity to sort firms into portfolios
in order to be close to the literature on the value premium. However, using Tobin’s Q instead produces very
similar results.
                                        V
   8
    The firm’s market-to-book ratio is K   = 1− P1V GO × V KAP
                                                               , where K is the value of installed capital
                                                   V
        −1
            R
Kf t = zt xt Jf t kj . Firms with more profitable existing projects have higher ratios V AP/K, and hence
higher market-to-book ratios.


                                                     18
3.2    Calibration

We calibrate our model to approximately match moments of aggregate dividend growth and

investment growth, accounting ratios, and asset returns. Thus, most of the parameters are

chosen jointly based on the behavior of financial and real variables. Table 2 summarizes our

parameter choices.

                                           [Table 2]

   We model the distribution of mean project arrival rates λf = E[λf t ] across firms as


                           λf = µλ δ − σλ δ log(Xf ),   Xf ∼ U [0, 1].                      (32)


We choose the project decreasing returns-to-scale parameter α = 0.85, the parameters gov-

erning the projects’ cash flows (σε = 0.2; θε = 0.35; σu = 1.5; and θu = 0.5), and the

parameters of the distribution of λf (σλ = 2; µλ = 2), in order to match the average values

and the cross-sectional distribution of the investment rate, the market-to-book ratio, and

the return to capital.

   We select the dynamics of the stochastic component of the firm-specific arrival rate

(µH = 0.075; µL = 0.16; and λH = 2.35) to ensure that the firm grows at about twice

the average rate in its high-growth phase and at about a third of the average rate in the

low-growth phase.

   We set the project expiration rate δ to 10%, to be consistent with commonly used values

for the depreciation rate. We choose the parameters governing the dynamics of the shocks

xt and zt to match the first two moments of the aggregate dividend growth and investment

growth. We choose φ = 0.07 to match the relative size of the consumption and investment

sectors in the data.

   The parameters of the pricing kernel, γx = 0.69 and γz = −0.35 are picked to match

approximately the average excess returns on the market portfolio and the IMC portfolio.

We set the interest rate r to 2.5%, which is close to the historical average real risk-free rate.

                                               19
       We simulate the model at a weekly frequency (dt = 1/52) and time-aggregate the data

to form annual observations. We simulate 1,000 samples of 2,500 firms over a period of 100

years. We drop the first half of each simulated sample to eliminate the dependence on initial

values. Unless noted otherwise, we report median moments estimates and t-statistics across

simulations.


                                               [Table 3]


       In Table 3, we compare the estimated moment in the data to the median moment estimate

and the 5th and 95th percentiles in simulated data. In most cases, the median moment

estimate of the model is close to the empirical estimate. The model matches the moments

of aggregate dividend and investment growth, the moments of the market portfolio and the

mean and dispersion in most firm characteristics.

       In some cases, the model generates median point estimates that are different than the

empirical estimates. However, the empirical estimates lie within the 90% confidence intervals

implied by the model. First, the model produces a somewhat lower average return on the

IMC portfolio, −3.9% vs −1.9% in the data.9 Second, the distribution of firm size produced

by the model is somewhat less skewed than in the data. The ratio of median to average

firm size is higher than in the data (0.70 versus 0.20), since the model does not generate a

sufficient number of large firms. Similarly, the dispersion of estimated IMC-beta is higher

in the data (0.99) than in the model, but this is may be partly due to higher measurement

error in the data than in the model. Third, the median value of Tobin’s Q in the data is a

bit smaller than in the model (1.41 vs 1.98). The average level of Tobin’s Q in the model

depends on a number of simplifying assumptions, such as the absence of labor costs and

financial leverage.
   9
    Investment firms tend to be quite a bit smaller than consumption firms, so the size effect may bias
the estimated return of the IMC portfolio upwards. Two pieces of evidence support this conjecture: when
excluding the month of January, which is when the size effect is strongest, the average return on the IMC
portfolio is −3.5%; in addition, its alpha with respect to the Small-minus-Big (SMB) portfolio of Fama and
French (1993) is −3.7%, as we see in Table 1.


                                                   20
4     Empirical Implications

In this section, we explore the empirical predictions of our model.


4.1    Inspecting the Mechanism

Here, we explore direct tests of the mechanism. In particular, there are two main predictions

of our model. First, growth opportunities are proportional to firms’ stock return betas with

the IMC portfolio. Second, firms with more growth opportunities increase their investment

more following a positive IST shock. Since growth opportunities are not observable directly,

we take two approaches. In the first approach, we test both predictions jointly using firms’

IMC betas as a measure of growth opportunities. In the second approach, we use the firms’

market to book ratios as an approximate measure of growth opportunities. In both cases,

we compare our empirical findings to the output of the calibrated model.

Growth opportunities and IMC-beta

Here, we show that our measure of growth opportunities (IMC-beta) is related to firm

characteristics commonly associated with growth opportunities. In Table 4, we report the

time-series average of firm characteristics in each of the 10 portfolios sorted on IMC-beta.

The top panel shows results in the historical data, and the bottom panel shows results in

simulated data from the model. As we see in the top panel of Table 4, our portfolio sorting

procedure is successful in generating ex-post dispersion in sensitivities with both the IST-

mimicking portfolio (IMC, second row) and the IST shock constructed using the price of

equipment ∆z I (third row). The difference in sensitivities between the highest and lowest

portfolio is statistically significant at the 1% level.

    The pattern of firm characteristics across the portfolio deciles is consistent with our

interpretation of IMC-beta as measuring heterogeneity in growth opportunities. Within the

consumption sector, firms in the highest IMC-beta portfolio invest more (14.8% investment

rate) than firms in the lowest IMC-beta portfolio (10.7%). Moreover, highest IMC-beta

                                                21
firms tend to have higher Tobin’s Q (2.39), and have higher R&D expenditures (6.0% as a

fraction of sales) than lowest IMC-beta firms (1.49 and 1.4% respectively). In addition, high

IMC-beta firms seem to exhibit higher preference for liquidity, since they hold more cash

(11.4% vs 6.6%) and pay lower dividends (2.8% vs 9.0%) than lowest IMC-beta firms.

   High IMC-beta firms tend to be smaller, both in terms of their market capitalization as

well as their book value of capital. The highest IMC-beta portfolio accounts for a fraction of

3.9% (2.8%) of the total market capitalization (book value) of capital versus 8.8% (9.8%) for

the lowest IMC-beta portfolio. Finally, there is little difference in the ratio of debt to assets

across these portfolios, suggesting that these differences in beta are not due to differences in

financial leverage.

                                           [Table 4]

   As we see in the bottom panel of Table 4, the model mimics most of the empirical patterns

above. Firms in the highest IMC-beta portfolio have higher investment rates (14.0%) and

higher Tobin’s Q (3.30) relative to the firms in the lowest IMC-beta portfolio (7% and 1.05

respectively). In addition, as in the data, high IMC-beta firms tend to have smaller size,

measured either by their market capitalization or by their capital stock.

Investment

The main mechanism of our model is that firms with higher growth opportunities, being

better positioned to take advantage of positive IST shocks, should increase their investment

more in response to a positive IST shock than firms with lower growth opportunities. Since

growth opportunities are not observable directly, our empirical tests rely on the observable

proxies for growth opportunities motivated by the model. Thus, we jointly evaluate the

validity of the main mechanism of our model and the model-based empirical proxies for the

IST shocks and the market value of firms’ growth opportunities.

   We compare the investment response of firms with different measures of growth op-

portunities (IMC-beta or market-to-book) to a positive IST shock. We use the following

                                               22
specification:

                   5
                   X                                   5
                                                       X
    if t = a 1 +         ad D(Gf,t−1 )d + b1 ∆zt−1 +         bd D(Gf,t−1 )d ∆zt−1 + c Xf,t−1 + ut ,   (33)
                   d=2                                 d=2


where it is the firm’s investment rate; ∆zt refers to measures of the IST shock; D(Gf )d

is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the firm’s growth opportunity measure

Gf ∈ {βfimc , Mf /Bf } belongs to the quintile d in year t − 1; X is a vector of controls which

includes the firm’s Tobin’s Q, leverage, cash flows, log of its capital stock relative to the

aggregate capital stock, and firm fixed effects. Definitions of these variables are standard

and are summarized in Appendix A. We standardize all variables to zero mean and unit

standard deviation. We cluster standard errors by firm and year, following Petersen (2009).

To evaluate the ability of the model to quantitatively replicate the data, we also estimate (33)

using simulated data from the model.

   We estimate equation (33) using four proxies for the IST shock implied by the model: i)

returns to the IMC portfolio, Rimc ; ii) our measure based on the price of equipment, ∆z I ;

iii) the first difference of the aggregate log investment-to-consumption ratio, ∆ic; and iv)

minus the returns to the value factor (using consumption firms only), −Rhml . To account

for time-to-build, we use two lags of each measure as regressors in (33), so for instance
               imc
∆zt = Rtimc + Rt−1 .

   We focus on the coefficients (b1 , . . . , b5 ) on the dummy variables, which measure differ-

ences in the response of investment to IST shocks. We report the results in Tables 5 and

6. Panel A of Table 5 compares the response of investment to IMC portfolio returns for

firms with different measures of growth opportunities. The first column shows that a one-

standard-deviation IMC return shock is associated with an increase in firm-level investment

by 0.09 standard deviations on average. Columns two and three show how this investment

response varies with the firm’s IMC-beta. Specifically, the sensitivity of the investment rate

to our measure of IST shocks varies between 0.048 for the low-β imc firms and 0.179 for the

high-β imc firms. When we include firm-level controls, the difference in investment sensitivity

                                                   23
drops somewhat to 0.08, but is still statistically significant at the 1% level. Columns (4) and

(5) show that results are similar if we proxy for growth opportunities using market to book

ratios.

    Our results are similar using the other three measures of IST shocks, as we show in

Table 6. Panel A shows that a positive one-standard deviation IST shock constructed us-

ing the price of equipment ∆z I is associated with a 0.031 standard deviation increase in

investment for the average firm. However, this response varies dramatically in the cross-

section, ranging from −0.01 to 0.093 between firms in the low- and high IMC-beta quintiles

respectively. Panel B shows that using the investment-to-consumption ratio ∆ic to measure

IST shocks leads to comparable results. Following a positive one-standard deviation shock,

high IMC-beta firms increase investment by 0.17 standard deviations, while low IMC-beta

firms increase investment by 0.04 standard deviations. Using the market-to-book ratio as

a measure of growth opportunities leads to comparable, but often quantitatively smaller

effects.

    Panel C shows that the common factor in firms’ investment rates is related to the value

factor in returns. Following a one-standard deviation negative change in the value factor,

firms with high IMC-beta (market-to-book) increase investment by 0.071 (0.086) standard

deviations, while firms with low IMC-beta (market-to-book) exhibit no statistically signifi-

cant response.

    The magnitude of this investment comovement is economically significant. Our point

estimates imply that a positive one-standard deviation shock to ∆zt increases the level of

investment rate of high-growth firms relative to low-growth firms by 0.4% to 3.1%, depending

on the specification. Fluctuations in the investment rate of this magnitude are substantial

relative to the median level of the investment rate (11%) in the population of firms. Moreover,

these fluctuations are not diversified across firms. Hence, these fluctuations are also large

relative to the unconditional volatility of the aggregate investment rate changes in our sample,

which is 2.4%.


                                              24
   Panel B of Table 5 shows that our model generates comovement in investment rates across

firms that is quantitatively similar to the data. To conserve space, we only report results

using returns to the IMC portfolio to proxy for IST shocks. Results are very similar using

the other three measures, since all measures are highly correlated in the model. In simulated

data, a positive one-standard deviation IST shock leads to an increase in firm-level investment

of 0.053 standard deviations. The impact of investment shocks varies in the cross-section

of firms from 0.08 to 0.10 depending on the measure of growth opportunities. Similar to

the data, including firm-level controls reduces the difference in investment responses among

high- and low-growth firms to 0.03-0.04.

   Our empirical results confirm that the firms identify as rich in growth opportunities

increase their investment more following a positive IST shock relative to firms we identify

as poor in growth opportunities. Furthermore, consistent with the prediction of our model,

the common factor in firms’ investment rates is related to the value factor.

Alternative Interpretations

Here we explore alternative interpretations of our empirical findings. To conserve space, we

briefly summarize the results of additional tests and refer the reader to the Internet Appendix

for details.

   First, our results could be consistent with a Q-theory model, under the assumption that

stock returns have a multi-factor structure. Under this alternative, a multi-factor structure

in returns implies a multi-factor structure of changes in Tobin’s Q, generating a similar

factor structure in investment rates. We explore this alternative by estimating a modified

version of (33), replacing Gf with the firm’s market beta and ∆z with returns to the market

portfolio. The market portfolio is a major source of comovement in the cross-section of

stock returns, thus under this alternative it should lead to a high degree of comovement in

investment rates. We find no evidence to support this alternative. The investment of high




                                              25
and low market-beta firms has the same response to the market portfolio, even though the

stock returns of these firms respond very differently.

   Second, IMC betas may capture firms’ financial constraints and not the differences in

their real production opportunities. If financial constraints limit firms’ ability to take ad-

vantage of new investment opportunities, the market value of such growth opportunities may

be relatively low. To sharpen the interpretation of our empirical results, we replicate our

empirical analysis on a sample of firms that have been assigned a credit rating by Standard

and Poor’s. Such firms are relatively less likely to be financially constrained, as they have

access to the public debt markets. We find that our results are stronger in this subsample,

indicating that our findings are unlikely to be explained by financial constraints.

   Third, we estimate IMC-betas using stock return data, while the theory suggests using

returns on the total firm value. To address this concern, we approximate firm-level IMC-

betas by de-levering the equity-based estimates under the assumption that firms’ debt is

risk-free. We find that our results remain similar, regardless of whether we use book or

market leverage.

   Fourth, we consider whether IMC-betas capture inter-industry linkages rather than dif-

ferences in growth opportunities. We construct IMC-beta quintiles based on the firm’s

intra-industry IMC-beta ranking, using the 30-industry classification of Fama and French

(1997). Our results are slightly stronger in this case, suggesting that our findings are driven

by intra- rather than inter-industry variation.


4.2    Asset Prices

Our model implies that heterogeneity in stock return exposure to IST shocks leads to cross-

sectional differences in equity risk premia. Here, we evaluate the ability of our model to

jointly reproduce the cross-section of risk premia and the patterns of return comovement in

the data.




                                              26
Risk Premia and Return Comovement

We first explore how growth opportunities are related to average returns and CAPM alphas,

in both the model and in the data. We focus on portfolios of firms sorted on our two measures

of growth opportunities, IMC-beta and book-to-market. We show the results in Tables 7

and 8, respectively.


                                          [Table 7]


   The top panel of Table 7 replicates the findings of Papanikolaou (2011), who shows that

sorting firms into portfolios based on IMC-betas results in a declining pattern of average

returns. However, as we see in the fourth row of Table 7, there is a strongly increasing

pattern in market betas. As a result, the CAPM misprices the IMC-beta portfolios. The

difference in average returns and CAPM alphas between the highest and lowest IMC-beta

portfolios is −3.2% and −7.1%, respectively.

   There is also substantial return comovement within the IMC-beta sorted portfolios. The

portfolio long the top IMC-beta decile and short the bottom IMC-beta decile has a standard

deviation of 25.9%, yet the market captures only a small fraction of this variation (R2 =

27.9%). Thus, the long-short portfolio has exposure to a systematic risk factor that is

not captured by the market portfolio. Including the IMC portfolio captures most of this

comovement, increasing the R2 to 76%.

   The bottom panel of Table 7 shows that our calibrated model reproduces these find-

ings. The model replicates the declining pattern of risk premia across the IMC-beta deciles

accompanied by the increasing pattern of market betas. Hence, the model reproduces the

failure of the CAPM. The difference in average returns and CAPM alphas between the high

and low IMC-beta portfolios is −3.6% and −5.7% respectively. In the model, firms with

more growth opportunities have higher market exposure because the market portfolio is a

linear combination of the disembodied shock x and the IST shock z. Since all firms have the



                                               27
same exposure to disembodied shocks x, firms with higher growth opportunities have higher

market betas.

   Our simulation results illustrate that the presence of two aggregate shocks generates

magnitudes of return comovement comparable to the data. The long-short portfolio of high

vs low IMC-beta deciles has a standard deviation of 10.5%, yet it is not spanned by the

market portfolio (R2 = 34.6%).


                                          [Table 8]


   Next, we assess the ability of our model to replicate the empirical relation between stock

returns and the book-to-market ratio (B/M ). The top panel of Table 8 replicates the well-

known value premium in our sample (see e.g., Fama and French (1992, 1993)). Sorting firms

on their ratio of book-to-market equity generates large differences in average returns, but

virtually no differences in market betas. As a result, the difference in average returns and

CAPM alphas between value firms and growth firms is 6.1% and 5.9% respectively. Our

model produces significant dispersion in risk premia between value and growth firms, and

the failure of the CAPM. In simulated data, the difference in average returns and CAPM

alphas between the two extreme book-to-market portfolios is 4.3% and 6.3% respectively.

   An important piece of the value puzzle is the presence of the value factor. In particular,

the long-short portfolio of high versus low B/M deciles has a standard deviation of 15.1%

and low correlation with the market portfolio. Motivated by this pattern, Fama and French

(1993) argue that value and growth firms have differential exposure to a systematic source of

risk that is not captured by the market portfolio. Our model replicates this pattern in return

comovement, as we see in the bottom panel of Table 8. The high minus low B/M portfolio

has a standard deviation of 10.6% and is not spanned by the market portfolio (R2 = 31.2%).

Thus, our model replicates the existence of the value factor, as well as the failure of the

CAPM to account for the value premium in stock returns.



                                             28
   The model mechanism behind the dispersion in risk premia and comovement among

high- and low-growth firms is that firms with different growth opportunities have different

exposures to IST shocks. We verify that the market-adjusted risk premia (CAPM alphas) of

firms with different growth opportunities are related to the heterogeneous exposures of these

portfolios to the IST shock. Figure 1 plots the portfolio CAPM alphas versus their betas

with respect to our two benchmark measures of the IST shock – changes in the relative price

of equipment ∆z I (top), and returns of the IMC portfolio Rimc (bottom). As we see in the

left panel of Figure 1, there is a strong and negative relation between the CAPM alphas of

the IMC-beta portfolios and their exposures to both measures of the IST shock z.

   The right panel of Figure 1 shows that the corresponding relation between CAPM alphas

and IST shock exposure is similar for the cross-section of book-to-market portfolios. The two

extreme book-to-market portfolios have statistically different loadings on the IMC portfolio

(t-statistic of 2.4), but not on the changes in the price of equipment ∆z I (t-statistic of 1.2).

However, the difference in the exposure to ∆z I between the decile portfolios 9 and 2 is

statistically significant with a t-statistic of 2.1.


                                             [Figure 1]


   Our results of this section qualitatively support the view that the observed differences

in risk premia and comovement across high- and low-growth portfolios can be attributed to

heterogenous exposure to IST shocks. Next, we explore whether this observed difference in

IST shock sensitivity can account for the observed differences in risk premia for empirically

plausible values of the price of risk of IST shocks γz .

Market price of IST shocks

Consistent with our model, firms with different growth opportunities differ in their exposures

to IST shocks and their risk premia. In this section, we estimate empirically the market

prices of the IST and the disembodied technology shocks and compare the estimates to their


                                                 29
calibrated model counterparts. Moreover, we evaluate the extent to which the observed

differences in IST-risk exposures contribute to the observed differences in risk premia among

stocks with different growth opportunities.

       We estimate the empirical equivalent of the stochastic discount factor (9) in our model,


                                         m = a − γx ∆x − γz ∆z,                                            (34)


using the generalized method of moments (GMM). We use the model pricing errors as mo-

ment restrictions, namely, we impose that the SDF in equation (34) should price the cross-

section of asset returns. The resulting moment restrictions are


                                          E[Rie ] = −cov(m, Rie ),                                         (35)


where Rie denotes the excess return of portfolio i over the risk-free rate.10 We report first-

stage GMM estimates using the identity matrix to weigh moment restrictions, and adjust

the standard errors using the Newey-West procedure with a maximum of three lags. As a

measure of fit, we report the sum of squared errors from the Euler equations (35).

       We proxy for IST shocks with the relative price of new equipment, ∆z I . As a robustness

test, we also use the change in the investment-to-consumption ratio, ∆ ln(I/C). For the

neutral technology shock x, we use the change in the (log) total factor productivity in the

consumption sector from Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006). We also consider specifications

of the SDF based on portfolio returns. In particular, we use a linear combination of the

market portfolio with either the IMC portfolio, or the HML portfolio, both of which span

the same linear subspace as the two technology shocks x and z in the model. We normalize

all shocks to unit standard deviation.
  10
    Since we use portfolio returns in excess of the risk free rate, the mean of the stochastic discount factor is
not identified. Without loss of generality, we choose the normalization E(m) = 1, which leads to the moment
restrictions (35). See Cochrane (2001), pages 256-258 for details.




                                                       30
   Table 9 shows the estimation results for the ten IMC-beta portfolios in the data (top

panel) and in the model (bottom panel). The market price of the IST shock in columns (2)

and (3) is negative and statistically significant. Depending on whether we approximate IST

shock using equipment prices or the investment-to-consumption ratio, the point estimate

of the price of risk ranges between −0.68 and −0.91. The model produces comparable but

somewhat smaller estimates, −0.40 and −0.65 respectively. Thus, our calibrated price of

risk γz is conservative relative to the data.

   In addition, the cross-sectional differences in the IST risk among the IMC-beta portfolios

account for a sizable portion of the differences in their average returns. Column (4) shows

that the unconditional CAPM produces large pricing errors (0.37%), similar to the model

in column (1) with only a disembodied productivity shock (0.41%). In contrast, adding the

real proxies for the IST shock to the SDF results in a substantial reduction in pricing errors

to 0.07% and 0.13% in columns (2) and (3) respectively. For comparison, adding IMC or

HML portfolio returns to the market return in columns (5) and (6) results in pricing errors

of 0.02% and 0.04% respectively.


                                           [Table 9]


   Table 10 shows similar results for the cross-section of ten B/M portfolios. The point

estimates of the market price of IST shocks are negative and significant, and somewhat larger

than those resulting from the model: the empirical estimates based on equipment prices and

the investment-to-consumption ratio are -0.98% and -1.09% respectively, compared to -0.43%

and -0.70% in the model. Furthermore, the pricing errors are substantially reduced by the

addition of the IST shock to the stochastic discount factor. The CAPM (column (4)) results

in pricing errors of 0.33%, while the two real proxies for the IST shocks above, together

with the disembodied shocks, result in pricing errors of 0.12% and 0.19% respectively. For

comparison, the combinations of the market portfolio with the IMC or HML portfolio returns

(columns 5 and 6) produce pricing errors of 0.16% and 0.06% respectively.

                                                31
       Our findings suggest that differential exposure to IST shocks generates sizable differences

in expected stock returns, and accounts for a significant part of the value premium. However,

we should be careful when interpreting these findings. In our analysis above, we treat the

estimated prices of risk as free parameters. In the case where the factors are portfolio returns,

an alternative strategy is to constrain the risk premium to equal the in-sample Sharpe ratio

of each portfolio. In this case, we find that the IMC portfolio does substantially worse in

pricing the book-to-market cross-section. The two factor model with the market portfolio

and IMC results in a sum of squared errors that is only moderately smaller than the CAPM

(0.43% versus 0.65%).11 We report the full set of results in the Internet Appendix.


                                                  [Table 10]


       One important limitation of estimating the price of IST shocks using the portfolios formed

on the book-to-market ratios is that such portfolios have a strong factor structure. As dis-

cussed in Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) and Daniel and Titman (2012), this may result

in spurious empirical estimates of the market prices of shocks correlated with the common

factors among such portfolios. Both papers advocate the use of industry portfolios as a

pragmatic solution, since returns on these portfolios do not exhibit a strong low-dimensional

factor structure. We report the estimates of the SDF using the 30 Fama-French industry

portfolios (Fama and French (1997)) in Table 11. The point estimates of the market price

of IST shocks, when using the equipment price or the investment-to-consumption ratio as

empirical proxies (columns 2 and 3) are −0.52 and −0.70 respectively, which are comparable

to the estimates in Tables 9 and 10. As before, we find that the pricing errors of the SDF

using real proxies for the systematic risk factors are comparable to those obtained when

using portfolio returns – market, and IMC or HML.


                                                  [Table 11]

  11
     Constraining the price of risk to equal the in-sample Sharpe ratio is equivalent to a time-series test, since
it imposes that the SDF prices the market and IMC portfolio perfectly. See Cochrane (2001) for details.


                                                       32
   We conclude that the market price of IST risk is negative, and the empirical estimates

are consistent in magnitude with the values we use in our calibration. Moreover, the cross-

sectional dispersion in average stock returns resulting from their heterogeneous exposures to

IST shocks captures a sizable portion of the return spread among the portfolios sorted on

the book-to-market ratio.


4.3    Cash Flows

Here, we show that our model closely replicates the empirical patterns of earnings and

profitability of value and growth firms. In particular, Fama and French (1995) document

that the cash flows of value and growth firms display a mean-reverting pattern. At the time

of portfolio formation, growth firms are more profitable in terms of return on equity (ROE)

than value firms. In the years following portfolio formation, profitability of growth firms

declines whereas the profitability of value firms increases. In contrast, earnings of growth

firms grow faster than those of value firms in the years after portfolio formation.

   The top two panels of Table 12 replicate the findings of Fama and French (1995) for

the subset of firms producing consumption goods. As we see in the bottom two panels of

Table 12, our model reproduces these empirical patterns. In the model, growth firms have

higher earnings-to-book than value firms at the time of portfolio formation. Similar to the

data, over the next five years the average profitability of growth firms declines and the average

profitability of value firms rises. This pattern arises because firm (and project) productivity

is mean-reverting, hence this productivity gap dissipates over time. However, even though

the average profitability of growth firms declines, growth firms accumulate capital at a faster

rate than value firms. Hence, the earnings of growth firms grow faster than those of value

firms of similar size.




                                               33
5     Conclusion

In the last few years we have seen significant developments in structural models of the cross-

sectional differences in risk premia. However, there has been far less progress in theoretical

analysis of the key sources of systematic risk in stock returns. In contrast, the empirical

literature has put forward a number of portfolio-based factor pricing models. However, the

economic sources of return comovement behind many of these factors are not well understood.

    In this paper we show that investment-specific technology shocks are an important source

of systematic risk in the cross-section of stock returns. The key theoretical insight behind

our analysis is that firms with abundant growth opportunities benefit more from positive

investment-specific shocks than firms with limited growth opportunities, and therefore stock

returns of high-growth firms have higher exposure to IST shocks. Thus, cross-sectional dif-

ferences in growth opportunities generate differences in risk premia and comovement among

stock returns and firm investment. In particular, our results suggest that the value fac-

tor in returns is partly driven by heterogeneous exposures of firms with different growth

opportunities to the IST shocks. Our empirical findings support the model’s predictions.

    More generally, our analysis in this paper focuses on one type of embodied technology

shocks, that is, investment-specific technical change. Embodied shocks, by definition, do not

automatically benefit all firms uniformly. Thus, embodied shocks offer a promising avenue

for understanding the empirical patterns of comovement and dispersion in risk premia in

the cross-section of stock returns. A recent example of this line of research is Eisfeldt and

Papanikolaou (2011), who consider technology shocks embodied in the human capital of

firms’ key employees.




                                             34
References
Abel, A. B. (1985). A stochastic model of investment, marginal q and the market value of
 the firm. International Economic Review 26 (2), 305–322.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1994). A unified model of investment under uncertainty.
 American Economic Review 84 (5), 1369–1384.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1996). Optimal investment with costly reversibility. Review
 of Economic Studies 63 (4), 581–593.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1998). The mix and scale of factors with irreversibility and fixed
 costs of investment. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48, 101–135.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006). Are technology improvements contrac-
  tionary? American Economic Review 96 (5), 1418–1448.

Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999). Optimal investment, growth options, and
  security returns. Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1553–1607.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. Cochrane (1999). Force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
  of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205–251.

Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino (2004). Corporate investment and asset price
  dynamics: Implications for the cross-section of returns. Journal of Finance 59, 2577–2603.

Chen, L., R. Novy-Marx, and L. Zhang (2010). An alternative three-factor model. Working
 paper, University of Rochester.

Christiano, L. J. and J. D. M. Fisher (2003). Stock market and investment goods prices:
 Implications for macroeconomics. Nber working paper.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991). Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns
  and economic fluctuations. Journal of Finance 46 (1), 209–37.

Cochrane, J. H. (1996). A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model.
  Journal of Political Economy 104 (3), 572–621.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press.

Cummins, J. G. and G. L. Violante (2002). Investment-specific technical change in the
 U.S. (1947-2000): Measurement and macroeconomic consequences. Review of Economic
 Dynamics 5 (2), 243–284.

Daniel, K. and S. Titman (2012). Testing factor-model explanations of market anomalies.
 Critical Finance Review 1 (1), 103–139.

                                              35
Eberly, J., S. Rebelo, and N. Vincent (2008). Investment and value: A neoclassical bench-
  mark. Working paper 13866, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eisfeldt, A. and D. Papanikolaou (2011). Organization capital and the cross-section of
  expected returns. Working paper, Northwestern University.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
  of Finance 47 (2), 427–65.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1995). Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and
  returns. Journal of Finance 50 (1), 131–55.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1997). Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial
  Economics 43 (2), 153–193.

Fisher, J. D. M. (2006). The dynamic effects of neutral and investment-specific technology
  shocks. Journal of Political Economy 114 (3), 413–451.

Gomes, J. F., L. Kogan, and M. Yogo. Durability of output and expected stock returns.
 Journal of Political Economy (5), 941 – 986.

Gomes, J. F., L. Kogan, and M. Yogo (2009). Durability of output and expected stock
 returns. Journal of Political Economy 117 (5), 941–986.

Gomes, J. F., L. Kogan, and L. Zhang (2003). Equilibrium cross section of returns. Journal
 of Political Economy 111 (4), 693–732.

Gordon, R. J. (1990). The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of Chicago
 Press.

Greenwood, J. (1999). The third industrial revolution. Economic Review (Q II), 2–12.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997). Long-run implications of investment-
  specific technological change. American Economic Review 87 (3), 342–362.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (2000). The role of investment-specific techno-
  logical change in the business cycle. European Economic Review 44 (1), 91–115.

Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econo-
  metrica 50 (1), 213–224.

Israelsen, R. D. (2010). Investment based valuation. Working paper.



                                            36
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010). Investment shocks and business
  cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2), 132–145.

Karlin, S. and H. M. Taylor (1975). A First Course in Stochastic Processes, Second Edition.
 Academic Press.

Lewellen, J. and S. Nagel (2006). The conditional capm does not explain asset-pricing
  anomalies. Journal of Financial Economics 82 (2), 289–314.

Lewellen, J., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2010). A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests.
  Journal of Financial Economics 96 (2), 175–194.

Li, D. and L. Zhang (2010). Does q-theory with investment frictions explain anomalies in
  the cross-section of returns? Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Li, E. X. N., D. Livdan, and L. Zhang (2009). Anomalies. Review of Financial Studies 22 (11),
  4301–4334.

Liu, L. X., T. M. Whited, and L. Zhang (2009). Investment-based expected stock returns.
  Journal of Political Economy 117 (6), 1105–1139.

Lyandres, E., L. Sun, and L. Zhang (2008). The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
  based explanation. Review of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2825–2855.

Moulton, B. R. (2001). The expanding role of hedonic methods in the official statistics of
 the united states. Technical report.

Papanikolaou, D. (2011). Investment shocks and asset prices. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 119 (4), pp. 639–685.

Petersen, M. A. (2009). Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
  Approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22 (1), 435–480.

Solow, R. M. (1960). Investment and technical progess. In K. J. Arrow, A. Karlin, and
  P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, pp. 89–104. Stanford, CA:
  Stanford University Press.

Zhang, L. (2005). The value premium. Journal of Finance 60 (1), 67–103.




                                             37
Appendix
A. Data
Macroeconomic variables
Data on the consumption deflator, consumption of non-durables and services and non-
residential investment is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data on the relative price
of equipment is from Israelsen (2010). Data on TFP in the consumption sector is from Basu
et al. (2006).

Firm-level variables
Firm-level variables are from Compustat, unless otherwise noted:

  Variable                       Data                               Model
  Investment (I)                 capx                               x z −1 KP ∗
                                                                              f
                                                                      −1
  Capital (K)                    ppegt                              z x j∈J f Kj
                                                                    zt−1 xt j∈J f Kj
                                                                             P
  Book Assets (A)                at
                                                                    P             t
  Operating Cash Flows (CF)      dp + item ib                          j∈J  f yj
                                                                                       −1
                                                                                          Kf∗
                                                                    P
  Payout                         DIV+REP                               j∈Jtf yjt − x z
  Market-to-Book (M/B)           V /EC                              V /K
  Tobin’s Q (Q)                  (V + EP + D − IN V T − T )/K       V /K
  Market Capitalization (V)      CRSP December market cap           Vf
  Dividends (DIV)                dvc +dvp                           -
  Share Repurchases              prstkc                             -
  Book Debt (D)                  dltt                               -
  Book Preferred Equity (EP)     pstkrv                             -
  Book Common Equity (EC)        ceq                                -
  Inventories (INVT)             invt                               -
  Deferred Taxes (T)             txdb                               -
  R&D Expenditures (R&D)         xrd                                -
  Cash Holdings (CASH)           che                                -



Sample
We omit firms with fewer than 50 weekly stock-return observations per year, firms producing
investment goods, financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6799) and utilities (SIC codes 4900-4949).
In our investment regressions we also exclude firms with missing values of CAPEX (Com-
pustat item capx), PPE (Compustat item ppent), Tobin’s Q, firms in their first three years
following the first appearance in Compustat, and firms with negative book values. Our sam-
ple contains 6,832 firms and 63,295 firm-year observations and covers the 1965-2008 period.


                                            38
Portfolio construction
HML portfolio We construct a 2 × 3 sort, sorting firms first on their market value of eq-
uity (CRSP December market capitalization) and then on their ratio of Book-to-Market (see
above for more details). We construct the value factor (HM L) as 1/2(SV − SG) + 1/2(LV −
LG), where SG, SV, LG and LV refer to the corner portfolios.

IMC portfolio We follow Gomes, Kogan, and Yogo (Gomes et al.) and Papanikolaou
(2011) and classify firms as investment or consumption producers based on the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce’s National Income and Product Account (NIPA) tables. We classify
industries based on the sector to which they contribute the most value. We use the 1997
Input-Output tables to classify NAICS industries into investment or consumption producers.
We include common shares (shrcd=10,11) of all firms traded in NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ
(exchcd=1,2,3).

10 IMC-beta portfolios We sort firms annually into 10 value-weighted portfolios based
on the past value of β imc . We estimate β imc using weekly returns. We include common
shares (shrcd=10,11) of all firms traded in NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ (exchcd=1,2,3).
We restrict the sample to firms producing consumption goods, and exclude financial firms
(SIC6000-6799) and utilities (SIC4900-4949). We rebalance the portfolios at the end of every
calendar year.

10 BE/ME portfolios We follow Fama and French (1993) and sort firms in the consumption
industry on their ratio of Book Equity (Compustat item ceq) to Market Equity (CRSP De-
cember market capitalization) into 10 portfolios. We include common shares (shrcd=10,11)
of all firms traded in NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ (exchcd=1,2,3). We use NYSE break-
points. We restrict the sample to firms producing consumption goods, and exclude financial
firms (SIC6000-6799) and utilities (SIC4900-4949). We rebalance the portfolios on June of
every calendar year.

30 Industry portfolios Returns on these portfolios are available from Kenneth French’s
website, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data library.html


B. Proofs and Derivations
Proof of Proposition 1. Kf is the solution to the problem:

                               max A(εf t , 1)xt Kfα − zt−1 xt Kf .                    (36)
                                Kf


The first order condition is
                                     α A(εf t , 1)Kfα−1 = zt−1 .                       (37)


                                                 39
Proof of Proposition 2.            The value of growth opportunities depends on the NPV of future
projects. When a project is financed, the value added net of investment costs is
                     h α         1
                                   i α                    1        α                  1
                      α 1−α − α 1−α zt1−α xt A(εf t , 1) 1−α = Czt1−α xt A(εf t , 1) 1−α .                           (38)

The value of growth opportunities for firm f equals the sum of the net present value of all future
projects
                                            Z   ∞                         α
                                                                                     
                                                                                              1
                    P V GOf t   =    EQ
                                      t   e          −r(s−t)
                                                  λf s Czs xs A(εf s , 1) 1−α
                                                                                  ds         1−α
                                        t
                                      α
                                              Z ∞                                   
                                                                                1
                                     1−α    Q        −ρ(s−t)
                                = Czt xt Et        e         λf s A(εf s , 1) 1−α ds
                                                t
                                      α
                                             Z ∞                                   
                                                                              1
                                     1−α            −ρ(s−t)
                                = Czt xt Et       e         λf s A(εf s , 1) 1−α  ds
                                                            t
                                         α
                                        1−α
                                = zt          xt G(εf t , λf t ),

where EQ
       t denotes expectations under the risk-neutral measure Q, and
                                                                  
                            dQ                         1 2    1 2
                               = exp −γx Bxt − γz Bzt − γx t − γz t ,                                                (39)
                            dP                         2      2

P being the physical probability measure. The second to last equality follows from the fact that
λf t and εf t are idiosyncratic, and thus have the same dynamics under P and Q.
    Let M be the infinitesimal matrix associated with the transition density (Karlin and Taylor
(1975)) of λf t :                                                          !
                                                        −µL         µL
                                            M=                                  .                                    (40)
                                                         µH         −µH

The eigenvalues of M are 0 and −(µL + µH ). Let U be the matrix of the associated eigenvectors,
and define                                                                          !
                                                        1            0
                                        Λ(u) =                                                                       (41)
                                                        0 e(−µL +µH ) u
Then
                                        "        #              "                                                #
                                                                           µL
                                            λH                      1+   µL +µH (λH     − λL )e−(µL +µH )(s−t)
     Et [λf s ] = λf · U Λ(s − t) U−1                = λf ·                µH
                                                                                                                     (42)
                                            λL                      1−   µL +µH (λH     − λL )e−(µL +µH )(s−t)




                                                            40
and
                                        Z   ∞                              1
                                                                                 
             G(εf t , λf t ) = C · Et            e−ρ(s−t) λf s A(εf s , 1) 1−α ds
                                        Zt ∞                             
                                                                                      1
                                                  −ρ(s−t)
                            = C · Et     e       Et [λf s ] A(εf s , 1) ds           1−α
                                       t
                                                                         
                               λf G1 (εf t ) + µL (λH − λL ) G2 (εf t ) ,                              λ̃f t = λH
                                               µL +µH
                            =                                                                                      (43)
                               λf G1 (εf t ) − µH (λH − λL ) G2 (εf t ) ,                              λ̃f t = λL
                                               µL +µH


The second equality uses the law of iterated expectations and the fact that λf t is independent
across firms. The functions G1 (ε) and G2 (ε) are defined as
                                                 Z     ∞                       1
                                                                                     
                       G1 (εt ) = C · Et                    e−ρ(s−t) A(εs , 1) 1−α ds ,                              (44)
                                                    t
                                                 Z     ∞                                        1
                                                                                                        
                                                                −(ρ+µL +µH )(s−t)
                       G2 (εt ) = C · Et                    e                       A(εs , 1)   1−α   ds .           (45)
                                                    t

G1 (ε) and G1 (ε) will satisfy the ODEs:

                                    1                        d                              1 2 d2
                       C · A(ε, 1) 1−α − ρG1 (ε) − θε (ε − 1)   G1 (ε) +                     σ ε     G1 (ε) = 0      (46)
                                                             dε                             2 e d ε2
                   1                                         d                              1 2 d2
       C · A(ε, 1) 1−α   − (ρ + µH + µL )G2 (ε) − θε (ε − 1)    G2 (ε) +                     σ ε     G2 (ε) = 0.     (47)
                                                             dε                             2 e d ε2


Proof of Proposition 3.        The risk premium on assets in place is determined by the
covariance with the pricing kernel:
                                                                                     
                                                                      dV APf t dπt
                           Et Rfvap
                                   
                                 t    − rf = −cov                             ,            = γx σ x .                (48)
                                                                      V APf t πt

Similarly, for growth opportunities:
                                                                            
                                                      dP V GOf t dπt                              α
                Et Rfgro
                        
                      t    − rf = −cov                          ,                = γ x σx +          γ z σz .        (49)
                                                       P V GOf t πt                              1−α

The risk premium on growth opportunities is lower than the risk premium of assets in place
as long as γz > 0.
    Expected excess returns of the firm are a weighted average of the risk premia of the two
components of its value:

                                 V APf t                      P V GOf t
                                         (Et Rfvap                      (Et Rfgro
                                                                               
             Et [Rf t ] − rf =                  t    − rf ) +                  t    − rf ).                          (50)
                                   Vf t                          Vf t




                                                                  41
Proof of Proposition 4. Profits accruing to the investment sector are
                                         Z
                       Πt = φ zt xt    Kf t df
                                     F
                              Z                                    α              α
                                                 1          1
                          = φ       A(ef t , 1) 1−α df λ̄α 1−α xt zt1−α = Γ · xt zt1−α
                                     F


Kf t is the solution
               R to the first      order
                                       condition (37). Because εf t has a stationary distribution,
            1                    1
Γ = φ λ̄α 1−α     F
                    A(ef t , 1) 1−α df is a constant.
    The price of the representative investment-sector firm satisfies
               Z   ∞                         
VIt =     EQ
           t            exp {−r(s − t)} φΠs ds
                 tZ    ∞                          α
                                                        
      =   Γ EQ
             t         exp {−r(s − t)} xs zs ds   1−α

                    t
                        Z ∞                                            
                 α
               1−α   Q                            1 2    α µZ    1 α    2
      = Γ xt zt Et            exp    −r + µX − σX −            +       σ (s − t)+
                           t                      2      1−α 21−α Z
                                                    
                                α σZ
        +σX (Bxs − Bxt ) +           (Bzs − Bzt ) ds
                                α−1
                    Z ∞
                                                                     1 α2 σZ2
                                                                                    
                 α
                1−α
                                              α          1 α      2
      = Γ xt zt           exp     −r + µX −         µZ +         σ +            (s − t) ds,
                      t                     1−α          2 1 − α Z 2 (1 − α)2
                 α
                    1
VIt   = Γ xt zt1−α ,
                    ρI

where
                                              α       1 α        1 α2 σZ2
                        ρI = r − µX +            µZ −      σZ2 −            > 0.              (51)
                                             1−α      21−α       2 (1 − α)2




                                                        42
Tables and Figures

              Table 1: Time-series moments of IST-shock mimicking portfolios

                                      A. Data                                    B. Model
                  imc        hml     imc
              R          R          R      Rhml          R   imc
                                                                    R   hml
                                                                               Rimc
                                                                                      Rhml
                        (C only)             (C only)              (C only)             (C only)
     µ       -0.019      0.034                                                -0.039     0.029
     Σ        0.112     -0.559                                                 0.115    -0.978
             -0.559      0.093                                                -0.978     0.061
     α       -0.029      0.041     -0.037     0.042     -0.007      -0.006    -0.056     0.039
             (-1.69)    (2.47)     (-2.11)   (2.59)     (-0.47)    (-0.79)    (-4.01)   (5.58)
     β mkt    0.225     -0.153      0.138    -0.134      0.040       0.067     0.319    -0.203
             (4.56)     (-4.17)    (2.98)    (-3.26)    (1.04)      (4.06)    (4.40)    (4.38)
     β smb                          0.409    -0.088      0.345       0.044     0.052     0.082
                                   (5.69)    (-0.84)    (7.00)      (1.30)
     β hml                                              -0.430      0.888
                                                        (-4.73)    (33.52)
     R2       0.099      0.067     0.249      0.078      0.473       0.865    0.285      0.297

Table 1 shows time-series moments for the two IST-shock mimicking portfolios: IMC; and HML constructed
excluding investment firms. We show mean returns µ, the matrix of standard deviations and correlations
Σ, and alphas from the CAPM (columns 1-2), market and size (columns 3-4) and the Fama-French 3-factor
model (columns 5-6). We use the Fama-French factors constructed using all firms, from Kenneth French’s
website. Columns 7 and 8 show the corresponding moments in simulated data.




                                                 43
                                    Table 2: Parameter values


         Parameter                                               Symbol   Value
         Technology, aggregate shocks
          Mean growth rate of the disembodied technology shock   µx       0.010
          Volatility of the disembodied technology shock         σx       0.130
          Mean growth rate of IST shock                          µz       0.005
          Volatility of IST shock                                σz       0.035
         Technology, idiosyncratic shocks
          Persistence of the firm-specific shock                 θε        0.35
          Volatility of the firm-specific shock                  σε        0.20
          Persistence of the project-specific shock              θu        0.50
          Volatility of the project-specific shock               σu        1.50
         Project arrival and depreciation
          Project depreciation rate                              δ         0.10
          Arrival rate parameter 1                               µλ        2.00
          Arrival rate parameter 2                               σλ        2.00
          Transition probability into high-growth state          µH       0.075
          Transition probability into low-growth state           µL       0.160
          Project arrival rate in the high-growth state          λH        2.35
         Stochastic discount factor
          Risk-free rate                                         r        0.025
          Price of risk of the disembodied shock                 γx        0.69
          Price of risk of the IST shock                         γz       -0.35
         Other
          Project-level returns-to-scale parameter               α         0.85
          Profit margin of the investment sector                 φ         0.07

Table 2 summarizes the calibrated parameter values.




                                                  44
                                        Table 3: Calibration


                                                                              Model
       Moment                                                 Data
                                                                       Median   5%    95%
       Aggregate dividend growth, mean                       0.025      0.017 -0.054 0.072
       Aggregate dividend growth, volatility                 0.118      0.150  0.104 0.477
       Aggregate investment growth, mean                     0.047      0.041 -0.041 0.068
       Aggregate investment growth, volatility               0.157      0.171  0.129 0.273
       Mean excess return of market portfolio                0.059      0.056  0.037 0.127
       Volatility of market portfolio return                 0.161      0.164  0.122 0.215
       Mean return of IMC portfolio                          -0.019    -0.039 -0.091 -0.012
       Volatility of IMC portfolio return                    0.112      0.115  0.089 0.157
       Relative market capitalization of investment
       and consumption sectors                                0.149     0.140      0.088     0.197
       Firm investment rate, median                           0.112     0.121      0.074     0.251
       Firm investment rate, IQR                              0.157     0.168      0.074     0.200
       Cash flows-to-Capital, median                          0.160     0.249      0.186     0.283
       Cash flows-to-Capital, IQR                             0.234     0.222      0.161     0.252
       Tobin’s Q, median                                      1.412     1.988      1.268     2.627
       Tobin’s Q, IQR                                         2.981     1.563      0.721     1.937
       IMC-beta, median                                       0.683     0.731      0.456     1.074
       IMC-beta, IQR                                          0.990     0.636      0.377     0.841
       Relative firm size, median                             0.201     0.701      0.679     0.721
       Relative firm size, IQR                                0.830     0.882      0.851     0.942

Table 3 compares sample moments to moments in simulated data. Stock return moments are estimated over
the sample 1963-2008. The moments of investment growth are estimated using the series on real private
nonresidential investment in equipment and software. Moments of firm-specific variables are estimated using
Compustat data over the 1963-2008 period, where we report time series averages of the median and inter-
quintile range (IQR) of the investment rate; cashflows over capital; market to book ratio; IMC-beta and the
ratio of firm size to average firm size. Moments of dividend growth are from the long sample in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999).




                                                    45
                  Table 4: Summary statistics: portfolios sorted on IMC-beta


                                                                  DATA
  β imc -decile               Lo       2       3         4      5     6           7       8       9       Hi
  Formation β imc           -0.53    -0.08   0.19      0.40   0.61 0.82         1.04   1.32     1.74     2.59
  Post-formation β imc      -0.06    -0.01   -0.01    0.00     0.22 0.27        0.55    0.60   1.11      1.51
  Post-formation β z        -3.33    -3.06   -2.91    -2.58   -2.84 -3.38      -1.87   -2.68   -1.61    -1.02
  I/K(%)                     10.7    10.5    10.5      10.6   11.1 11.6         11.6   12.3     13.2     14.8
  Tobin’s Q                  1.49    1.29    1.31      1.32   1.33 1.42         1.51   1.73     2.00     2.39
  k/K(%)                     9.3     15.9    15.7      13.5   12.1 10.1          9.1    6.9      4.7      2.7
  m/M (%)                    8.8     15.7    14.4      12.6   10.8 11.0          9.2    7.6      6.0      3.9
  CASH/ASSETS (%)            6.6      6.0     6.0       6.1    6.0   6.3         6.6    7.3      8.9     11.4
  DEBT/ASSETS (%)            16.1    17.2    17.5      17.5   17.6 17.7         17.7   17.3     17.2     14.6
  R&D/SALES (%)              1.4      1.2     1.2       1.3    1.5   1.5         1.8    2.4      3.7      6.0
  DIV/CF (%)                 9.0     16.6    18.4      18.1   17.4 16.9         13.7   10.3      7.3      2.8
                                                                MODEL
  β imc -decile               Lo       2        3       4       5     6          7        8       9      Hi
  I/K(%)                     7.0     7.5      7.8     8.1      8.4   8.8       9.2      9.8     10.8    14.0
  Tobin’s Q                  1.05    1.09     1.15    1.21    1.30 1.40        1.54     1.74    2.11    3.30
  k/K(%)                     18.2    17.2     14.9    12.7    10.6   8.7        7.0      5.3     3.6     1.7
  m/M (%)                    14.3    14.6     13.5    12.1    10.8   9.5        8.3      7.1     5.8     3.9
  Formation β imc            0.10    0.32     0.51    0.57    0.63 0.70        0.87     0.96    1.16    1.32
  Post-formation β imc       0.21    0.40     0.45    0.50    0.56 0.62        0.69     0.78    0.92    1.14

                                                                           imc
Table 4 shows summary statistics for ten portfolios of firms sorted by βt−1    . βtimc refers to the firm’s beta
with the investment minus consumption portfolio (IMC) in year t, estimated using non-overlapping weekly
returns within year t. We report time-series averages of the following firm characteristics: median P    Tobin’s
                                                                                                              I
Q; total firm investment in the portfolio divided by the total capital stock in the portfolio, I/K = i∈P Kii ;
                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                          i∈P
the median cash holdings over assets, CASH/A; the median ratio of dividends plus share repurchases over
cash flows, DIV /CF ; the median ratio of research and development over sales R&D/A; the sum of property
plant and equipment (PPE) of firms in each portfolio scaled by the total PPE, k/K; cumulative market
capitalization of firms in each portfolio scaled by the aggregate market capitalization, m/M ; and the median
β imc on which firms are sorted into portfolios.




                                                      46
                      Table 5: Response of investment rates to IST shocks

                                                                   A. Data
               Dependent variable it
                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)
                imc
               Rt−1                             0.089     0.048      0.048    0.051    0.046
                                                (4.30)    (3.44)    (2.95)    (4.30)   (2.66)
                           imc )
               D(Gf )3 × (Rt−1                            0.019      0.014    0.023    0.020
                                                          (1.23)    (1.15)    (2.05)   (1.83)
                           imc )
               D(Gf )H × (Rt−1                            0.131      0.084    0.091    0.055
                                                          (5.53)    (5.50)    (3.06)   (2.11)
               R2 (%)                             0.7       2.3       45.1     8.1      45.3
               Growth opportunities (Gf )          -       β imc     β imc    M/B      M/B
               Controls                            N         N          Y       N         Y
                                                                   B. Model
               Dependent variable it
                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)
                imc
               Rt−1                             0.053     0.026     -0.022    0.020    -0.047
                                                (4.40)    (4.07)    (-3.02)   (3.63)   (-3.60)
                           imc )
               D(Gf )3 × (Rt−1                            0.014     -0.008    0.018    -0.002
                                                          (3.16)    (-1.48)   (4.36)   (-1.27)
                           imc )
               D(Gf )H × (Rt−1                            0.084      0.029    0.102     0.041
                                                          (3.74)    (1.91)    (4.00)   (2.35)
               R2 (%)                             0.3       2.5        7.4     3.5       7.9
               Growth opportunities (Gf )          -       β imc     β imc    M/B       M/B
               Controls                            N         N          Y       N         Y

Table 5 shows the response of investment it to returns on the IMC portfolio for firms with different levels of
growth opportunities Gf . We consider two measures of growth opportunities Gf : the firms’s stock return
beta with the IMC portfolio, β imc , and the firm’s ratio of market-to-book equity (M/B). D(Gf )i is a dummy
quintile variable equal to 1 if firm f belongs in quintile i in year t − 1 and zero otherwise. We show results
with and without a vector of controls that includes firm-fixed effects and lagged values of log Tobin’s Q,
cashflows over lagged capital, log book equity over book assets, and log capital stock. See equation 33 for
more details on the specification. We compute standard errors using two-way clustering by firm and by year.
The top panel shows results in historical data. The sample period is 1965-2007. We exclude firms producing
investment goods, financial firms (SIC6000-6799) and utilities (SIC4900-4949). The bottom panel shows
results in data simulated from the model. We report the average values of the estimated coefficients and
t-statistics (in parenthesis) across simulations. We simulate 1,000 samples. Each simulation sample contains
2,500 firms for 50 years. In each simulation, we exclude firms with no active projects.




                                                     47
                Table 6: Response of investment rates and IST shocks, continued

                                                (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)
           it
                                                      A. Changes in price of equipment
             I
           ∆zt−1                            0.031       -0.01     0.017      0.027      0.028
                                            (1.05)      (-0.43)   (0.61)     (2.10)     (1.37)
                        I )
           D(Gf )3 × (∆zt−1                             0.031     0.017      0.009      0.011
                                                        (2.63)    (1.62)     (0.65)     (0.86)
                        I )
           D(Gf )H × (∆zt−1                             0.103     0.048      0.067      0.038
                                                        (4.43)    (2.52)     (1.92)     (2.30)
           R2 (%)                           0.1         1.5       44.7       8.3        45.7
           it                               B. Changes in the investment-consumption ratio
           ∆ict−1                           0.088       0.039     0.067      0.054      0.065
                                            (3.85)      (1.91)    (3.20)     (3.53)     (3.39)
           D(Gf )3 × (∆ict−1 )                          0.038     0.02       0.006      0.006
                                                        (3.03)    (1.57)     (0.49)     (0.41)
           D(Gf )H × (∆ict−1 )                          0.128     0.063      0.064      0.043
                                                        (5.29)    (3.01)     (1.92)     (1.95)
           R2 (%)                           0.8         2.2       45.3       7.7        43.9
           it                                          C. Returns to the value factor
             hml
           −Rt−1                            0.019       -0.014    -0.002     0.005      -0.009
                                            (0.77)      (-0.68)   (-0.11)    (0.28)     (-0.47)
                        hml )
           D(Gf )3 × (−Rt−1                             0.029     0.012      0.023      0.037
                                                        (1.67)    (0.97)     (1.81)     (4.40)
                        hml )
           D(Gf )H × (−Rt−1                             0.085     0.054      0.081      0.064
                                                        (2.84)    (2.45)     (2.34)     (1.93)
           R2 (%)                           0.8         2.2       45.3       7.7        43.9
           Growth opportunities (Gf )       -           β imc     β imc      M/B        M/B
           Controls                         N           N         Y          N          Y

Table 6 shows the response of investment it to measures of the IST shocks for firms with different levels
of growth opportunities Gf . We report results using three empirical proxies for the investment shock: (a)
the first difference of the de-trended log quality-adjusted relative price of investment goods from Israelsen
(2010); (b) changes in the log aggregate investment-to-consumption ratio; (c) negative of the returns on the
HML portfolio, constructed excluding firms producing investment goods. See equation 33 in text and notes
to Table 5 for more details on the specification.




                                                      48
                          Table 7: Decile portfolios sorted on IMC-beta


                                                             Data
         β imc -decile         Lo        2          3           8         9         Hi     Hi - Lo
         E(R) − rf (%)        5.62      5.51       6.36       4.83       4.15      2.42     -3.20
                             (2.31)    (2.51)     (2.89)    (1.52)     (1.10)     (0.53)   (-0.80)
         σ(%)                15.78     14.23      14.27     20.56      24.36      29.70     25.88
         β mkt                0.75      0.77       0.79       1.20       1.40      1.61      0.86
                            (17.74)   (27.77)    (29.86)   (50.65)    (34.57)    (27.40)   (9.81)
         α(%)                 2.22      2.01       2.78      -0.61      -2.19      -4.88    -7.10
                             (1.40)    (1.74)     (2.56)   (-0.53)    (-1.37)    (-2.10)   (-2.13)
         R2 (%)              56.75     73.75      77.31     85.77      82.99      74.00     27.87

                                                            Model
         β imc -decile         Lo        2          3           8         9         Hi     Hi - Lo
         E(R) − rf (%)        7.52      7.30       7.04       5.40       4.84      3.97     -3.55
                             (3.72)    (3.51)     (3.30)    (2.14)     (1.81)     (1.34)   (-2.50)
         σ(%)                14.36     14.81      15.16     17.75      18.72      20.39     10.53
         β mkt                0.83      0.87       0.89       1.06       1.11      1.19      0.36
                            (23.51)   (30.68)    (38.90)   (77.51)    (49.93)    (31.73)   (5.15)
         α(%)                 2.71      2.25       1.82      -0.79      -1.65      -2.99    -5.70
                             (4.82)    (5.00)     (4.93)   (-3.46)    (-4.57)    (-4.89)   (-5.05)
         R2 (%)              91.27     94.69      96.56     98.91      97.63      94.49     34.59

The top panel of Table 7 reports return moments of decile portfolios sorted on IMC-beta. IMC-beta is
the firm’s beta with the investment-minus-consumption portfolio (IMC) in year t, estimated using non-
overlapping weekly returns within year t. The construction of the IMC portfolio is detailed in Papanikolaou
(2011). We restrict the sample to firms producing consumption goods, and exclude financial firms and
utilities. Standard errors are computed using Newey-West with 1 lag to adjust for autocorrelation in returns.
t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. We use monthly data and report annualized estimates of mean returns
and CAPM alphas by multiplying the monthly estimates by 12. The market portfolio includes the investment
and the consumption sector. The bottom panel reports median coefficient estimates in simulated data.




                                                     49
                Table 8: Decile portfolios sorted on BE/ME (consumption firms)


                                                            Data
        BE/ME-decile           Lo         2        3          8          9        Hi      Hi - Lo
        E(R) − rf (%)         3.41      5.61      4.44      7.96       7.88      9.53      6.12
                            (1.27)     (2.24)    (1.76)    (3.04)     (2.88)    (3.10)    (2.62)
        σ(%)                17.36      16.26     16.35     16.95      17.71     19.91      15.12
        β mkt                 1.01      0.97      0.97      0.91       0.95      1.05      0.04
                           (42.71)    (47.36)   (49.48)   (24.28)    (23.45)   (22.54)    (0.67)
        α(%)                 -1.16      1.21      0.06      3.83       3.57      4.77      5.93
                           (-1.06)     (1.46)    (0.08)    (2.63)     (2.35)    (2.67)    (2.41)
        R2 (%)              84.92      90.01     87.94     72.66      72.52     69.90      0.18

                                                           Model
        BE/ME                  Lo         2         3         8          9        Hi      Hi - Lo
        E(R) − rf (%)         3.62       4.65     5.26      7.06       7.40      7.90       4.28
                            (1.21)     (1.76)    (2.12)    (3.31)     (3.53)    (3.83)    (2.98)
        σ(%)                20.49      18.49     17.48     15.18      14.91     14.67      10.65
        β mkt                 1.19       1.09     1.04      0.90       0.87      0.84      -0.34
                           (29.75)    (48.67)   (75.39)   (38.70)    (31.12)   (24.01)    (-4.71)
        α(%)                 -3.35      -1.76     -0.85     1.83       2.31      2.98       6.34
                           (-5.16)    (-4.88)   (-3.70)    (4.94)     (5.18)    (5.33)    (5.41)
        R2 (%)              93.81      97.65     98.93     96.56      94.90     91.60      31.02

The top panel of Table 8 reports return moments of ten portfolios sorted on Book-to-Market Equity. We
restrict the sample to firms producing consumption goods, and exclude financial firms and utilities. We
use NYSE breakpoints for portfolio assignments, following Fama and French (1993). Standard errors are
computed using Newey-West with 1 lag to adjust for autocorrelation in returns. t-statistics are reported in
parenthesis. We use monthly data and report annualized estimates of mean returns and CAPM alphas by
multiplying the monthly estimates by 12. The market portfolio includes the investment and the consumption
sector. The bottom panel reports median coefficient estimates in simulated data.




                                                    50
                     Table 9: Asset pricing - ten IMC-beta sorted portfolios

                                                                     Data
  Factor price
                     (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)
                    1.47              0.38               1.32
   ∆x
                  [0.41, 2.52]     [-1.16, 1.93]      [0.26, 2.39]
                                                                            0.29            0.41               0.39
   Rmkt
                                                                        [0.08, 0.51]     [0.19, 0.62]       [0.17, 0.60]
                                      -0.68
  ∆z I
                                   [-1.30, -0.07]
                                                         -0.91
  ∆ic
                                                      [-1.58, -0.24]
                                                                                            -0.29
  Rimc
                                                                                         [-0.56, -0.02]
                                                                                                               -0.42
  −Rhml
                                                                                                            [-0.81, -0.02]
  SSQE (%)          0.41              0.07               0.13               0.37            0.02               0.04
                                                                  Model
  Factor price
                     (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)
                     0.45             0.70               0.70
   ∆x
                 [0.15, 0.80]     [0.40, 1.05]       [0.36, 1.13]
                                                                           0.36             0.81               0.82
   Rmkt
                                                                       [0.12, 0.61]     [0.41, 1.37]       [0.39, 1.45]
                                     -0.40
  ∆z I
                                 [−0.78, −0.08]
                                                        -0.65
  ∆ic
                                                    [−1.46, −0.12]
                                                                                           -0.87
  Rimc
                                                                                       [−1.36, −0.54]
                                                                                                              -0.87
  −Rhml
                                                                                                          [−1.39, −0.54]
  SSQE (%)           0.13              0.00               0.00              0.30             0.00              0.00

Table 9 reports estimates of γx and γz from the model SDF: m = a−γx ∆x−γz ∆z. We use the cross-section
of ten portfolios sorted on IMC-beta. ∆x is the disembodied productivity shock; Rmkt is the market return;
∆z I is the first difference of the de-trended log quality-adjusted relative price of investment goods from
Israelsen (2010); ∆ic is the change in the log aggregate investment-to-consumption ratio; Rimc is the return
on the IMC portfolio (see Appendix A for details); −Rhml is the negative of the returns on the HML portfolio,
constructed excluding firms producing investment goods. The top panel presents empirical estimates using
annual data in the 1965-2008 period; we report first-stage estimates and sum of squared errors (SSQE) along
with 90% confidence intervals for point estimates computed using the Newey-West adjusted standard errors
(three lags). The bottom panel presents estimates from 1,000 simulations, each simulation spanning 50 years.
We report median point estimates across simulations, and confidence intervals computed using the 5% and
95% simulation percentiles.




                                                           51
                     Table 10: Asset pricing - ten BE/ME-sorted portfolios

                                                                    Data
  Factor price
                     (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)
                    1.54             0.27              1.13
   ∆x
                 [0.76, 2.32]     [-0.77, 1.31]     [0.52, 1.74]
                                                                           0.40            0.48              0.38
   Rmkt
                                                                       [0.19, 0.62]     [0.24, 0.72]      [0.17, 0.59]
                                     -0.98
  ∆z I
                                 [-1.99, -0.03]
                                                      -1.09
  ∆ic
                                                   [-2.17, -0.02]
                                                                                          -0.77
  Rimc
                                                                                       [-1.44, -0.11]
                                                                                                            -0.33
  −Rhml
                                                                                                         [-0.61, -0.06]
  SSQE (%)          0.37             0.12             0.19                 0.33           0.16              0.06
                                                                   Model
  Factor price
                     (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)
                     0.45            0.72              0.72
   ∆x
                 [0.15, 0.80]    [0.41, 1.07]      [0.37, 1.15]
                                                                          0.36             0.83              0.82
   Rmkt
                                                                      [0.12, 0.62]     [0.42, 1.41]      [0.38, 1.47]
                                    -0.43
  ∆z I
                                [−1.01, −0.10]
                                                      -0.70
  ∆ic
                                                  [−1.57, −0.15]
                                                                                          -0.92
  Rimc
                                                                                      [−1.46, −0.56]
                                                                                                            -0.90
  −Rhml
                                                                                                        [−1.43, −0.55]
  SSQE (%)           0.16             0.00             0.00                0.36            0.01              0.00

Table 10 reports estimates of bx and bz from the model SDF: m = a − γx ∆x − γz ∆z. We use the cross-
section of ten BE/ME portfolios. See the footnote to Table 9 for variable definitions and the details of the
estimation procedure.




                                                         52
                            Table 11: Asset pricing - Industry portfolios

                    Factor price     (1)      (2)           (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)
                                     1.06      0.44         0.92
                     ∆x
                                    (3.47)   (1.76)     (3.25)
                                                                     0.37      0.43     0.37
                     Rmkt
                                                                    (3.68)   (3.94)    (3.66)
                                              -0.57
                     ∆z I
                                             (-3.32)
                                                            -0.70
                     ∆ic
                                                        (-2.97)
                                                                              -0.22
                     Rimc
                                                                             (-1.56)
                                                                                        0.06
                     −Rhml
                                                                                       (0.31)
                    SSQE            5.82      2.42          3.03    2.24      1.71     2.22

Table 11 reports estimates of bx and bz from the model SDF: m = a − γx ∆x − γz ∆z. We use the 30
Fama and French (1997) portfolios, excluding the ’Other’ industry. See Appendix A and main text for more
details, and the footnote to Table 9 for variable deifnitions. We use annual data over the 1965-2008 period;
we report first-stage estimates and sum of squared errors (SSQE) along with t-statistics computed using the
Newey-West procedure with three lags.




                                                       53
                            Table 12: Cash flows around portfolio formation

                                                       A. Data
              -5       -4       -3       -2        -1      0        1        2        3        4        5
                                               1) Profitability Et /Bt−1
     SG     0.213    0.212     0.217   0.229     0.240 0.250 0.221         0.231    0.226    0.225    0.226
     SV     0.158    0.151     0.144   0.131     0.116 0.112 0.127         0.153    0.162    0.170    0.171
     LG     0.318    0.324     0.326   0.332     0.341 0.345 0.317         0.318    0.311    0.307    0.305
     LV     0.200    0.201     0.199   0.194     0.188 0.182 0.183         0.201    0.204    0.209    0.215
                                                  2) Earnings Et /Etm
     SG     0.620    0.626     0.658   0.717     0.780 1.000 1.042         1.076    1.118    1.125    1.177
     SV     1.534    1.492     1.443   1.335     1.071 1.000 1.106         1.144    1.159    1.140    1.162
     LG     0.895    0.895     0.919   0.926     0.968 1.000 1.007         1.019    1.060    1.081    1.101
     LV     1.103    1.116     1.151   1.066     1.022 1.000 1.007         1.008    0.955    0.947    0.955
                                                       B. Model
              -5       -4       -3       -2        -1      0        1        2        3        4        5
                                               1) Profitability Et /Bt−1
     SG     0.226    0.230     0.237   0.251     0.280 0.324 0.298         0.285    0.277    0.271    0.267
     SV     0.229    0.223     0.214   0.197     0.168 0.166 0.194         0.211    0.221    0.227    0.231
     LG     0.234    0.239     0.250   0.268     0.301 0.313 0.286         0.271    0.263    0.258    0.255
     LV     0.243    0.239     0.233   0.223     0.206 0.199 0.210         0.216    0.220    0.222    0.223
                                                  2) Earnings Et /Etm
     SG     1.193    1.109     1.037   0.988     0.979 1.000 1.052         1.145    1.255    1.379    1.509
     SV     1.388    1.359     1.305   1.205     1.023 1.000 1.138         1.206    1.236    1.246    1.246
     LG     0.819    0.815     0.827   0.869     0.967 1.000 0.957         0.951    0.965    0.987    1.014
     LV     1.133    1.144     1.140   1.109     1.034 1.000 1.018         1.013    0.996    0.975    0.951

Table 12 compares the empirical cash flow patterns of value and growth firms (Panel A) to the patterns
in simulated data (Panel B). In panel 1, we calculate post-formation changes in profitability, defined as
                                            p     p
cash flows over portfolio book equity Ēt+i    /B̄t+i−1 , for size-BM portfolios formed in June of each year. Our
procedure closely mimics the construction in Fama and French (1995). The four portfolios LV , LG, SV , LG
refer to the corner portfolios of a 2-by-3 sort on ME and BE/ME using consumption firms only and NYSE
                p
breakpoints. Ēt+i   equals the sum of earnings at time t + i of firms assigned to portfolio p in year t. In
panel 2, earnings are measured relative to the total earnings of the market portfolio constructed using only
consumption firms (Etm ), and then standardized to one at the portfolio formation date. Hence, for portfolio
                 p
p we compute Ēt+i     m
                    /Ēt+i and Ētp /Ētm for each portfolio formation year t and lead/lag i using firms that have
data in years t and t + i. The two ratios are then averaged separately across portfolio formation years. See
the main text and Appendix A for variable definitions.




                                                       54
                                                                 Figure 1: CAPM alphas versus IST-betas

               A: ten β IM C sorted portfolios                                                               B: ten Book-to-Market sorted portfolios
                  (Excluding investment firms)                                                                       (Excluding investment firms)
              0.04                                                                                                          0.05                             V

              0.03                                                                                                                                                89
                                                            4                                                               0.04
                                   1                 3
              0.02
                                        2                                                                                   0.03
                                                     5
              0.01
    CAPM α




                                                                                                                  CAPM α
                                                                                                                                                6
                               6                                                                                            0.02                                             7
                                                                            7
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                            8                                                                                                                           4                          2
                                                                                                                            0.01
             −0.01
                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                              0                                                              3
             −0.02


             −0.03                                                                                                         −0.01
                                                                                                  10                                                                                                    G

             −0.04                                                                                                         −0.02
                −4.5   −4                    −3.5          −3        −2.5           −2         −1.5    −1                      −5               −4.5              −4                 −3.5               −3             −2.5

                                                           βz (∆ zI)                                                                                                   βz (∆ zI)
              0.03                                                                                                          0.05
                        4                                                                                                                                                V
                       13
                                                                                                                                    8            9
              0.02                                                                                                          0.04
                           2
                                             5
              0.01                                                                                                          0.03
                                                 6
                                                            7
    CAPM α




                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                  CAPM α
                 0                                                                                                          0.02        7
                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                       5                4        2
             −0.01                                                                                                          0.01
                                                                                         9
             −0.02                                                                                                            0                                                  3

             −0.03                                                                                     10                  −0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G

             −0.04                                                                                                         −0.02
                −0.2   0               0.2           0.4   0.6       0.8        1        1.2     1.4   1.6                      0       0.05        0.1    0.15        0.2       0.25       0.3       0.35   0.4       0.45
                                                           βz (IMC)                                                                                                βz (IMC)


Figure 1 plots CAPM alphas versus IST-shock betas for two sets of portfolios. The left panel (A), uses ten
portfolios sorted on their univariate betas with respect to the IMC portfolio, β IM C (see Appendix A for the
details of IMC construction). The right panel (B) uses ten portfolios sorted on their book-to-market ratio.
We use two proxies for the IST shock z: (i) the negative of the changes in the de-trended log relative price
of investment goods ∆z I (see the definition in Section 3.1); (ii) returns on the IMC portfolio.




                                                                                                             55
