NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY VARIATION VS. R&D UNCERTAINTY:
WHAT MATTERS MOST FOR ENERGY PATENT SUCCESS?
David Popp
Nidhi Santen
Karen Fisher-Vanden
Mort Webster
Working Paper 17792
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17792
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

This work was supported by NSF grant # 0825915. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Popp, Nidhi Santen, Karen Fisher-Vanden, and Mort Webster. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technology Variation vs. R&D Uncertainty: What Matters Most for Energy Patent Success?
David Popp, Nidhi Santen, Karen Fisher-Vanden, and Mort Webster
NBER Working Paper No. 17792
January 2012
JEL No. O31,Q4,Q42,Q54,Q55
ABSTRACT
R&D is an uncertain activity with highly skewed outcomes. Nonetheless, most recent empirical studies
and modeling estimates of the potential of technological change focus on the average returns to research
and development (R&D) for a composite technology and contain little or no information about the
distribution of returns to R&D—which could be important for capturing the range of costs associated
with climate change mitigation policies—by individual technologies. Through an empirical study
of patent citation data, this paper adds to the literature on returns to energy R&D by focusing on the
behavior of the most successful innovations for six energy technologies, allowing us to determine
whether uncertainty or differences in technologies matter most for success. We highlight two key
results. First, we compare the results from an aggregate analysis of six energy technologies to technology-by-technology
results. Our results show that existing work that assumes diminishing returns but assumes one generic
technology is too simplistic and misses important differences between more successful and less successful
technologies. Second, we use quantile regression techniques to learn more about patents that have
a high positive error term in our regressions – that is, patents that receive many more citations than
predicted based on observable characteristics. We find that differences across technologies, rather
than differences across quantiles within technologies, are more important. The value of successful
technologies persists longer than those of less successful technologies, providing evidence that success
is the culmination of several advances building upon one another, rather than resulting from one single
breakthrough. Diminishing returns to research efforts appear most problematic during rapid increases
of research investment, such as experienced by solar energy in the 1970s.
David Popp
Associate Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Nidhi Santen
Engineering Systems Division
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E19-411-ST20
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
nrsanten@mit.edu

Karen Fisher-Vanden
Department of Agric. Economics and Rural Soc.
112-E Armsby Building
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
fishervanden@psu.edu
Mort Webster
Engineering Systems Division
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E40-235
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
mort@mit.edu

I. Introduction
Technological change will play a key role in any attempt to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions that lead to climate change. For example, European Union proposals to stabilize
global average temperatures at two degrees Celsius over pre-Industrial Revolution levels imply
stabilizing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations at 450 parts per million (ppm).
Current levels already exceed 380 ppm. To meet such targets, annual CO2 emissions would need
to peak at about 9 billion tons of carbon per year by about 2012, and fall to as little as 3.5 billion
tons per year by 2100 (Clarke et al., 2007). Meeting emission reduction targets such as these
will not be possible without major changes in the way that energy is produced and consumed.
Given the current status of alternative technologies, making such changes will be costly.
Generation of electricity and heat is the largest source of carbon emissions, accounting for 41%
of carbon emissions worldwide in 2006, followed by transportation at 23% (IEA 2008). In both
cases, alternative carbon-free energy sources such as wind, solar, or hydrogen fuels all are priced
higher than traditional fossil fuels (IEA 2006). However, technological improvements are likely
to occur, leading to lower costs. Much uncertainty surrounds the potential for technological
change. In its latest report on climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) summarizes estimates of the costs of stabilizing global carbon concentrations from a
variety of climate models. To stabilize concentrations at a level of 550 parts per million (ppm),
the estimated costs, in terms of lost GDP in the year 2050, range from a four percent loss to a
slight increase in GDP, relative to baseline growth (IPCC 2007). Future technological change is
an important driver of this uncertainty, and affects not only the cost of reducing emissions, but
also predictions of what emissions levels will occur in the absence of climate policy initiatives.

Despite this uncertainty, most recent empirical studies and modeling estimates of the
potential of technological change focus on the average returns to research and development
(R&D), but contain little or no information about the distribution of returns to R&D, which is
important for capturing the range of costs associated with climate change mitigation policies.
The true nature of innovation and the R&D process is inherently uncertain and thus can be best
described by a probability distribution (Mansfield, 1968; Evenson and Kislev, 1975). More
importantly, this probability distribution is highly skewed (Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002; Pakes,
1986), suggesting that models focusing on average returns may severely underestimate the
potential for significant innovations. Except for work by Baker (e.g., Baker and Solak, 2011;
Baker and Adu-Bonnah, 2008), however, few studies in the climate policy literature have
assumed that investment in R&D influences the level of uncertainty associated with the
magnitude of the returns to R&D. This is in part due to a lack of empirical support for
calibrating R&D models based on anything other than average returns. Due to the highly skewed
returns to R&D, deterministic models based on average returns could underestimate the value of
R&D investments as part of a strategy to avoid extreme climate impacts in the future. Through
an empirical study of patent citation data, this paper adds to the literature on returns to energy
R&D by focusing on the behavior of the most successful innovations.

Moreover, we are

interested in understanding whether this behavior differs across energy technologies.

The

objective of this work is to provide an empirical basis for better modeling of the uncertain returns
to energy R&D.
Our paper builds on existing work using patent citations to study the returns to innovation
(e.g., Popp 2002, 2006a, Caballero and Jaffe 1993). A common finding in this literature is that
research experiences diminishing returns – it gets more difficult to make additional advances as

2

technology improves.1

We make two contributions. First, in contrast to Popp (2006a), we

compare the results from analyzing an aggregate of six energy technologies to technology-bytechnology results. Our results show that existing work that assumes diminishing returns for one
generic technology is too simplistic and misses differences between more successful and less
successful technologies.
Second, given the importance of differences across technologies, is there any new
information we can cull from looking at the most successful patents within each technology? To
measure the relative importance of differences across technologies versus the uncertainty of
R&D, we apply quantile regression techniques to learn more about patents that have a high
positive error term in our regressions – that is, patents that receive many more citations than
predicted based on observable characteristics. It is these patents that are the high value patents in
the distribution of possible outcomes. While standard regression estimates give the change in the
conditional mean of the dependent variable as we change a variable by one unit, quantile
regression allows for an examination of inter-variable relationships at various parts of the
conditional distribution by allowing estimates of the coefficients to vary based across quantiles
of the distribution. Using quantile techniques, we consider the following questions:
•

How does the likelihood of receiving a highly cited patent vary with research
effort?2

1

Note that claims of diminishing returns to research within a field need not be inconsistent with the more general
notion that there are increasing returns to research at the macroeconomic level. As new research makes the
technologies in a given field obsolete, research efforts should switch to other, more productive areas. Such a general
equilibrium analysis is beyond the scope of this research.
2
Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004) suggest that the expected value of research is independent of the amount of
research spending by a firm. That is, increased firm R&D expenditures do not increase the average value of a firm’s
patents. Our question is slightly different, as we focus on those patents in the upper tail of the value distribution, as
these are the patents that move knowledge forward. Because additional R&D projects increase the likelihood that
any one research draw will be high valued, Lanjouw and Schankerman’s findings do not rule out the possibility that
more R&D effort would increase the probability of observing a single high-valued invention. See, for example, the

3

•

Does it become harder to achieve a highly cited patent over time? I.e., is the
distribution of potential ideas replenished over time, or does success become more
difficult as high-valued opportunities are depleted?

•

Do these results differ across energy technologies?

We find that higher R&D spending does not necessarily lead to highly cited patents
(“breakthroughs”). We also find no evidence that highly cited patents or breakthroughs are more
difficult to achieve over time. Interestingly, we find that increases in subsequent patents lead to
a proportionally higher increase in citations to earlier high quality patents, suggesting that these
high quality patents may induce subsequent innovations. Lastly, comparing the results from
technology-by-technology regressions to those pooling our six energy technologies, we find that
differences across quantiles only hold for select technologies and are smaller in magnitude than
differences across technologies. Thus, differences in technologies seem to be more important
than R&D uncertainty in explaining patent behavior.

II. Literature Review
A survey of the recent climate policy and energy modeling literature shows that a decade
after the work of researchers such as Goulder and Mathai (2000) and Goulder and Schneider
(1999), the induced technical change climate policy and energy planning research community
still has a long way to go in representing technology-by-technology variation and uncertain
returns to R&D in its analyses. Goulder and Mathai (2000) presented a new analytic framework
for characterizing optimal carbon emissions abatement and carbon taxes under learning-bysearching technical change.

In their simplified framework, they considered a single

model in Evenson and Kislev (1975). However, if firms invest in the most promising research projects first, one
would expect the probability of highly valued research to decrease as research effort increases.

4

representative emission abating technology affected by R&D investments.

Alternatively,

Goulder and Schneider (1999) considered multiple technologies in their study of the impact of
carbon policy on energy R&D investments, but they too made an important simplifying
assumption (for the sake of focusing on their contribution) by assigning their technology groups
the same parameter value for R&D program effectiveness. Goulder and Schneider (1999)
comment on their decision and perform key sensitivity analyses, citing the lack of available
empirical data for doing otherwise. Even today, the majority of researchers in the induced
technical change climate policy and energy planning research community continue to make very
similar assumptions about R&D-based technical change.
Within a sampling of the last five to seven years of the numerical modeling literature, the
same distinct categories of assumptions arise. Bosetti et al. (2006) present WITCH, an optimal
growth model that endogenously accounts for R&D-based technological learning. However,
while retaining the typical technological detail of bottom-up models, WITCH considers a single
R&D-influenced technology category (advanced biofuels). Later, Bosetti and Tavoni (2009) use
a stochastic version of WITCH to determine optimal investment in an uncertain backstop
technology R&D program under stringent carbon policies. They, too, use a single representative
carbon-free backstop. Schwoon and Tol (2006) use a formulation of the Goulder and Mathai
(2000) model to study the impact of socio-economic inertia in optimal carbon abatement in the
presence of induced-technical change. Their model consists of a single learning sector, and
therefore one parameter value for the inertia and R&D learning parameters. Moreover, in their
future research discussion the authors point to the need to break the economy up into additional
sectors, because they can have quite different inertias and parameters. Finally, most recently
Bye and Jacobsen (2011) use a numerical energy-climate CGE model to study how to divide

5

R&D investment dollars between general and emission-saving technologies under various carbon
tax magnitudes. However, in doing so, they use a single representative backstop technology
(CCS) to differentiate between general R&D and emission saving R&D technology programs.
During this time, other studies considered multiple technology categories, but used
essentially the same values and assumptions about the process of innovation across them. In
their R&D investment analysis for general versus emission-saving technologies, Bye and
Jacobsen (2011) also use identical functional forms and assumptions for decreasing returns to
knowledge for the backstop and general technology R&D processes. The authors comment on
the general fact that different R&D industries must have important differences, but that they
found no empirical research supporting using a different structure or parameter values. Several
other important economic models introduced and used within the last decade to study energy
technology R&D investment and climate policies, either in the context of the entire energy sector
or specific sectors such as electricity, also make similar assumptions. Popp (2006b) uses the
same parameters for the innovation possibilities frontier and diminishing returns to research in
ENTICE-BR for both types of innovation processes included (energy efficiency and carbon-free
backstop technology). Miketa and Schrattenholzer (2004) use the same learning rate for both
wind and solar technologies in determining the optimal allocation of R&D funds to the two
electricity technologies using a learning-by-searching modified version of the MESSAGE
electricity sub-model. Finally, Otto et. al. (2008) study cost-effectiveness of climate policy
under technology externalities, and use a CGE model to show that it is second-best optimal to
subsidize emission intensive R&D when combined with a carbon pricing scheme. However, for
their two R&D-affected industries (a non-carbon intensive industry and a carbon-intensive
industry), they assume that knowledge accumulates as a deterministic function of investment.

6

Even studies that allow for uncertain returns to research focus on average returns to R&D
during calibration. First, in determining the optimal R&D allocation between three different
technologies (fossil, renewables, and CCS) in a climate-energy-economic model under
uncertainty (MERGE), Blanford (2009) utilizes the same parameter values for the return on
investment, diminishing returns, and limiting probability for the different technologies (although
alternate values are tested across different model runs). The behavior of all technologies in the
analysis are therefore effectively treated the same. Second, Baker and Adu-Bonnah (2008)
consider two R&D-affected technology categories (alternative non-fossil and conventional
fossil), use different structures to model technical change, and allow for differing probabilities
for program riskiness to study the socially optimal level of R&D investment in the two
technologies. However, investment in R&D in the model results in one of only three outcomes:
a deterministic “target” amount of technical change, total failure, or a “breakthrough.”
Moreover, a one-to-one relationship between R&D investment dollars and the target amount of
technical change is used for both technology groups, and sensitivity analyses are run on
important innovation parameters such as the cost coefficient using a wide value range.
In an effort to help close these research gaps, Baker et al. (2008, 2009a, 2009b) perform a
comprehensive data collection using expert elicitations for how government funding
differentially impacts the probability of success for three key alternative energy technologies:
CCS, solar photovoltaic, and nuclear. Their findings allow for technology-specific calibration of
induced innovation and technical change in certain types of climate policy assessments, as shown
in Baker and Solak (2011). The current paper addresses another key gap in the empirical
literature, also with an aim to support calibration in climate policy modeling.

Using the

historical record on technology-specific knowledge flows as measured via patent data, we

7

examine the variation in the behavior of potential “breakthrough” innovations through time for a
wide variety of technologies, focusing both on differences across technologies and between
successful and unsuccessful patents within technology groups.

III. Estimation Framework
To envision the research process, consider a distribution representing the possible
outcomes from a project. We use forward patent citations as a measure of the value of these
outcomes. When a patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier patents that are related to the
current invention. The citations are placed in the patent after consultations among the applicant,
his or her patent attorney, and the patent examiner. Citations received by a patent indicate that
the knowledge represented in the patent was utilized in a subsequent invention.3 Because we are
interested in the social value of invention, we prefer the use of citations as a measure of value
over alternatives such as patent renewals and stock market returns, both of which focus primarily
on the returns of innovation to the inventing firm. Lanjouw & Schankerman (2004) compare
numbers of claims, forward citations, backward citations, and patent family size, and find that
forward citations are the most reliable measure of patent quality. Moreover, Popp (2002) shows
that (a) the likelihood of citation to patents for a given technology and year can be used to
measure the quality of the knowledge stock on which future inventors build and (b) that
increasing quality of the knowledge stock leads to more inventions in future years. Popp (2006a)
suggests that the likelihood of citation falls over time, suggesting that research success does
become more difficult as knowledge progresses. This paper also provides evidence that the
3

The key assumption here is that a citation made to a previous patent indicates a flow of knowledge from the cited
patent to the citing patent, so that patents cited more frequently are considered more valuable to future inventors.
Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998) investigate the validity of this assumption, using evidence from citations made to
NASA patents. They conclude that, although there is noise in the citation process, aggregate citation patterns
represent knowledge spillovers, although the spillover may be indirect.

8

expected number of citations per patent falls in years when many other patents are granted in the
field, suggesting that there are also diminishing returns to research in any given time period.
However, neither of these papers considers the uncertainty inherent in the research process, as
they focus on average returns within a given year and constrain the results to be the same for all
technologies.
We build on this work by considering the entire distribution of research outcomes,
focusing on the characteristics of high-value (e.g. highly cited) patents. It is these high-value
patents that will have the most impact on climate change. Note, however, that a simple count of
patent citations is not sufficient. The number of subsequent citations received by a patent is a
function of, among other things, the number of patents that are granted in subsequent years.
More citations will be received by patents in active fields. Thus, following the model in Popp
(2006a), we estimate the predicted number of citations for each patent. However, whereas Popp
(2006a) only focused on mean values and assumed common parameter values across
technologies, we (1) allow the results to vary across technologies and (2) use quantile regression
to provide additional information on patents that are highly cited. Defining citesi,j,s,t as the
number of citations made to patent i in technology group j with grant year t, by patents with
application year s, and NCTGj,s as the number of successful patent applications pertaining to
technology j filed by U.S. inventors in year s, the predicted total number of citations to each
patent/year pair are:
citesi , j , s ,t = NCTG j , s e λi = e

ln( NCTG j ,s ) + β' X i , j,s,t + ε i , j ,s ,t

NCTGj,s controls for the opportunities for citation available to each patent.

(1)
Because our

observations are count data, we use negative binomial regression to estimate equation (1).
Following Popp (2006a), the vector of explanatory variables, Xi,j,s,t, controls for features

9

of the citing and cited patent. Most importantly, we include two tests for diminishing returns.
First, we ask whether the likelihood of citation falls when more patents are granted within a
specific technology group in the same year as the cited patent. This variable, NCTDj,t, tests for
diminishing returns to research within a given year, t. A negative coefficient on this variable
suggests that any individual patent will receive fewer citations, after controlling for each patent’s
characteristics, if it is granted in a year with many other patents in the same technology.
Diminishing returns here may imply that the additional research done in such years is of lower
quality. The assumption is that researchers choose the most fruitful projects first. When the
demand for energy R&D increases (for example, when energy prices are higher), marginal
projects that weren’t viewed as profitable before now appear worthwhile. Alternatively, it may
be the case that there are fewer citations per patent because the patents overlap. This suggests
that the extra research done in years with many patents is of less social value, since the unique
contribution of each patent is smaller.
Second, we ask whether the probability of citation falls as the cumulative number of
patents in a field increases. Cumulative patents Kj,t, defined below, tests for diminishing returns
across time. Diminishing returns across time could occur if there is a limited pool of potential
inventions in a given field. As the technological frontier moves outward, it becomes increasingly
difficult to create new inventions that exceed the current standard. To test this, we create a stock
of existing patents for each technology, using patent data from 1900-2007. In any year t, the
stock of existing patents is calculated as:
t

K j ,t =  PAT j ,l exp[− β1 (t − l )]{1 − exp[− β 2 (t − l + 1)]}

(1)

l =0

In this equation, β1 represents a rate of decay, and β2 a rate of diffusion. We choose a
decay rate of 0.1 and a rate of diffusion of 0.25. Such rates are commonly found in the literature
10

on technological change, and imply that a patent has its maximum effect on the stock about 4
years after the patent was granted (see, for example, Griliches, 1995). For each technology, the
stocks are normalized so that the level of the stock in 1980 equals 100. Thus, a one-unit change
in the stock indicates a one percent increase in the knowledge stock for that technology.
In addition to these controls for the returns to research over time, we also consider several
variables that control for the characteristics of individual potentially cited patents. In particular,
to capture the level and direction of government-sponsored R&D, we include two variables to
ascertain the effect of government research on the knowledge stock. The first is a dummy
variable set equal to 1 if the cited patent is assigned to the U.S. government. This includes
patents assigned to a government laboratory. The second is a dummy variable set equal to 1 if
the cited patent is a child of a U.S. government patent. These are defined as patents that are not
assigned to the U.S. government, but that cite at least one patent assigned to the U.S.
government.4 In addition, we include controls for patent features such as the number of claims
and the number of citations made by the patent. The complete list of explanatory variables
appears below:
•

NCTGj,s represents the total number of successful U.S. patent applications per
citing year, s: This controls for opportunities for future citations. Separate counts

are made for each technology group, j.
•

NCTDj,t represents the total number of patents granted in the technology
group in the same year, t, as the cited patent. As noted, this controls for

diminishing returns within a given year.
4

I label these patents as “children” so as to provide a short label for discussion. It need not be the case, however,
that child patents are direct descendants of government research, meaning that they need not result from work
directly related to the government’s research efforts. Citations may result simply because both patents are in similar
areas, so that there is an indirect knowledge spillover, but no intentional technology transfer between the
government and the private patent.

11

•

Kj,t-1 is the lagged value of the stock of accumulated patents granted in
technology j by year t, where year t represents the issue year of the cited patent.
This controls for diminishing returns across time.

•

ASSIGNEEi is a set of dummy variables defining the patent assignee of the
cited patent. Potential assignee types are corporate, individual, government,

university, other research institution, and child of a government patent. For each
type, we include separate dummy variables for U.S. and foreign assignees (e.g.
there is a dummy variable for U.S. corporations and a second for foreign
corporations). U.S. corporations are the excluded category.
•

CLAIMSi represents the number of claims on each cited patent. Other things
equal, patents with more claims should be cited more frequently.

•

CITEMADEi is the number of citations made by the cited patent. Patents may
generate more subsequent citations simply because they are in more crowded
areas. The number of citations made by these patents controls for this.

•

CITELAGs,t is the difference between the citing patent’s application year, s, and
the cited patent’s grant year, t. This allows for declining probabilities of citation
over time, as the cited patents gradually become obsolete. To allow for non-linear
effects, we also include CITELAG2s,t.

•

CITINGYRs is a vector of year dummies defined based on the application year of

the citing patents. 1990 is the excluded year. This captures any fixed effects in

12

citations common to a grant year. Over time, the number of citations per patent
have increased due to changes in citing behavior.5
•

TECHNOLOGYj is a vector of energy technology group dummies. About half of

all patent citations are to patents in the same classification (Jaffe et al. 1993).
However, the technology groups in this paper range from groups with one or two
subclassifications to groups with patents from many different broad
classifications. Technology groups with broad definitions are more likely to
include subclasses that are not strongly related, which means that citations to
other patents in the group are less likely in those groups. The excluded group is
nuclear power.
We are particularly interested in patents that have a high positive error term from this
regression – that is, patents that receive many more citations than predicted based on observable
characteristics. It is these patents that are the high value patents in the distribution of possible
outcomes. Quantile regression techniques allow us to learn more about these patents. While
standard regression estimates give the change in the conditional mean of the dependent variable
as we change a variable by one unit, quantile regression allows examination of inter-variable
relationships at various parts of the conditional distribution by allowing estimates of the
coefficients to vary across quantiles of the distribution.6 Using quantile regression, we can, for
example, ask whether additional research effort (measured by the total number of patents in a
field) increases the likelihood of highly valuable patents, and whether this likelihood varies over

5

Changes in citing behavior over time must be accounted for because of institutional changes at the patent office
that make patents more likely to cite earlier patents than was previously true, even if all other factors are equal. In
particular, two changes have played an important role. First, computerization of patent office records has made it
easier for both patent examiners and inventors to locate other patents similar to the current invention. Second,
increasing legal pressure has made it more important for examiners to be sure that all relevant patents are cited.
6
Koenker and Hallock (2001) provide a review of quantile regression techniques.

13

time. This last question addresses whether the distribution of potential ideas is replenished over
time, or if success becomes more difficult as high-valued opportunities are depleted.
In addition we also explore the potential sources of high-valued innovations, asking
whether these highly cited patents come from particular institutions, and whether increased
government R&D spending can affect the likelihood of discovering high-value inventions. For
example, Popp (2006a) finds that government patents are not more likely to be cited than other
patents. This result is surprising, as one expects government research to focus on more basic
needs, which should be cited more frequently. One possible explanation for this could be that
government research projects are more risky. If the government does research that private firms
won’t do because of greater risk, government research could have a similar expected value to
private research, while at the same time resulting in both more high-value innovations and lowvalue innovations. Quantile regression allows us to identify such differences across high- and
low-valued patents.

IV. Data

Our data include all patents for our selected technologies granted by the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) with priority dates ranging from 1971 to 2008.7 We focus on
granted patents because, until 2000, only patents granted by the USPTO were made public.8
This also ensures that all the patents in our sample have met a minimum quality threshold. To
identify patents, we use a combination of the International Patent Classification (IPC) codes on
7

To calculate the stocks described in section II, we use patents dating back to 1900. However, the citation data
needed for the remaining analysis is not available until patents granted in 1975, limiting the citation analysis to
patents from the 1970s forward. Note that, because we observe granted patents, patent counts in recent years are
truncated, since the average patent takes 2-3 years to go through the examination process. Year effects will account
for this truncation bias.
8
This is different from most countries, where patent applications are published 18 months after they are filed. Even
today, while most U.S. applications are published after 18 months, an inventor can request that the application not
be published as long as the applicant agrees not to pursue patent protection in other countries.

14

the patent and keyword searches of the title and abstract. The IPC classes and keyword searches
used are listed in Appendix A.9 We include patents related to six technologies that either provide
cleaner energy or reduce energy consumption: wind, solar, fuel cells, nuclear, hybrid autos, and
energy efficiency.

We obtained the patent data using Delphion, a commercially-available

database that allows searching and downloading of patent records from patent offices
worldwide.10
Patents are sorted by the priority year, which is the year in which the initial application
pertaining to this patent was filed. If a patent is granted, protection begins from the priority date.
This date corresponds to when the inventive activity took place, as patent applications are
usually filed early in the inventive process (see, e.g., Griliches, 1990). Figure 1 shows the trends
in each technology across time. Invention in nuclear technologies was strong throughout the
1970s until 1990, at which point patent counts begin to decline. Patent counts in both solar and
wind energy have two peaks – one during the 1970s energy crisis and a second in the 21st century
as climate policy brings renewed interest to renewable energy. Interestingly, the 1970s peak is
larger for solar energy, whereas for wind the more recent peak is larger. The trend for energy
efficiency is similar to wind, although the 1970s peak is less notable. Both fuel cells and hybrid
vehicle patents remain relatively flat until 1990 and peak around the year 2000.
The Delphion database includes rich descriptive data for each patent, including patent
citations made by each patent and the number of claims. Using this citation data, we are able to

9

The IPC system is used by patent offices around the world to classify patents based on their intended use. We
begin by using a combination of keyword and IPC class searches to identify patent classes that both include relevant
patents and that do not also include irrelevant patents. We prefer to omit classes that contain a mix of relevant and
irrelevant patents. While this may cause us to omit some relevant patents, this is preferred to including irrelevant
patents that would simply add noise to our data without adding additional information. For most technologies, this
resulted in a set of IPC classes that were used to identify relevant technologies. In the case of energy efficiency, we
could not identify relevant classes, as these patents are spread throughout various end use technologies. Thus, we
instead use a keyword search to identify these patents.
10
http://www.delphion.com.

15

obtain forward citations received by each of our energy patents by other patents within the same
technology field.

Table 1 and Figure 2 provide descriptive statistics on forward citations

received by patents in each of our technology groups. Note that the distribution of citations is
highly skewed. Many patents are never cited. For every technology, the 25th percentile of
citations received is 0. The median for the aggregate of all technologies is just one citation
received. Across technologies, the median ranges from 0 for efficiency patents to 3 for wind
patents.

Even at the 75th percentile, forward citations received range from 1 for energy

efficiency to 7 for wind. However, there is a long tail with a select group of highly cited patents,
as the maximum number of citations received ranges from 47 in nuclear energy to 210 for energy
efficiency and for hybrid vehicle technologies.
The three panels of Figure 2 provide a visual representation of three typical distributions
of patent citations. Each shows, on the y-axis, the number of patents from a given year and
technology that receive a specific number of forward citations. Panel A represents citations
received by a successful technology, hybrid vehicles. Here we see the distribution of citations
received by hybrid vehicle patents from 1991. Note that while over half of the 80 patents from
this year receive five citations or less, there is a very long tail, including one patent that receives
76 citations. The pattern of another successful technology, wind energy patents from 1981, is
similar, as shown in panel B. Of particular note here is that, compared to the two other panels,
most of these patents receive at least one citation. Only 4 of 76 wind patents from that year
receive no citations. Most patents receive a few citations, but the tail is noticeably shorter than
for hybrid vehicles. Finally, panel C shows citations received by solar energy patents in 1981.
Compared to hybrid vehicles and wind energy, solar energy has received less commercial
success. The patent citations received are consistent with these patents having lower social

16

value. Of the 337 solar energy patents from 1981, 193 receive two or fewer citations. Moreover,
while the distribution is still skewed, there are no large outliers, unlike the hybrid vehicle case.
Table 2 provides descriptive data by technology for other patent characteristics. The
number of claims per patent is relatively stable, with the average ranging from 11.5 for nuclear to
17.0 for fuel cells. The number of cited references to earlier patents ranges from 7.7 for nuclear
to 12.3 for efficiency. In both cases, these data suggest that nuclear energy patents are narrower
in scope than their counterparts in fields such as fuel cells or energy efficiency. Interestingly,
while the greater breadth of fuel cell patents also results in a high average number of future
citations received, that is not the case for energy efficiency patents. Finally, note that the size of
each technology group does vary, as there are only 47.5 wind patents per year on average,
compared to 469.5 energy efficiency patents per year. Nonetheless, wind patents are very likely
to receive citations from future wind patents, whereas energy efficiency patents are less likely
than our other technologies to receive a future citation from a patent within the same group. This
suggests that it is not just the size of each group that matters, but the quality of the innovations
that influence future usefulness.
To consider whether patents from some institutions are more valuable than others, we use
data from the NBER patent database to identify the type of assignee for each patent (e.g.,
corporate, individual, government, university, other research institution, and child of a
government patent, as well as foreign or domestic).11 Table 3 shows the percentage of patents
from various assignees. The first rows show these data for the overall sample, followed by
percentages for selected single years. Overall, nuclear and solar are most likely to have patents

11

We used an updated version of the NBER database that includes data on assignees for all patents granted through
2006, available at https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home. For patents from 2007 onward, we matched
assignee characteristics with patents from the same assignee from earlier years when possible and then manually
coded patents for which the assignee did not appear in the NBER database.

17

assigned to government. Except for hybrid vehicles, about 40% of patents come from foreign
inventors. Largely due to innovation from Japanese auto manufacturers, over two-thirds of
hybrid vehicle patents granted in the U.S. go to foreign inventors.

Looking across time,

government patents were more prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s, and the share of foreign patents
is growing for every technology.
Finally, the right-hand columns of Table 3 show the average number of citations received
by patents with different assignees. Except for wind, children of government patents receive the
most citations. There is variation in the quality of government patents across technologies.
Government wind patents receive, on average, more citations than any other type of wind patent.
However, just 1.44% of wind patents are assigned to the government. Government patents also
receive more citations than the average patent for fuel cells and solar energy. For the remaining
technologies, government patents receive fewer citations than average. In all cases, foreign
patents receive fewer citations.

V. Estimation

Because most patents are never cited, we use count data regression techniques. For the
quantile regressions, we use a method suggested by Machado and Santos Silva (2005) and
developed for Stata by Miranda (2006, 2008).12 To overcome the problem of having a discrete
dependent variable when doing the quantile regression, this method smooths the data by adding a
uniform random variable to each dependent variable. With appropriate assumptions (discussed
in Machado and Santos Silva 2005), standard quantile regression techniques can be applied to a
monotonic transformation of this smoothed variable. Because the “jitters” to the data are

12

QCOUNT, the Stata software for quantile regressions using count data is available from
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456714.html.

18

randomly added, 100 draws of the random variable u are taken and an average of the jittered
sample is created.
Our regressions include patents granted in the U.S. for six technologies (wind, solar, fuel
cells, nuclear, hybrid autos, and energy efficiency). We consider cited patents with initial
priority dates from 1971 to 2004, and citing patents with priority dates ranging from 1972 to
2008.
Table 4 presents regression results pooling all technologies. Except for the coefficient for
ln(# of citing patents), results are shown as incidence rate ratios, eβ.

Moreover, to aid

interpretation and make comparisons across technologies, the number of patents, the number of
claims, and the number of citations made by each patent are normalized so that a one-unit change
equals a ten percent deviation from the mean.13 For example, an incidence rate ratio of 1.2
implies that a ten percent deviation from the mean for that variable results in 20 percent more
citations to the patent. The first four columns present the 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th quantiles, and
the final column presents the results from a standard generalized negative binomial regression.
Our primary focus is on the behavior of patents in the higher quantiles. Indeed, descriptive data
suggest that the mean number of citations falls near the 75th quantile for most technologies, as
most patents are never cited. The interpretation for each quantile is that these represent patents
with unobserved characteristics in quantile x.

Intuitively, this can be thought of as the

unobserved quality of each patent, so that patents in higher quantiles have higher unobserved
quality.
Note that ln(# of citing patents) controls for the number of opportunities for a patent to be
cited. In a standard count model, this coefficient should equal 1. Indeed, it is not significantly
13

The normalization first divides each continuous variable by its mean, multiplies by 10, and then takes deviations
from the mean by subtracting 10. This procedure is introduced in Kerr and Newell (2003), and results in normalized
variables that have a mean of 0.

19

different from 1 in column 5. Interestingly, its value grows in the quantile models, with a value
of 1.493 for the 90th quantile, indicating that increases in subsequent patents more than
proportionally increase citations to high quality patents. This suggests that high quality patents
may be the cause of these subsequent patents – that is, the value of high quality knowledge leads
to additional patents in subsequent years. Also interesting is that the cite lag, or the time that
passes between the cited and citing patents, is twice as short for high quality patents, suggesting
that the value of these patents is revealed quickly. While statistically significant due to the large
number of observations, the squared term for the cite lag has almost no meaningful effect, with a
value of 0.999 or 1.0 in all cases.
The accumulated stock of past patents (“stock of patents”) and the number of patents
granted in the same year as the cited patent (“# of patents in cited year”) are important for
calibration of climate models, as they control for potential diminishing returns to innovation.
The only evidence for diminishing returns is in a given year, as suggested by the significant
value of 0.962 associated with “# of patents in cited year” in the last column. Thus, as more
patent applications are filed in a given year, the probability of any one patent receiving a citation
falls (by 3.8% for a 10% increase in patent applications). This effect is twice as large for the
highest quality patents (i.e., a 10% increase in the number of patents in the cited year reduces the
probability of citation by 6.2% in the 90th quantile, compared to just 3.3% in the 25th quantile),
suggesting that additional research effort is applied to marginal projects with less potential value.
Thus, the pooled regression results suggest that large increases in research spending do not
necessarily make it easier to obtain breakthrough results, as the most promising projects are
pursued first.

20

Finally, we control for several possible patent assignee characteristics. While the effect
of most characteristics is similar across quantiles, we do find that patents assigned to government
agencies are less likely to receive citations in the highest quality quantile. Moreover, as in Popp
(2006a), children of government patents are the most valuable. This suggests that the value of
government research is enhanced once acted upon by the private sector. Moreover, while the
differences are small, nearly all assignee effects are smallest in the 90th quantile. Since corporate
patents are the excluded category, this suggests that those patents are most likely to result in high
value outcomes.
While we find some differences across quantiles, the results in Table 4 constrain the
effects to be the same across all technologies.
technologies.

However, our data include a range of

Some, such as wind and hybrid vehicles, have moved from experimental

technologies to (at least limited) commercial success. Solar, in contrast, remains a high-cost
niche technology. Others, such as energy efficiency and nuclear, have been mature for some
time. Therefore, we also estimate separate regressions for each individual technology.14 Table 5
presents results for the generalized negative binomial regression by technology. This suggests
that there are important differences across technologies. Of particular note is the effect of the
cite lag variable.

Using coefficient estimates for citelag and citelag2 from the individual

technology regressions, Figure 3 shows how the probability of citation changes after x years. As
shown in panel A of Figure 3, the probability of citation trends downward monotonically over
time for most technologies. However, for wind and hybrid vehicles, the probability of citation
initially increases, peaking after six years for wind and three years for hybrids. Indeed, the
combined effect of the cite lag variables for wind does not become negative until year 12. As

14

We drop the variable NCTGt from these regressions, as it is perfectly collinear with the individual year dummies
for citing patents.

21

these two technologies are the most successful of our six energy technologies, this suggests that
the value of patents last longer for successful technologies. For instance, evidence from a history
of wind technology innovation (Dykes, 2010a; Dykes, 2010b) demonstrates that success in wind
is cumulative. There is not a single breakthrough invention, but rather a series of successful
innovations that build on the last major improvement. At each step, innovations such as variable
speed, improved power electronics, better materials for rotors, and the ability to “feather” rotors
required success of the previous innovation. The persistent value of wind patents over time is
consistent with such behavior.
Regarding diminishing returns, once again the only meaningful evidence is found within
a given year. Wind, solar, and fuel cells all experience diminishing returns within a given year,
as suggested by the significant <1 coefficient associated with “# of patents in cited year” in Table
5. A ten percent increase in patents in the cited year reduces the probability of receiving a
citation by 2.6% for wind, 4.3% for solar and 2.1% for fuel cells. In contrast, both hybrids and
energy efficiency show evidence of positive spillovers within a given year, as the probability of
citation increases for patents from years with higher patenting activity. There are few noticeable
differences for assignee types across technologies, except that the low value of U.S. government
patents found in the pooled regression appears to be almost entirely a result of nuclear energy
patents, as this is the only technology for which this coefficient is significant.
To help reconcile the differences regarding diminishing returns across different
technologies, Table 6 includes the results of an additional regression adding a squared term for
the number of patents in the cited year.15 To be able to interpret the squared term, we do not
normalize the data in this regression, and thus only use this approach for single technology

15

Results for other coefficients remain the same and are not reported.

22

regressions.16 As shown in Table 6, diminishing returns are an issue for all technologies when
the level of innovation is high enough, as the squared term is negative for all technologies in
which the linear term is not negative. This holds true for wind, nuclear, and hybrid vehicles.
Moreover, for all three of these technologies, the turning point at which increased patenting leads
to diminishing returns occurs at reasonable values, either slightly above or slightly below the
average number of patents per year for these technologies. Figure 4 shows the patent counts for
each technology, with years affected by diminishing returns represented by dashed lines. These
dashed lines represent years where the number of patents is above the turning point calculated in
Table 6. In each case, it is the years of peak patenting activity that experience diminishing
returns within a given year.
The other notable change in Table 6 is that the coefficient on cite lag increases for hybrid
patents. As a result, while hybrid and wind patents are still the only two technologies for which
the probability of citation does not decay immediately, it is now hybrid patents that see the
probability of citation increase more strongly over time. This is shown in panel B of Figure 3,
where the combined effect of the cite lag variables for hybrid patents does not become negative
until year 19. As we will show below, this result is driven by the most successful hybrid patents.
Tables 7 and 8 present the quantile results for each technology. Table 7 includes patent
characteristics (including our tests for diminishing returns) and Table 8 includes assignee
characteristics.

Comparisons across technologies can be seen by reading across, and

comparisons across quantiles for a given technology can be seen by reading downward. What is
notable here is that the differences across quantiles found in the pooled regression only hold up
in select technologies and are generally of a smaller magnitude. The most notable difference is
that the cite lag for hybrids only increases the probability of citation in the 90th quantile,
16

However, we do divide the number of patents by 10 to obtain reasonable magnitudes on the coefficients.

23

suggesting that the result found for hybrids in Table 6 is driven by the highest quality patents.
Similarly, for three less successful technologies – solar, fuel cells, and nuclear – patents in the
90th percentile decay more quickly. However, it is clear that the major differences are driven by
technology, rather than by quantiles. For example, for the three technologies in which the effect
of number of patents in the cited year is positive, the coefficient is positive across all quantiles.
Moreover, for each of these three technologies, the turning point of the net effect of number of
patents in the cited year is similar across all quantiles. The largest spread is for hybrids, where
the turning point ranges from 271.9 patents in the 50th quantile to 302.9 patents in the 90th
quantile. Thus, it is not that more valuable wind patents behave differently than less valuable
wind technologies, but rather that patents from successful technologies such as wind and hybrids
behave differently than other technologies.

VI. Discussion

Reducing carbon emissions will require a diverse set of energy technologies. As the costs
of many alternative technologies are high, innovation will play an important role in efforts to
reduce carbon emissions. While climate models are beginning to reflect the diverse nature of the
technologies required to reduce emissions, efforts to calibrate R&D-driven innovation on these
technologies lag behind.

Most empirical papers on energy innovation pool technologies

together, and to our knowledge, all existing work focuses on the average returns to innovation on
alternative energy technologies. By estimating separate equations for each technology and using
quantile regression techniques to focus on the characteristics of high-value energy patents, we
are able to determine whether R&D uncertainty or differences in technologies matter most for
patent success.

24

By testing for the impact of patent characteristics on patent value by technology, we find
that there are differences between successful and less successful technologies. In particular, the
value of successful technologies persists longer than those of less successful technologies,
providing evidence that success is the culmination of several advances building upon one
another, rather than resulting from one big hit. Our evidence on diminishing returns suggests
that diminishing returns within a given year are an issue when inventive activity is particularly
high. However, at low levels of activity, some technologies, such as hybrid vehicles, experience
increasing returns, suggesting benefits to positive spillovers are possible with just moderate
levels of research investment.
By using quantile regression techniques, we explore whether high value patents have
different observable characteristics than other patents. When pooled across technologies, we do
find evidence that the magnitude of diminishing returns within a given year is larger for the most
successful innovations. However, using quantile regressions for individual technologies, this
result only holds for solar energy. While this may suggest that solar energy innovation was hurt
by moving too quickly in the 1970s, the biggest takeaway point from this research is that it is
differences across technologies, rather than among high and low impact innovations within a
technology, that are most important.
Our results suggest that allowing for different behavior across technologies is important
when modeling R&D-based innovation in climate models, and we provide empirical evidence
for such calibration. In particular, it would be useful to classify technologies based on their
likelihood of success, with knowledge based on technologies perceived to be successful decaying
more slowly. Such technologies are also likely to have slow, steady improvement over time,
rather than large discrete jumps in knowledge. The results on diminishing returns by quantiles

25

and technology suggest that diminishing returns will be most problematic during rapid increases
of research investment, such as experienced by solar energy in the 1970s, but that it need not be
universal. Finally, that decay rates fall monotonically for less successful technologies suggests
that data patent citations received just a few years after a patent’s initial filing data could provide
researchers and policymakers information on the research avenues most likely to be successful.
Our results also provide qualitative insights for policy. Diminishing returns within a
given year but not necessarily over time, as in the wind and hybrid cases, suggest that long-term
sustained incentives to innovate may be more effective than short bursts of support. Moving
advanced technologies to large-scale commercial deployment will likely require a sequence of
innovations over a number of years. This sequence suggests that research prizes, which offer
large rewards for a single technological breakthrough, will be less effective, as they do not
provide incentives for the series of incremental gains needed to make successful energy
technologies possible. The differences between technologies also supports economic theory,
which would indicate that technology neutral policy instruments be used where possible. In the
1970s it would have been difficult to predict that wind and hybrid technologies would evolve
differently from solar and fuel cells. Technology-specific support can lead to spending on lowvalue innovations, as in the case of federal support for nuclear. Finally, as suggested above,
some evidence of which technologies are higher-value can sometimes be apparent after several
years, and policies that can adjust to new information will lead to more efficient outcomes.

26

References

Baker, E. and Adu-Bonnah, K. (2008). Investment in Risky R&D Programs in the Face of
Climate Uncertainty. Energy Economics 30: 465-486.
Baker, E. and S. Solak. 2011. "Climate change and optimal energy technology R&D policy."
European Journal of Operations Research 213(2): 442-454.
Baker, E., Chon H. and Keisler, J. 2008. Advanced Nuclear Power: Combining Expert
Elicitations to Inform Climate Policy. Working Paper.
Baker, E., Chon, H. and Keisler, J. 2009a. “Advanced Solar R&D: Applying Expert Elicitations
to Inform Climate Policy”. Energy Economics 31:S37-S49.
Baker, E., Chon, H. and Keisler, J. 2009b. Carbon Capture and Storage: Combining Expert
Elicitations to Inform Climate Policy. Climatic Change 96 (3): 379.
Blanford, G. J. 2009. "R&D investment strategy for climate change." Energy Economics 31:
527-536.
Bosetti, V. and M. Tavoni. 2009. "Uncertain R&D, backstop technology and GHGs
stabilization." Energy Economics 31: 518-526.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, M. Galeotti, E. Massetti and M. Tavoni. 2006. “WITCH: A World
Induced Technical Change Hybrid Model.” The Energy Journal, Special Issue. Hybrid
Modelling of Energy-Environment Policies: Reconciling Bottom-up and Top-down,
December 2006: 13-38.
Bye, B. and K. Jacobsen. 2011. "Restricted carbon emissions and directed R&D support; an
applied general equilibrium analysis." Energy Economics 33: 543-555.
Caballero, R.J. and Jaffe, A.B. (1993), “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical
Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic
Growth,” in Blanchard, O.J. and Fischer, S. (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clarke, L., J. Edmonds, H. Jacoby, H. Pitcher, J. Reilly and R. Richels. 2007. Scenarios of
greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric concentrations, sub-report 2.1A of synthesis
and assessment product 2.1 by the U.S. climate change science program and the
subcommittee on global change research. Department of Energy, Office of Biological and
Environmental Research, Washington, DC, p 106
Dasgupta, P. and Stiglitz, J. (1980). Uncertainty, Industrial Structure, and the Speed of R&D.
The Bell Journal of Economics 11(1): 1-28.
Dykes, K. (2010) "Codes, standards, and technology development for wind energy conversion
systems" Society for the History of technology (SHOT) 2010 Annual Meeting.
Dykes, K. (2010) "Competing Voices in the History of Development of Wind Energy
Conversion Systems" Actor-Network Theory Energy (ANT-E) Workshop, NTNU,
Trondheim, Dec. 9th, 2010.
Evenson, R.E. and Kislev, Y. (1975) Agricultural Research and Productivity. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
27

Goulder, L. H. and K. Mathai. 2000. "Optimal CO2 abatement in the presence of induced
technological change." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39: 1-38.
Goulder, L.H. and S.H. Schneider. 1999. "Induced technological change and the attractiveness
of CO2 abatement policies." Resource and Energy Economics 21: 211-253.
Griliches, Z. (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,” in
Stoneman, P. (ed.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, pp. 52–89.
Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 28(4), 1661-707.
Holdren JP. 2006. The energy innovation imperative: Addressing oil dependence, climate
change, and other 21st Century energy challenges. innovations. 1: 3-23
International Energy Agency. 2006. Renewable energy: RD&D priorities, insights from the IEA
technology programmes, OECD/IEA, Paris, France.
International Energy Agency. 2008. CO2 Emissions From Fuel Combustion, OECD/IEA, Paris,
France.
IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. B. Metz, O.R.
Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer, eds. United Kingdom and New York, NY,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Jaffe, A.B. and Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, Citations, & Innovations: A Window on the
Knowledge Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jaffe, A.B., Fogarty, M.S. and Banks, B.A. (1998). Evidence from Patents and Patent Citations
on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 46(2): 183–205.
Kamien, M.I. and Schwartz, N.L. (1971). Expenditure Patterns for Risky R and D Projects.
Journal of Applied Probability 8(1): 60-73.
Kerr, R.G. Newell (2003), Policy-induced technology adoption: Evidence from the U.S. lead
phasedown, Journal of Industrial Economics 51(3), 317-343.
Koenker, R. and Hallock, K.F. (2001). Quantile Regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
15(4): 143-156.
Lanjouw, J.O., and Schankerman, M. (2004). Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators. Economic Journal , 114 (495): 441-465.
Machado, José A.F. and J.M.C. Santos Silva (2005), “Quantiles for counts,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 100(472), 1226-1237.
Mansfield, E. (1968). Industrial Research and Technological Innovation: An Econometric
Analysis. W. W. Norton & Company, New York.
Messner, S. (1997). “Endogenized technological learning in an energy systems model.” J Evol
Econ 7: 291-313.

28

Miketa, A. and L. Schrattenholzer. 2004. "Experiments with a methodology to model the role of
R&D expenditures in energy technology learning processes; first results." Energy Policy
32: 1679-1692.
Miranda, Alfonso (2006), “QCOUNT: Stata program to fit quantile regression models for count
data,”
Statistical
software
components,
Boston
College
Software,
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456714.html.
Miranda, Alfonso (2008), “Planned fertility and family background: a quantile regression for
counts analysis,” Journal of Population Economics, 21, 67-81.
Otto, V. M., Loschel, A., and J. Reilly. 2008. "Directed technical change and differentiation of
climate policy." Energy Economics 30: 2855-2878.
Pakes, A. (1986). Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent
Stocks. Econometrica 54 (4): 755-784.
Popp, D. (2006a). They Don't Invent Them Like They Used To: An Examination of Energy
Patent Citations Over Time. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15 (8): 753776.
Popp, D. 2006b. "ENTICE-BR: the effects of backstop technology R&D on climate policy
models." Energy Economics 28: 188-222.
Popp, D. (2002). Induced Innovation and Energy Prices. American Economic Review 92(1): 160180.
Schwoon, M. and R.S.J. Tol. 2006. "Optimal CO2-abatement with socio-economic inertia and
induced technological change." The Energy Journal 27(4): 25-57.
Shittu, E. and E. Baker. 2009. "Optimal energy R&D portfolio investments in response to a
carbon tax." IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.

29

Table 1 – Descriptive data: number of citations per patent, 1971-2008

No. of
Citations

No. of
Citations

No. of
Citations

Efficiency

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

1.212
4.473
210
0
0
0
0
1
5
15

Hybrid

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

4.928
10.219
210
0
0
0
1
5
22
46

Solar

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

3.830
5.761
69
0
0
0
2
5
15
29

Fuel Cells

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

5.378
10.325
119
0
0
0
1
6
25
49

Nuclear

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

3.187
4.367
47
0
0
0
2
4
12
20

Wind

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

4.912
6.492
62
0
0
0
3
7
18
31

Total

Mean
SD
Max
Min
5_percentile
25_percentile
50_percentile
75_percentile
95_percentile
99_percentile

2.967
6.673
210
0
0
0
1
3
14
31

30

Table 2 – Other descriptive data, 1971-2008

Citations

Claims

Cited
References

Patents Per
Year

Efficiency

Mean
SD
Max
Min

1.212
4.473
210
0

15.731
13.672
318
1

12.322
21.037
641
0

469.510
424.155
1421
1

Fuel Cells

Mean
SD
Max
Min

5.378
10.325
119
0

16.957
14.661
300
0

11.481
19.337
479
0

172.020
233.436
912
2

Hybrid

Mean
SD
Max
Min

4.928
10.219
210
0

14.371
11.937
167
1

11.501
18.050
395
0

81.596
109.167
379
1

Nuclear

Mean
SD
Max
Min

3.187
4.367
47
0

11.536
10.531
499
0

7.702
8.615
201
0

176.542
119.899
330
1

Solar

Mean
SD
Max
Min

3.830
5.761
69
0

14.135
13.030
236
0

8.118
8.707
140
0

151.365
150.767
542
1

Wind

Mean
SD
Max
Min

4.912
6.492
62
0

14.067
11.558
138
1

11.483
15.426
327
0

47.523
38.885
145
1

Total

Mean
SD
Max
Min

2.967
6.673
210
0

14.823
13.182
499
0

10.711
17.437
641
0

134.689
227.498
1421
1

31

Table 3 – Descriptive data: granted patents and citations by assignee
% of granted patents by assignee
%
private

N
Entire Sample
Efficiency
Fuel Cells
Hybrid
Nuclear
Solar
Wind

% gov

% other
public

%
foreign

Average number of cites received by assignee
% gov
child

average
cites

Private

Government

Other
Public

Foreign

Child

23005
8429
3835
10416
7871
2091

96.03
89.54
95.56
84.65
92.12
96.04

1.05
2.64
0.54
12.09
3.84
1.44

2.91
7.88
3.84
3.31
3.97
2.67

42.97
49.63
67.57
46.47
39.82
41.47

0.76
16.41
3.68
28.82
15.48
9.20

1.21
5.38
4.93
3.19
3.19
4.91

1.22
5.24
5.03
3.28
3.81
4.87

0.76
8.82
4.10
2.96
4.63
7.21

1.26
5.71
2.61
1.58
3.49
4.83

1.15
4.29
4.76
2.58
2.42
3.12

7.25
9.32
12.24
3.76
4.81
5.25

1971
Efficiency
Fuel Cells
Hybrid
Nuclear
Solar
Wind

66
32
30
12
27
72

98.48
88.00
100.00
67.44
75.00
100.00

0.00
10.00
0.00
27.91
25.00
0.00

1.52
2.00
0.00
4.65
0.00
0.00

34.85
34.00
43.33
43.41
37.50
33.33

0.00
0.00
3.33
16.28
25.00
0.00

1.08
6.16
5.70
5.05
8.63
10.33

1.06
6.52
5.70
5.83
6.25
10.33

0.00
3.60
0.00
3.50
15.75
0.00

2.00
3.00
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.00

0.48
7.94
6.92
3.81
13.33
5.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
4.76
9.50
0.00

1981
Efficiency
Fuel Cells
Hybrid
Nuclear
Solar
Wind

558
73
22
247
542
36

96.95
76.00
96.15
80.59
93.18
96.05

1.25
9.33
3.85
18.32
5.04
0.00

1.79
14.67
0.00
1.10
2.08
3.95

36.02
22.67
26.92
58.24
33.23
30.26

0.18
13.33
3.85
37.00
14.84
5.26

1.12
9.75
5.46
3.84
3.03
5.93

1.14
9.77
5.24
4.00
2.97
6.11

1.00
8.43
11.00
2.92
3.18
0.00

0.20
10.45
0.00
7.00
5.57
1.67

1.18
9.06
1.86
3.00
2.35
2.87

0.00
9.44
8.00
4.01
3.39
9.00

(continued on next page)

32

% of granted patents by assignee

N

%
private

% gov

% other
public

%
foreign

Average number of cites received by assignee

% gov
child

average
cites

Private

Government

Other
Public

Foreign

Child of
government
patent

1991
Efficiency
Fuel Cells
Hybrid
Nuclear
Solar
Wind

567
150
130
241
130
30

93.47
89.06
97.50
92.53
90.50
100.00

2.12
5.47
0.00
6.17
5.03
0.00

4.41
5.47
2.50
1.30
4.47
0.00

42.33
55.47
71.25
44.81
49.72
34.38

0.71
37.50
8.75
30.19
16.20
12.50

1.63
15.21
9.06
2.63
3.13
9.53

1.63
14.33
8.86
2.71
3.24
9.53

0.17
15.71
0.00
1.79
1.67
0.00

2.36
29.00
17.00
1.25
2.50
0.00

2.09
15.49
9.33
1.90
2.60
4.27

38.67
23.74
19.00
2.63
3.67
13.25

2001
Efficiency
Fuel Cells
Hybrid
Nuclear
Solar
Wind

1360
904
346
310
222
64

95.59
94.30
97.31
76.97
93.58
96.55

0.81
0.99
0.00
2.81
1.89
0.69

3.90
4.82
2.69
20.79
4.53
2.76

47.21
58.99
73.12
61.24
52.08
64.14

1.10
11.29
1.61
17.98
15.47
11.72

0.65
0.95
1.74
0.29
0.65
1.49

0.65
0.94
1.76
0.21
0.69
1.48

0.27
1.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00

0.79
0.98
0.80
0.62
0.08
1.50

0.42
0.65
1.44
0.16
0.41
0.95

1.33
1.34
1.00
0.17
0.89
1.56

33

Table 4 – Pooled Technology Results
Pooled
ln(# of citing patents)
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr.
# of claims made
# of cited references
Foreign corporation
assignee
US individual assignee
Foreign individual assignee
US government assignee
Foreign government
assignee
US university assignee
Foreign university assignee
US institution assignee
Foreign institution assignee
Child of US govt. patent
Child of Foreign govt patent

q25
0.907***
(0.011)
0.974***
(0.003)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.967***
(0.001)
1.008***
(0.001)
0.996***
(0.000)

q 50
0.914***
(0.010)
0.976***
(0.002)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.967***
(0.001)
1.010***
(0.000)
0.996***
(0.000)

q75
1.147***
(0.011)
0.969***
(0.003)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.968***
(0.001)
1.013***
(0.001)
0.996***
(0.000)

q90
1.493***
(0.013)
0.914***
(0.003)
1.000
(0.000)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.938***
(0.002)
1.018***
(0.001)
0.997***
(0.000)

gnbreg
0.998***
(0.034)
0.964***
(0.003)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.962***
(0.002)
1.012***
(0.001)
0.997***
(0.001)

0.759***
(0.008)
0.867***
(0.012)
0.570***
(0.014)
0.852***
(0.023)

0.757***
(0.008)
0.866***
(0.012)
0.573***
(0.013)
0.852***
(0.022)

0.717***
(0.009)
0.862***
(0.013)
0.519***
(0.014)
0.810***
(0.022)

0.683***
(0.010)
0.822***
(0.015)
0.463***
(0.015)
0.726***
(0.026)

0.722***
(0.014)
0.829***
(0.022)
0.534***
(0.021)
0.799***
(0.041)

0.708***
(0.021)
0.863***
(0.032)
0.451
(0.392)
0.852***
(0.042)
0.524***
(0.032)
1.392***
(0.021)
1.274***
(0.022)
831678
0.26242

0.717***
(0.020)
0.860***
(0.031)
0.492***
(0.047)
0.848***
(0.040)
0.557***
(0.027)
1.413***
(0.021)
1.270***
(0.021)
831678
0.52377

0.688***
(0.020)
0.895**
(0.037)
0.451***
(0.048)
0.838***
(0.044)
0.511***
(0.028)
1.450***
(0.025)
1.337***
(0.025)
831678
0.78349

0.619***
(0.026)
0.845***
(0.038)
0.426***
(0.063)
0.766***
(0.044)
0.452***
(0.032)
1.372***
(0.027)
1.410***
(0.033)
831678
0.95075

0.693***
(0.037)
0.903*
(0.056)
0.564***
(0.100)
0.812**
(0.069)
0.538***
(0.044)
1.279***
(0.032)
1.267***
(0.035)
831678

Number of obs.
Predicted quantile
log likelihood
-303570.7
NOTES: Standard errors in parentheses; * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Except for the coefficient for ln(# of citing patents), results are shown as incidence rate ratios,
e(beta). Moreover, to aid interpretation and make comparisons across technologies, the number of
patents, the number of claims, and the number of citations made by each patent are normalized so
that a one-unit change equals a ten percent deviation from the mean (Kerr and Newell, 2003).

34

Table 5 – Generalized Negative Binomial Results by Technology
wind

solar

fuelcell

nuclear

hybrid

eff

ln(# of citing patents)
Cite lag

1.017*
0.975***
0.940***
0.984*
1.018
0.926***
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.017)
(0.015)
Cite lag^2
0.999***
0.999***
0.999***
0.999***
0.997***
1.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Stock of patents
0.996***
0.997***
0.994***
1.000
0.998***
0.997***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.000)
(0.001)
# of patents in cited yr.
0.974***
0.957***
0.979***
0.986
1.027**
1.035***
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)
# of claims made
1.016***
1.011***
1.015***
1.009***
1.016***
1.012***
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.002)
# of cited references
1.000
0.991***
0.993***
1.000
1.002
1.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Foreign corporation assignee
0.584***
0.708***
0.654***
0.635***
1.112
0.914*
(0.056)
(0.032)
(0.027)
(0.020)
(0.084)
(0.043)
US individual assignee
0.790***
0.800***
0.592***
0.763***
1.054
1.183***
(0.058)
(0.029)
(0.061)
(0.067)
(0.152)
(0.077)
Foreign individual assignee
0.636***
0.543***
0.446***
0.493***
0.617**
0.622***
(0.056)
(0.032)
(0.080)
(0.060)
(0.130)
(0.054)
US government assignee
1.176
1.077
1.030
0.528***
1.244
0.646
(0.209)
(0.114)
(0.123)
(0.030)
(0.501)
(0.215)
Foreign government assignee
0.804
0.733***
0.567**
0.642***
0.931
0.636*
(0.221)
(0.076)
(0.143)
(0.039)
(0.358)
(0.168)
US university assignee
0.526**
0.926
0.904
0.543***
1.367
1.072
(0.168)
(0.094)
(0.084)
(0.112)
(0.420)
(0.197)
Foreign university assignee
0.793
0.754
0.462**
0.203***
0.000***
0.267*
(0.255)
(0.179)
(0.149)
(0.067)
(0.000)
(0.188)
US institution assignee
0.765
0.919
0.744***
0.557***
1.002
0.838
(0.221)
(0.266)
(0.079)
(0.096)
(0.372)
(0.167)
Foreign institution assignee
0.345**
0.420***
0.494***
0.577***
0.680
1.080
(0.153)
(0.082)
(0.059)
(0.077)
(0.277)
(0.253)
Child of US govt. patent
1.285***
1.395***
1.447***
1.028
1.356**
2.454***
(0.119)
(0.073)
(0.064)
(0.040)
(0.200)
(0.553)
Child of Foreign govt. patent
1.622***
1.397***
1.595***
1.202***
1.232
0.791
(0.200)
(0.075)
(0.131)
(0.044)
(0.255)
(0.169)
Number of obs.
31981
160773
86196
179506
39684
333538
log likelihood
-20032.1
-64944.1
-59450.9
-69914.5
-24580.2
-61275.2
NOTES: Standard errors in parentheses; * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; All e(beta) except ln_nctg

35

overall
0.998***
(0.034)
0.964***
(0.003)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.962***
(0.002)
1.012***
(0.001)
0.997***
(0.001)
0.722***
(0.014)
0.829***
(0.022)
0.534***
(0.021)
0.799***
(0.041)
0.693***
(0.037)
0.903*
(0.056)
0.564***
(0.100)
0.812**
(0.069)
0.538***
(0.044)
1.279***
(0.032)
1.267***
(0.035)
831678
-303570.7

Table 6 – Impact of High Patenting Activity

wind

solar

fuel cells

nuclear

hybrid

efficiency

1.009
(0.010)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.996***
(0.001)
1.045
(0.038)
0.994**
(0.002)
1.013***
(0.002)
1.001
(0.002)

0.975***
(0.006)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.997***
(0.001)
0.984***
(0.006)
1.000
(0.000)
1.009***
(0.001)
0.988***
(0.002)

0.941***
(0.010)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.994***
(0.001)
0.994
(0.005)
1.000
(0.000)
1.009***
(0.002)
0.992***
(0.002)

0.970***
(0.010)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.996
(0.004)
1.153***
(0.060)
0.997***
(0.001)
1.009***
(0.002)
0.999
(0.002)

1.061***
(0.018)
0.997***
(0.000)
0.999*
(0.000)
1.082***
(0.019)
0.999***
(0.000)
1.012***
(0.003)
1.002
(0.002)

0.917***
(0.019)
1.000
(0.000)
0.997***
(0.001)
1.002
(0.005)
1.000
(0.000)
1.008***
(0.002)
1.001
(0.001)

ln(# of citing patents)
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr. X10
(# of patents in cited yr. X10)^2
# of claims made
# of cited references

Turning point for nCTD effect
36.6
260.5
268.1
Average patents/year
55.8
208.4
212.7
232.8
101.1
617.5
Number of obs.
31981
160773
86196
179506
39684
333538
log likelihood
-20022.82 -64943.38 -59450.88 -69904.75 -24543.49 -61274.15
NOTES: Standard errors in parentheses; * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; All e(beta) except ln_nctg

36

Table 7 – Patent Characteristic Quantile Results by Technology
90th quantile
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr.
# of patents in cited yr.^2
# of claims made
# of cited references
75th quantile
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr.
# of patents in cited yr.^2
# of claims made
# of cited references
50th quantile
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr.
# of patents in cited yr.^2
# of claims made
# of cited references

wind
1.005
(0.012)
0.999**
(0.000)
0.996***
(0.001)
1.083**
(0.033)
0.992***
(0.002)
1.016***
(0.001)
1.002
(0.002)

solar
0.921***
(0.009)
0.999
(0.000)
0.998***
(0.001)
0.963***
(0.005)
1.000***
(0.000)
1.015***
(0.001)
0.983***
(0.002)

fuel cells
0.899***
(0.011)
0.999**
(0.000)
0.990***
(0.001)
0.993
(0.005)
1.000
(0.000)
1.011***
(0.001)
0.991***
(0.002)

nuclear
0.904***
(0.011)
0.999*
(0.000)
0.990**
(0.004)
1.473***
(0.083)
0.993***
(0.001)
1.017***
(0.002)
0.998
(0.002)

hybrid
1.068***
(0.020)
0.996***
(0.001)
0.999***
(0.000)
1.100***
(0.014)
0.998***
(0.000)
1.014***
(0.002)
1.003
(0.002)

efficiency
0.884***
(0.008)
1.000
(0.000)
0.994***
(0.001)
0.994**
(0.002)
1.000***
(0.000)
1.009***
(0.001)
1.001
(0.001)

1.020
(0.011)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.995***
(0.001)
1.105***
(0.031)
0.989***
(0.002)
1.017***
(0.001)
1.002
(0.002)

0.982***
(0.005)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.997***
(0.000)
0.989**
(0.004)
1.000
(0.000)
1.009***
(0.001)
0.989***
(0.002)

0.931***
(0.010)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.994***
(0.001)
0.995
(0.004)
1.000*
(0.000)
1.010***
(0.001)
0.986***
(0.001)

0.965***
(0.007)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.992***
(0.002)
1.179***
(0.042)
0.997***
(0.001)
1.011***
(0.001)
0.999
(0.001)

0.987
(0.016)
0.999**
(0.001)
0.998***
(0.000)
1.132***
(0.013)
0.998***
(0.000)
1.012***
(0.002)
1.000
(0.002)

0.881***
(0.008)
1.000
(0.000)
0.994***
(0.001)
0.993**
(0.002)
1.000***
(0.000)
1.006***
(0.001)
1.000
(0.000)

1.016
(0.009)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.995***
(0.001)
1.079***
(0.024)
0.991***
(0.002)
1.013***
(0.001)
1.001
(0.001)

0.984**
(0.005)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.997***
(0.000)
0.998
(0.004)
1.000*
(0.000)
1.006***
(0.001)
0.990***
(0.001)

0.950***
(0.008)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.995***
(0.001)
0.996
(0.004)
1.000
(0.000)
1.007***
(0.001)
0.989***
(0.001)

0.963***
(0.007)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.991***
(0.002)
1.199***
(0.044)
0.997***
(0.001)
1.008***
(0.001)
1.000
(0.001)

1.015
(0.013)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.999**
(0.000)
1.072***
(0.009)
0.999***
(0.000)
1.006***
(0.001)
0.999
(0.001)

0.884***
(0.010)
1.000
(0.000)
0.994***
(0.001)
0.993**
(0.002)
1.000***
(0.000)
1.006***
(0.001)
0.999
(0.001)

37

Table 7 – Patent Characteristic Quantile Results by Technology (continued)
25th quantile
Cite lag
Cite lag^2
Stock of patents
# of patents in cited yr.
# of patents in cited yr.^2
# of claims made
# of cited references

1.015
(0.009)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.996***
(0.001)
1.075**
(0.025)
0.992***
(0.002)
1.013***
(0.001)
1.000
(0.002)

0.976***
(0.006)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.998***
(0.000)
0.998
(0.004)
1.000*
(0.000)
1.005***
(0.001)
0.991***
(0.002)

0.948***
(0.008)
0.999***
(0.000)
0.995***
(0.001)
0.996
(0.004)
1.000
(0.000)
1.006***
(0.001)
0.990***
(0.001)

0.953***
(0.007)
0.999**
(0.000)
0.992***
(0.002)
1.210***
(0.052)
0.997***
(0.001)
1.006***
(0.001)
0.999
(0.002)

0.994
(0.014)
0.999**
(0.001)
0.999***
(0.000)
1.065***
(0.010)
0.999***
(0.000)
1.005***
(0.001)
0.999
(0.001)

Table 8 – Assignee Characteristic Results by Technology
90th quantile
Foreign corp. assignee
US individual assignee
Foreign individual
US government assignee
Foreign government
US university assignee
Foreign university
US institution assignee
Foreign institution
Child of US govt. patent
Child of For. govt. patent

wind
0.466***
(0.041)
0.737***
(0.038)
0.573***
(0.040)
1.123
(0.148)
0.862
(0.157)
0.334***
(0.083)
0.905
(0.203)
0.582**
(0.097)
0.243**
(0.107)
1.259**
(0.105)
1.680***
(0.193)

solar
0.608***
(0.025)
0.747***
(0.024)
0.461***
(0.026)
1.245*
(0.130)
0.685***
(0.058)
0.942
(0.085)
0.506**
(0.134)
0.865
(0.133)
0.306***
(0.070)
1.754***
(0.092)
1.768***
(0.096)

38

fuel cells
0.567***
(0.017)
0.505***
(0.036)
0.342***
(0.057)
0.956
(0.063)
0.427***
(0.082)
0.890
(0.055)
0.425***
(0.110)
0.693***
(0.050)
0.409***
(0.045)
1.432***
(0.043)
1.624***
(0.075)

nuclear
0.517***
(0.016)
0.650***
(0.053)
0.290***
(0.046)
0.371***
(0.024)
0.520***
(0.031)
0.328***
(0.092)
0.086
(172.546)
0.383***
(0.072)
0.437***
(0.079)
1.065
(0.039)
1.332***
(0.045)

hybrid
1.022
(0.051)
1.130
(0.095)
0.516***
(0.077)
1.463
(0.569)
0.689
(0.243)
1.519*
(0.323)
0.000
(5.778)
0.945
(0.276)
0.654
(0.214)
1.330**
(0.121)
1.361
(0.223)

efficiency
0.929**
(0.021)
1.188***
(0.033)
0.707***
(0.038)
0.613**
(0.105)
0.623*
(0.136)
0.974
(0.093)
0.331
(0.305)
0.937
(0.142)
0.927
(0.098)
4.942***
(1.048)
0.909
(0.239)

Table 8 – Assignee Characteristic Results by Technology (continued)
75th quantile
Foreign corporation
US individual assignee
Foreign individual
US government
Foreign government
US university assignee
Foreign university
US institution assignee
Foreign institution
Child of US govt. patent
Child of For. govt. patent
50th quantile
Foreign corporation
US individual assignee
Foreign individual
US government assignee
Foreign government
US university assignee
Foreign university
US institution assignee
Foreign institution
Child of US govt. patent
Child of For. govt. patent

0.454***
(0.034)
0.774***
(0.038)
0.581***
(0.039)
1.457*
(0.224)
0.898
(0.206)
0.340***
(0.070)
0.763
(0.163)
0.782
(0.171)
0.222
(59330.6)
1.505***
(0.124)
1.974***
(0.198)

0.707***
(0.020)
0.843***
(0.019)
0.574***
(0.024)
1.138*
(0.068)
0.756***
(0.047)
0.929
(0.068)
0.570**
(0.108)
0.800
(0.108)
0.407***
(0.061)
1.474***
(0.049)
1.391***
(0.046)

0.575***
(0.017)
0.448***
(0.032)
0.303***
(0.046)
1.209**
(0.083)
0.415***
(0.048)
0.790***
(0.056)
0.362***
(0.093)
0.712***
(0.065)
0.438***
(0.046)
2.009***
(0.067)
1.819***
(0.106)

0.639***
(0.013)
0.717***
(0.037)
0.465***
(0.035)
0.551***
(0.020)
0.660***
(0.023)
0.492***
(0.090)
0.061
(20115.22)
0.571***
(0.063)
0.609***
(0.053)
1.033
(0.026)
1.268***
(0.032)

1.232***
(0.062)
1.035
(0.096)
0.574***
(0.068)
1.205
(0.506)
0.887
(0.259)
1.893
(0.678)
0.000
(209.060)
1.377
(0.411)
0.481**
(0.116)
1.593***
(0.193)
1.484**
(0.218)

0.922***
(0.021)
1.170***
(0.032)
0.685***
(0.039)
0.562
(0.284)
0.580
(0.184)
0.985
(0.098)
0.240
(2.86e+05)
0.811
(0.227)
0.862
(0.123)
2.435***
(0.267)
0.832
(0.241)

0.555***
(0.033)
0.821***
(0.034)
0.665***
(0.034)
1.397*
(0.212)
0.810
(0.165)
0.403***
(0.108)
0.785
(0.178)
0.793
(0.186)
0.119
(7.9e+05)
1.362***
(0.097)
1.968***
(0.181)

0.703***
(0.019)
0.857***
(0.019)
0.598***
(0.024)
1.164*
(0.069)
0.748***
(0.048)
0.929
(0.065)
0.456
(67961.09)
0.766*
(0.099)
0.377
(0.263)
1.438***
(0.046)
1.327***
(0.041)

0.678***
(0.016)
0.542***
(0.030)
0.429***
(0.050)
1.157*
(0.067)
0.521***
(0.048)
0.781***
(0.045)
0.418***
(0.083)
0.719***
(0.054)
0.542***
(0.049)
1.946***
(0.060)
1.745***
(0.092)

0.644***
(0.013)
0.739***
(0.038)
0.483***
(0.037)
0.559***
(0.021)
0.664***
(0.024)
0.295
(69439.18)
0.019
(25929.77)
0.567***
(0.073)
0.611***
(0.058)
1.032
(0.025)
1.238***
(0.028)

1.171***
(0.043)
0.945
(0.057)
0.703***
(0.058)
0.957
(0.761)
0.871
(1.201)
1.068
(0.219)
0.000
(19382.3)
1.278
(0.457)
0.609
(0.206)
1.404***
(0.124)
1.184
(0.132)

0.913***
(0.023)
1.174***
(0.034)
0.683***
(0.064)
0.441
(1.13e+05)
0.558
(0.488)
0.749
(2.57e+05)
0.227
(3.01e+05)
0.785
(40.803)
0.780
(90533.9)
2.322***
(0.291)
0.829
(0.837)

39

Table 8 – Assignee Characteristic Results by Technology (continued)
25th quantile
Foreign corporation
US individual assignee
Foreign individual
US government assignee
Foreign government
US university assignee
Foreign university
US institution assignee
Foreign institution
Child of US govt. patent
Child of For. govt. patent

0.557***
(0.035)
0.832***
(0.036)
0.670***
(0.036)
1.421*
(0.235)
0.786
(0.203)
0.206
(7.79e+05)
0.329
(1.23e+06)
0.768
(0.246)
0.027
(1.92e+05)
1.358***
(0.102)
1.923***
(0.190)

0.714***
(0.020)
0.860***
(0.020)
0.635***
(0.026)
1.158*
(0.073)
0.732***
(0.058)
0.930
(0.069)
0.360
(2.05e+05)
0.679
(1.91e+05)
0.230
(68282.460)
1.414***
(0.047)
1.298***
(0.042)

40

0.697***
(0.016)
0.556***
(0.031)
0.478***
(0.058)
1.136*
(0.063)
0.555***
(0.055)
0.794***
(0.043)
0.367
(1.08e+05)
0.747***
(0.053)
0.532**
(0.129)
1.822***
(0.052)
1.691***
(0.084)

0.646***
(0.013)
0.749***
(0.042)
0.419
(5136.148)
0.571***
(0.023)
0.649***
(0.026)
0.334
(99672.705)
0.019
(43248.828)
0.542***
(0.086)
0.592***
(0.076)
1.042
(0.027)
1.213***
(0.030)

1.148***
(0.043)
0.961
(0.059)
0.726***
(0.065)
0.544
(1.37e+06)
0.572
(2.62e+05)
0.936
(1.152)
0.002
(1.06e+05)
0.522
(3.55e+06)
0.733
(0.133)
1.397***
(0.125)
1.214
(0.139)

Figure 1 – Successful U.S. Patent Applications by Priority Year

The figure shows successful U.S. patent applications for each of our six technologies, sorted by
priority date. Note that our data only include granted patents. Thus, patent counts in the last
years of the sample are truncated, as some patent applications from these years have yet to be
processed.

41

Figure 2 – Sample Citation Frequency Distributions
A. Citations to hybrid patents,1991

B. Citations to wind energy patents,1981

(continued on next page)

42

C. Citations to solar energy patents,1981

Each figure shows the distribution of forward citations received by patents from a given priority
year and for a given technology. The x-axis shows the number of forward citations received, and
the y-axis shows the number of patents receiving that many forward citations.

43

Figure 3 – Effect of cite lag by technology
A. Based on estimates from Table 5

B. Based on estimates from Table 6

44

Figure 4 – Years affected by diminishing returns

The figure shows patent counts sorted by priority year for the three technologies where
diminishing returns varies depending on the number of patents. Years affected by diminishing
returns are shown with dashed lines.

45

Appendix A – List of IPC Classes Used
Electric/Hybrid Vehicles
B60W 20
VEHICLES IN GENERAL/CONJOINT CONTROL OF VEHICLE SUBUNITS OF DIFFERENT TYPE OR DIFFERENT FUNCTION;
CONTROL SYSTEMS SPECIALLY ADAPTED FOR HYBRID
VEHICLES; ROAD VEHICLE DRIVE CONTROL SYSTEMS FOR
PURPOSES NOT RELATED TO THE CONTROL OF A PARTICULAR
SUB-UNIT /Control systems specially adapted for hybrid vehicles, i.e.
vehicles having two or more prime movers of more than one type, e.g.
electrical and internal combustion motors, all used for propulsion of the
vehicle
B60L 7
VEHICLES IN GENERAL/ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR
PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-PROPELLED VEHICLES;
MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES;
ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN
GENERAL/ Electrodynamic brake systems for vehicles in general
B60L 8
VEHICLES IN GENERAL/ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR
PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-PROPELLED VEHICLES;
MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES;
ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN
GENERAL/ Electric propulsion with power supply from force of nature,
e.g. sun, wind
B60L 11
VEHICLES IN GENERAL/ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR
PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-PROPELLED VEHICLES;
MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES;
ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN
GENERAL/ Electric propulsion with power supplied within the vehicle
NOT B60L 7/28
VEHICLES IN GENERAL/ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR
PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-PROPELLED VEHICLES;
MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES;
ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN
GENERAL/ Electrodynamic brake systems for vehicles in general/Eddycurrent braking
Energy efficiency
keywords only:

((((((energy OR fuel OR gas* OR electric* OR petrol*) <near/1>
(consum* OR use OR using OR usage OR burn*)) <near/3> (reduc* OR
less OR lower)) <in> (AB, TI, BACKGROUND)) OR ((((energy OR fuel
OR gas*) <near/1> (efficien* OR economy OR mileage OR productivity))
<near/3> (improv* OR increas* OR better OR greater)) <in> (AB, TI,
BACKGROUND)))

A1

Fuel cells
H01M 8

Nuclear Energy
G21B
G21C
G21D

Solar energy
F03G 6

F24J 2

H01L 27/142

H01L 31/04-058

PROCESSES OR MEANS, e.g. BATTERIES, FOR THE DIRECT
CONVERSION OF CHEMICAL ENERGY INTO ELECTRICAL
ENERGY/Fuel cells; Manufacture thereof

NUCLEONICS/NUCLEAR PHYSICS; NUCLEAR ENGINEERING/
FUSION REACTORS
NUCLEONICS/NUCLEAR PHYSICS; NUCLEAR ENGINEERING/
NUCLEAR REACTORS
NUCLEONICS/NUCLEAR PHYSICS; NUCLEAR ENGINEERING/
NUCLEAR POWER PLANT

MACHINES OR ENGINES FOR LIQUIDS; WIND, SPRING, OR
WEIGHT MOTORS; PRODUCING MECHANICAL POWER OR A
REACTIVE PROPULSIVE THRUST, NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED
FOR/ SPRING, WEIGHT, INERTIA, OR LIKE MOTORS;
MECHANICAL-POWER-PRODUCING DEVICES OR MECHANISMS,
NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR OR USING ENERGY SOURCES
NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR /Devices for producing mechanical
power from solar energy
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING; WEAPONS;
BLASTING/HEATING, RANGES, VENTILATING/PRODUCTION OR
USE OF HEAT NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR/Use of solar heat,
e.g. solar heat collectors
ELECTRICITY/BASIC ELECTRIC ELEMENTS/ SEMICONDUCTOR
DEVICES; ELECTRIC SOLID STATE DEVICES NOT OTHERWISE
PROVIDED FOR/ Devices consisting of a plurality of semiconductor or
other solid-state components formed in or on a common
substrate/including semiconductor components specially adapted for
rectifying, oscillating, amplifying or switching and having at least one
potential-jump barrier or surface barrier; including integrated passive
circuit elements with at least one potential-jump barrier or surface
barrier/energy conversion devices
ELECTRICITY/BASIC ELECTRIC ELEMENTS/ SEMICONDUCTOR
DEVICES; ELECTRIC SOLID STATE DEVICES NOT OTHERWISE
PROVIDED FOR/ Semiconductor devices sensitive to infra-red radiation,
light, electromagnetic radiation of shorter wavelength, or corpuscular
radiation and specially adapted either for the conversion of the energy of
such radiation into electrical energy or for the control of electrical energy
by such radiation; Processes or apparatus specially adapted for the
manufacture or treatment thereof or of parts thereof; Details

A2

H02N 6

Wind
F03D

thereof/Adapted as conversion devices/ including a panel or array of
photoelectric cells, e.g. solar cells
ELECTRICITY/ GENERATION, CONVERSION, OR DISTRIBUTION
OF ELECTRIC POWER/ELECTRIC MACHINES NOT OTHERWISE
PROVIDED FOR/ Generators in which light radiation is directly
converted into electrical energy

MACHINES OR ENGINES FOR LIQUIDS; WIND, SPRING, OR
WEIGHT MOTORS; PRODUCING MECHANICAL POWER OR A
REACTIVE PROPULSIVE THRUST, NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED
FOR/Wind Motors

A3

