NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHIND THE GATE EXPERIMENT:
EVIDENCE ON EFFECTS OF AND RATIONALES FOR SUBSIDIZED ENTREPRENEURSHIP TRAINING
Robert W. Fairlie
Dean Karlan
Jonathan Zinman
Working Paper 17804
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17804
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

Thanks to David Card, Morten Sorensen, David Sraer, Jesse Cunha, Herb Scheutze and seminar participants
at SOLE Meetings, NBER, UC Berkeley, University of British Columbia, UCSC, Harvard/IZA Evaluation
Conference, Duke/Kauffman Entrepreneurship Conference, and WEA meetings for helpful comments
and suggestions. Special thanks go to Jonathan Simonetta at the U.S. Department of Labor for responding
to our numerous requests for obtaining the experimental data and for ultimately providing the data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Robert W. Fairlie, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Behind the GATE Experiment: Evidence on Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship
Training
Robert W. Fairlie, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 17804
February 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. D04,D14,D22,H32,H43,I38,J21,J24
ABSTRACT
Various theories of market failures and targeting motivate the promotion of entrepreneurship training
programs throughout the world. Using data from the largest randomized control trial ever conducted
on entrepreneurship training, we examine the validity of such motivations and find that training does
not have strong effects (in either relative or absolute terms) on those most likely to face credit or human
capital constraints, or labor market discrimination. On the other hand, training does have a relatively
strong short-run effect on business ownership for those unemployed at baseline, but not at other horizons
or for other outcomes. On average, training increases short-run business ownership and employment,
but there is no evidence of broader or longer-run effects on business ownership, business performance
or broader outcomes.
Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
rfairlie@ucsc.edu
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
314 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jzinman@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Governments and donors spend billions of dollars subsidizing entrepreneurship training
programs around the world. In the United States alone, there exist more than 1,000 SBAsubsidized Small Business Development Centers (SBDC) and 762 not-for-profit programs
providing self-employment training and other assistance.1 Arguments for subsidizing training are
manifold, and span theories of allocative and/or redistributive frictions in credit, labor, insurance,
and human capital markets. But these arguments have been difficult to evaluate empirically due
to classic endogeneity problems from selection into training. Thus, surprisingly little is known
about the overall effectiveness of entrepreneurship training and whether this training mitigates
market or redistributive frictions.
We address these limitations with an analysis of the largest and broadest randomized trial on
entrepreneurship training ever conducted in the United States or elsewhere in the world – the
Project Growing America through Entrepreneurship (GATE).2 Project GATE was a longitudinal
study conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor and the Small Business Administration (SBA)
1

SBDCs exist in all 50 states, and are administered and funded through partnerships between the SBA
and public colleges and not-for-profits. See http://www.sba.gov/content/small-business-developmentcenters-sbdcs for a directory of SBDCs, Aspen Institute/FIELD (2012) for information on non-profit
programs, and European Commission (2010) for a description of programs in the European Union.
2
The only previous randomized trial conducted in the United States was a smaller demonstration
experiment of self-employment training for U.I. recipients in Washington and Massachusetts (Benus et al
(1994)). That study found positive program impacts on self-employment, total earnings, and job creation,
but in addition to training the assistance program allowed for concurrent U.I. benefit payments and a
lump-sum benefit payment. A few recent experiments of the effects of business training on microentrepreneurs have been conducted in developing countries (Field, Jaychandran, and Pande 2010; Berge,
Bjorvatn, and Tungooden 2011; Drexler, Fischer, and Schoar 2011; Karlan and Valdivia 2011; Karlan,
Knight, and Udry 2012; Gine and Mansuri 2011). These studies have generally found some positive, but
mixed, results. The results of this literature may be informative, but not generalizable, to the developed
country context where the content of entrepreneurship training, education level of trainees, and types of
businesses being created are very different, and where formal labor, financial and business markets are
more open and accessible. For related research using non-randomized approaches to identifying effects of
self-employment training programs, see, e.g., Kosanovich and Fleck (2001), Rodriguez-Planas (2010),
Almeida and Galasso (2010), and for random and quasi-experimental approaches to studying
entrepreneurship education for college and younger students see Huber, Sloof and van Praag (2012) and
Oosterbeek, van Praag and Ijsselstein (2010).

in which free entrepreneurship training was randomly offered to individuals interested in starting
or improving a business. More than four thousand individuals applied for a limited number of
slots for free entrepreneurship training services at 14 different SBDCs and non-profit
community-based organizations (CBOs) located across 7 cities in 3 states. SBDCs and CBOs are
the predominant providers of entrepreneurship training services in the U.S. market. Subjects
assigned to the treatment group were offered an array of best-practice training services whereas
subjects assigned to the control group were not offered any free services. Follow-up surveys at 6
and 18, and 60 months after treatment assignment yield a rich set of outcome measures. The 60month follow-up survey provides rare measures of long-run outcomes.
We use the GATE experiment to conduct a comprehensive examination of the impacts of
entrepreneurship training. We provide new estimates for additional outcomes beyond those
reported in the original evaluation report, estimates that control for non-compliance in the
treatment and control groups, non-experimental estimates from the control group to demonstrate
potential biases, and estimates of distributional differences in business sales and employment.3
We also test hypotheses regarding the rationales for training interventions by examining several

3

The final evaluation report for Project GATE submitted to the U.S. Department of Labor found that the
program increased business ownership in the short-run, and had positive effects on business longevity and
job creation over the full sample period (Benus et al. 2009). Unemployment insurance recipients at
baseline were found to experience larger positive effects. The report concluded "that the benefits of
Project GATE exceed its costs," and "DOL should initiate a new self-employment training program
similar to Project GATE in all states." The Department of Labor recently funded a new round of GATE
programs in three new states and one previous state "because of the success of the original Project
GATE" (U.S. Department of Labor 2010).
However, the final evaluation report made several methodological decisions with which we disagree.
It excludes business partnerships between treatment and control group members (120 members), reports
estimates for several business outcomes that condition on post-treatment ownership status, does not
sufficiently address differential attrition between the treatment and control groups (treated subjects were
4-5 percentage points more likely to complete the follow-up surveys), relies on several estimates that may
suffer from recall bias, and uses a hot-deck procedure to impute missing values for outcome measures.
2

additional heterogeneous treatment effects and their implications for whether and why markets
fail for specific reasons and thereby justify training subsidies.
Our estimates of average treatment effects across the entire sample suggest that GATE had
limited impacts on ultimate outcomes. GATE significantly increased the likelihood of business
ownership at 6-months (5pp on a base of 0.36) but not thereafter. 4 There is a more modest
increase in overall employment at 6-months (3pp), suggesting some substitution between selfemployment and wage/salary employment. We find no evidence, however, of average treatment
effects on other outcomes, including measures of business performance, household income, and
work satisfaction at any horizon (6-, 18-, or 60-months). We also show that the estimates are not
overly sensitive to reasonable assumptions about how attrition affects the composition of the
treatment vs. control groups. Overall, the only significant full-sample average treatment effects,
across a very large number of tests are on 6-month business ownership and 6-month employment
status.
These null effect estimates on more ultimate outcomes are not simply due to a weak
treatment (lack of compliance, quality, intensity, etc.). We find that the GATE assignment to
treatment produced a 136 percent short-term increase and a 45 percent long-term increase in the
amount of training received. Recipients reported the training as useful in follow-up surveys, and
the treatment group was 11-13 percentage points more likely to create a business plan and 2-6
percentage points more likely to start a business than the control group.
We also provide novel results on heterogeneous treatment effects, using these interactions to
shed light on the empirical importance of various rationales offered for training subsidies. Credit
constraints are one rationale offered for training subsidies: if training is valuable but potential
4

The point estimates fall from 5pp at the 6-month follow-up, to 2pp at the 18-month follow-up, to 0-1pp
at the 60-month follow-up.
3

recipients lack the liquidity to pay for it, offering low-cost training may be a cost-effective way
(compared to, say, subsidizing lending) to improve access. Training may also improve access by
providing information, special training, and assistance in finding capital. Labor market
discrimination is a second rationale for training subsidies: if minorities face greater
discrimination from employers than from customers or lenders, then subsidizing training may be
a relatively efficient method of helping minorities overcome barriers to starting businesses and
avoid future discrimination in the labor market. A third rationale for training subsidies is human
and managerial capital constraints: if education or managerial labor markets do not function well,
then low-cost training may improve efficiency or efficiently redistribute to the most-affected
parties. Unemployment insurance frictions are a fourth rationale for training subsidies: training
may be a relatively efficient way to insure against job loss by providing recipients with
incentives to work by creating a job for themselves (and perhaps others).
We do not find evidence supporting the credit constraint, discrimination, and human capital
constraint arguments. We do find limited support for the unemployment insurance friction
hypothesis: the GATE treatment effect on business ownership at 6-months is significantly greater
for those who were initially unemployed compared with those who were employed at baseline.
But, we do not find any other evidence of relatively strong effects for the unemployed, nor do we
find any evidence of lasting effects for the unemployed.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides more details on GATE,
including its research design and implementation, the nature of the training services received by
subjects, and GATE’s average impacts on business planning and starts. Section 3 presents our
results on more ultimate outcomes of interest, distributional effects on business size, compliance
and local average treatment effects, non-experimental estimates, and a bounds analysis

4

addressing differential attrition. This section also presents estimates of heterogeneous treatment
effects to test hypotheses about the (redistributive) efficiency of self-employment training.
Section 4 concludes.

2. The Growing America through Entrepreneurship (Project GATE) Experiment
A. Evaluation and Treatment Design
Growing America through Entrepreneurship (Project GATE) was an evaluation designed and
implemented by the U.S. Department of Labor and U.S. Small Business Association. The GATE
experiment is the largest-ever randomized evaluation of entrepreneurship training and assistance
involving more than four thousand participants. It differs from earlier large-scale evaluations in
the United States because its training was marketed to any individual interested in starting or
growing a business, and not limited to individuals receiving unemployment or welfare benefits.5
GATE was administered between September 2003 and July 2005 in seven cities of varying
sizes: Philadelphia; Pittsburgh; Minneapolis/St. Paul; Duluth, Minnesota; Virginia, Minnesota;
Portland, Maine; Lewiston, Maine; and Bangor, Maine (see Bellotti et al. 2006 for more details).
Both urban and rural populations were served by the sites. Fourteen different organizations
provided the GATE training, including SBA-funded Small Business Development Centers and
non-profit community-based organizations.6 All of the providers and their programs had been

5

Demonstration programs in Washington and Massachusetts starting in 1989, and Self-Employment
Assistance programs in several states starting in 1993, targeted unemployment insurance recipients. The
Self-Employment Investment Demonstration, implemented from 1988 to 1992 in five states, targeted
AFDC recipients.
6
The Aspen Institute lists more than 750 non-profit programs providing training, technical assistance,
and/or loans to entrepreneurs in the United States. SBDCs exist in all 50 states, and more than one million
small businesses and entrepreneurs utilize these resources. The SBA provided $128 million in FY 2009 in
grant funding for these programs.
5

operating prior to the experiment, and thus collectively represent the existing market for
entrepreneurship training in the United States.
Training providers marketed GATE to a broad group of potential entrepreneurs with an
extensive campaign that included public service announcements, paid advertisements, and flyers
and posters at One-Stop Career Centers. Individuals interested in receiving training had to first
attend an orientation meeting at one of the 21 participating One-Stop Career Centers in the seven
GATE cities. Anyone attending the orientation meeting was then eligible to apply for GATE by
completing a nine-page application form with questions on demographics, work and business
experience, and the individual’s current business or new business idea.

Applicants were

informed that “GATE does not have space for everyone” and that a “lottery or random drawing
will decide whether you will be able to enter the program.”
Program coordinators reviewed applications for completeness and then randomly assigned all
complete applications to the treatment or control group with equal probability. The treatment
group was offered an array of free services. Program administrators informed the control group
that the GATE program did not have the capacity to offer them services, and administrators
offered no referrals to other (free) services either. Individuals in both groups were notified that
they would be mailed follow-up surveys in 6, 18, and 60 months.
The array of GATE services offered to the treatment group began with a one-on-one
assessment meeting to determine an individual’s specific training needs. Then training was
provided by experienced business consultants in classroom and/or one-on-one settings.
Classroom offerings targeted a variety of general and specialized topics at different experience

6

levels. 7 One-on-one counseling was designed to provide advice that was customized to the
individual’s experience, capability, circumstances, and opportunities. GATE “training” was
always offered as this bundle/menu of services, and hence we cannot disentangle the effects of
its different components. The total cost of providing training to GATE recipients was estimated
to be $1,321 per person.

B. Sample Characteristics and External Validity
For the study, 4,197 individuals completed the application process and were randomly
assigned to the treatment (N=2,094) or control (N=2,103) group. Among participants, 19 percent
were self-employed and 39 percent were receiving unemployment insurance (U.I.) benefits at the
time of the application. GATE participants do not differ substantially from the U.S. selfemployed population in demographic characteristics such as race, nativity, gender, age, and
education (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2010). Given these characteristics and GATE’s mass
marketing, GATE treatment effects plausibly apply to a broad population of entrepreneurs and
potential entrepreneurs who are interested in training. GATE’s filters, which included attending
the orientation session and completing the application, imply that its external validity is
questionable for populations more marginally interested in training; e.g., for those who would
only participate if some other benefit was conditioned on participation or if particularly
aggressive marketing techniques were employed.
The training and providers in the GATE experiment are representative of the current market
for entrepreneurship training. As noted above, GATE training was provided by 14 different
SBDCs and CBOS, which are the primary providers of subsidized self-employment training in
7

Introductory courses cover subjects such as legal structure, business plans, and marketing. Intermediate
and advanced courses cover subjects including managing growth, legal risks, and personnel issues. More
specialized courses covered, e.g., accounting, information technology, and web-based businesses.
7

the United States. These providers and their programs existed prior to the experiment, and the
sites participating in GATE are located across rural and urban areas (7 cities of varying sizes),
and 3 states.

C. Randomization Integrity and Differential Attrition
Table 1 starts by comparing mean baseline characteristics across the treatment and control
groups. Random assignment was not stratified by site, but each site produced roughly 50-50
assignments nevertheless. Among the numerous baseline characteristics measured in the
application, only one, age, is statistically different between treatment and control. One would
expect to find one or two significant differences by chance, and the magnitude of the age
difference is small (< 1 year). In any case, when estimating treatment effects we present results
both without covariates as well as with controls for a large set of detailed baseline characteristics.
Table 1 also compares treatment and control completion rates and baseline characteristics for
each of the three follow-up surveys. Control group members are significantly more likely to
attrit: the completion rate differs by 4-5 percentage points, on a base of 56-80 percent, for each
follow-up wave. However, despite differential attrition rates overall, we do not find differences
in the observable composition of the treatment versus control groups, based on characteristics
observed in the baseline. The number of significant differences is about what one would expect
to find by chance, and the magnitude of these differences is small. More formally, in a regression
of follow-up survey completion on baseline characteristics, treatment status, and baseline
characteristics interacted with treatment status, the F-tests on the interaction variable coefficients
have p-values of 0.214 for Wave 1, 0.823 for Wave 2, and 0.091 for Wave 3. Despite this

8

reassurance, we investigate how treatment effects might be biased if there is in fact differential
attrition (e.g., on unobservables) in Section 3.F below.

D. Empirical Strategy
Our main specification for estimating average treatment effects uses simple means
comparisons or OLS intent-to-treat estimates, conditional on all of the baseline covariates shown
in Table 1. When estimating heterogeneous treatment effects we add a set of interactions
between baseline covariates and treatment assignment to the model.

E. Treatment Effects on Services Received, Business Planning, and Trying Business Ownership
Given that the control group was not restricted from obtaining training elsewhere, it is
important to examine whether and how the GATE treatment actually changed the use of training
and business planning.
Table 2 shows that the treatment group was an estimated 37 percentage points more likely to
receive any training in the 6 months following random assignment than the control group.8 The
first 6 months after random assignment was the most intensive period for receiving training, with
less training received during the subsequent 12 month period (i.e. between Wave 1 and Wave 2)
and the last 42 month period (i.e. between Wave 2 and Wave 3).
The treatment group also received more than twice the number of hours of training by the
first follow-up wave. The difference in training received is 9 hours at Wave 1 and 8.5 hours

8

Examining who receives entrepreneurship training, we find only a few characteristics that predict takeup of training by each follow-up wave. Focusing on the main effects we find some evidence that African
Americans and the more educated are more likely to receive training (see Appendix Table 1). Examining
differential take up between the treatment and control groups, we find only a few significant differences.
F-tests for differential take up for all covariates do not reject equality in any of the three follow-up waves.
9

summing across waves.9 The extra hours of instructional time are likely to result in substantially
more "homework" time. Consider business planning as an example of one of the main types of
content that is covered in training. Although students learn or receive guidance in the classroom
or one-on-one counseling on how to write a business plan, the actual writing, research and
calculations for the business plan are done elsewhere, and thus not reported as “training” hours
(estimates reported below indicate that the treatment group is much more likely to write a
business plan than the control group). Among those who received any training, the treatment
group received on average 19.2 hours of training in the first 6 months, which is roughly twothirds the instructional time for a 5-unit college course over a quarter.
Follow-up survey responses also indicate that GATE participants were satisfied with services
(Appendix Table 2). 51.7 percent of GATE recipients reported that “the overfull usefulness” of
the services received was “very useful”, with 33.7 percent responding “somewhat useful”. Most
recipients of GATE training responded that services helped “a lot” or “somewhat” with at least
one specific aspect of the business or business planning (e.g., marketing strategy, accounting,
networking, information technology). The treatment group reports greater satisfaction overall,
and for each of the training aspects, than control group trainees (who obtained non-GATE
training of their own accord). These responses, along with the experience, best-practice
approach, and scale of the service providers (e.g. the SBA-funded SBDCs), suggest that any null
effects are not due to low-quality training that is particular to GATE.
Table 3 shows that GATE affected some business planning and practice outcomes as
well. Treated individuals were 13 percentage points more likely to have written a business plan
by Wave 1, and this difference persists over time. This translates, to a relatively small degree,
9

Drexler et al. (2011) find substantial effects on business practices and outcomes from only a few hours
of extra training among microcredit users in the Dominican Republic.
10

into participants trying business ownership: there are significant differences in the likelihood of
of ever having owned a business of 4 and 5 percentage points at the 6- and 18-month follow-ups.
By 60-months the difference shrinks to 2.5 percentage points, with a p-value of 0.135. We do not
find any differences in loan applications, however, on a low base; e.g., only 6 percent of the
treatment and control groups applied for a business loan by Wave 1.

3. Treatment Effects on More Ultimate Outcomes
A. Average Effects on Business Ownership and Performance
We start by examining the average impacts on business ownership at each follow-up wave.
Table 4 reports estimates. For the treatment group, 40.1 percent are self-employed business
owners at the 6-month follow-up survey. This rate of business ownership is 5.2 percentage points
higher (conditional on baseline covariates) than for the control group. At the 18-month followup, the treatment effect point estimate remains positive, but the difference of 2.2 percentage
points is smaller (control group mean = 0.41) and no longer statistically significant. Sixty months
after random assignment, the treatment and control groups have nearly identical levels of
business ownership.10 The positive effects of entrepreneurship training on business ownership
appear to die out over time. 11 Confirming this interpretation, we find a similar decline in
treatment effects over time if we condition the sample in all waves to only those who respond to

10

We also find very similar average total number of businesses owned between the treatment and control
groups over the 60-month sample period.
11
The results are not due to the influence of side or casual businesses, or disguised unemployment (Carter
and Sutch 1994). Defining business ownership with 30 or more hours worked per week, we find lower
rates of business ownership, but similar treatment-control differences: the treatment group has a 4.2
percentage point higher rate of full-time business ownership than the control group at Wave 1, dropping
to 1.8 percentage points at Wave 2, and dropping to essentially zero at Wave 3. We also restrict business
ownership to only include businesses reporting positive sales at each survey wave to remove non-serious
self-employment activities. Again, we find similar results.
11

the Wave 3 survey. Thus, the pattern of estimated effects on business ownership is not due to
changes in sample composition.
Before examining additional outcomes, we briefly examine treatment effects on the dynamics
of business entry and exit in Appendix Table 3. Given that the treatment and control groups start
with roughly equal ownership rates (Table 1), any differences in business ownership rates at each
of the follow-up survey waves are due to differences in business creation rates, differences in
business exit rates, or both.12 The second panel of Appendix Table 3 shows that, conditional on
not owning a business at baseline, treatment group members were far more likely to have started
a business 6 months later. This effect dissipates over time. The third panel of Appendix Table 3
shows that, conditional on owning a business at baseline, we do not find any significant
differences in exit rates. Thus the treatment effect is driven primarily by a difference in business
starts, not exits.
Overall, the estimates indicate that entrepreneurship training increased average levels of
business ownership in the short-run. Entrepreneurship training appears to have drawn new
people into starting businesses but did not increase the survival rates of pre-existing businesses.13
The effects of entrepreneurship training disappear in the long run, however. This implies that
the marginal businesses produced by entrepreneurship training do not survive in the
medium/long-run. 14 Indeed, examining the treatment effects on business sales and hiring

12

See Evans and Leighton (1989), Fairlie (1999), and Carrasco (1999) for more discussion and empirical
estimates of the relationships between self-employment entry, exit and steady-state rates.
13
Using information on start and stop dates for all businesses owned between survey dates, we find no
evidence of treatment effects on total length of time of business ownership. This finding contrasts with
the finding of longer business longevity found in the final evaluation report, however, that estimate of
business survival conditions on the first business started after random assignment (Benus et al. 2009).
14
Treatment effects do not vary with local economic conditions. We estimate specifications that include
the unemployment rate, and treatment interacted with the unemployment rate (with unemployment
varying by MSA and year/month), and find no evidence of heterogeneity conditional on underlying
unemployment in the local economy.
12

employees (Table 4), we find no significant effects, suggesting that the marginal businesses had
low levels of sales and generally did not hire employees.
The positive Wave 1 average treatment effect on short-run business ownership is not
accompanied by positive average treatment effects on business sales or the likelihood of having
an employee. Nor do we find significant treatment effects on sales or employees at longer
horizons. Note that these results do not condition on business ownership, and thus capture the
treatment’s overall impact on sales and hiring employees. The results for employment do not
differ when we change the focus from having an employee to the number of employees
(Appendix Table 4). Results are similar for other measures of business performance such as
profits and a summary index that standardizes and aggregates across several measures of
business size and success (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007). These estimates are also reported in
Appendix Table 4.15

B. Effects on Firm Size Distribution?
Next we explore whether the average treatment effect analysis might obscure important
effects on the firm size distribution. In particular, training may have spurred the creation of a few
very successful businesses which may have in turn led to large local economic impacts. We
focus here on long-run (Wave 3: 60-month) outcomes, for treatment vs. control, and for both all
businesses and businesses started post-treatment.
We start by simply examining the distribution of sales and employment for businesses
created by the treatment and control groups in Table 5 (Columns 2, 3, 5 and 6). We also report
the unconditional distributions for all individuals in the treatment and control groups (Columns 1
and 4), but note that the differences in the distributions between treatment and control groups are
15

The business outcome summary index actually shows a small negative treatment effect in the long-run.
13

similar because the percent of individuals who do not own a business is essentially the same for
the 60-month follow-up. Both the sales and employee distributions show that our sample has
fewer large businesses than the United States as a whole. This is partly due to the five-year study
period: the distributions are more similar when we compare our sample to U.S. businesses
created in the past 5 years (Column 8). Focusing on the treatment vs. control comparisons, we do
not find that businesses created by the treatment group are more likely to be very successful than
businesses created by the control group. In fact, we find that a higher percentage of businesses
owned by the control group have sales of $500,000 or more. The treatment-control difference,
however, is less clear when we focus on other sales level cutoffs or on high levels of
employment. We do not find a significant difference between the full treatment and control
distributions reported in Table 5 using a chi-square test.
To more formally test whether average treatment effects hide important differential effects
across the distribution of sales, we also estimate regressions for the probability of creating
businesses at various cutoffs above $100,000 and 10 employees using the full Wave 3 sample.16
We find no treatment effects at any of these cutoffs (results not reported in tables, but available
upon request). Finally, we estimate quantile regressions for sales and employees starting with the
75th percentile and incrementing up by 5 percentile points to the 95th percentile. Again, we find
no evidence of treatment effects at any of these quantiles. Overall, we do not find evidence that
entrepreneurship training increased the likelihood of creating high-revenue or high-employment
firms five years post-random assignment.

16

For example, the dependent variable equals 1 if the person owns a business with sales of $100,000 or
more and zero otherwise; i.e., the zero group includes non-business owners and low-sales business
owners.
14

C. Average Effects on Earnings from the Business
Although business earnings and income are more difficult to measure precisely, we also
estimate treatment effects on these outcomes. The follow-up surveys provide information on 1)
how much the owner paid him/herself in regular salary from the business, and 2) how much the
owner received in other income payments such as bonuses, profit distributions, or owner's draw
from the business. Information is also available on the start and stop dates of all of the businesses
owned between each survey wave. Although there is a fair amount of missing information, these
measures can be combined to estimate the total earnings and income from all businesses owned
between survey waves.17 Appendix Table 4 reports estimates. We find no evidence of positive
treatment effects. In fact, the point estimates for treatment effects for all three waves are
negative.
Another method for measuring business earnings that reduces problems with missing
values and recall bias is to use only the most recently owned business (including businesses
owned at the survey date). Appendix Table 4 reports estimates. Using this measure we also do
not find any evidence of positive treatment effects.
In contrast to these results, the final evaluation report for Project GATE (Benus et al.
2009) found positive estimates for total business earnings except for Wave 1, and a total
treatment/control difference of $1,128 from combining all waves (although not statistically
significant). The positive benefit/cost conclusion reached in the final evaluation report essentially
hinges on this finding and the finding of 170 more full-time jobs created by the treatment
group.18 Our analysis of the GATE Project data, however, provides no evidence of a positive

17

Among study participants reporting owning a business between survey waves, we find that 16 to 21
percent are missing a value for at least one component needed to calculate total business earnings.
18
The actual estimated benefit/cost to society calculated in the report is $-1,891, but arguments are made
that underreporting of business earnings could make the estimated positive business earnings effect larger,
15

business earnings treatment effect (in fact the point estimates for each wave are negative) or
evidence of positive effects on hiring employees. Although we cannot replicate the analysis
conducted in the report to identify the exact causes of the discrepancy, we suspect that the hotdeck imputations, exclusion of treatment/control partnerships, and sample weighting procedure
are each partly responsible.19

D. Average Effects on Overall Employment, Household Income, and Work Satisfaction
Returning to Table 4, we also estimate treatment effects on broader outcomes: the likelihood
of being employed (wage/salary work or business ownership), household income, and work
satisfaction (which we use as a proxy for potential non-pecuniary benefits of employment or selfemployment). 20 The positive 6-month effect on employment suggests that the business
ownership effect does not fully crowd-out wage/salary work: the two point estimates (on
business ownership, and employment) suggest about 50 percent crowd-out. Similar to the
business ownership effect, the effect on overall employment dissipates over time. For income
and work satisfaction, we do not find significant effects at any horizon.21

and that higher treatment group job creation (which is not included in the calculation) could improve the
final benefit/cost estimate (Benus et al. 2009).
19
The final evaluation report used a hot-deck procedure to impute all missing values for start and stop
dates and earnings from each business owned during the sample period. It also excluded all
treatment/control business partnerships, and used sample weighting procedures to adjust for non-response
to follow-up surveys. In sensitivity analysis presented in an appendix in the report, estimates of treatment
effects on total business earnings over the sample period became noticeably smaller when removing each
of these procedures (which were conducted separately, but not together).
20
See, for example, Hamilton (2000) and Kawaguchi (2004).
21
We also estimate treatment effects on total earnings by combining separately reported business earnings
and wage/salary earnings (as opposed to direct reports of total household income). We do not find any
significant treatment effects on this measure either. Nor do we find any significant effects on reliance on
public assistance.
16

E. Compliance and Local Average Treatment Effects
To gauge how much larger treatment estimates are when estimating the effects of receiving
entrepreneurship training (i.e. “treatment-on-the-treated” or local average treatment effects),
instead of estimating the effects of being offered free entrepreneurship training (i.e. “intent-totreat” effects), we estimate instrumental variables regressions. As reported in Table 2, 18.8
percent of the treatment group did not receive any entrepreneurship training in the first 6 months
after random assignment, and 44.0 percent of the control group received at least some
entrepreneurship training in the 6 months after random assignment. To account for both types of
non-compliance and estimate the effects of receiving entrepreneurship training on business
outcomes, we estimate the following two-stage regression. The first-stage regression for the
probability of receiving any entrepreneurship training is:
(3.1) Ei = ω + γXi + πTi + ui.
The second-stage regression for the outcome of interest, y, is:
෡ i + ε i,
(3.2) yi = α + βXi + ΔE
෡i is the predicted value
where Xi includes baseline characteristics, Ti is the treatment indicator, E
of entrepreneurship training from (3.1), and ui and εi are error terms. Δ provides an estimate of
the local average treatment effect (LATE).
The IV estimates are reported in Appendix Table 5 for the six main outcomes reported in
Table 4. As expected given the non-compliance rates, the point estimates are generally scaled up
by a factor of 2 to 3 over the “intent-to-treat” estimates reported in Table 4. None of our
statistical inferences change. The LATE estimates indicate that receiving entrepreneurship
training increases business ownership by 13.5 percentage points and overall employment by 7
percentage points at Wave 1. There is no strong evidence of effects on long-term business

17

ownership or other outcomes. Because most of the ITT estimates are close to zero the "scaled
up" LATE estimates also tend to be close to zero.
Appendix Table 5 also reports estimates of non-experimental correlations between receiving
entrepreneurship training and our key outcomes, to compare to the LATE estimates. For these
regressions we include only the control group sample, and control for the rich set of baseline
characteristics reported in Table 1. For most of the business outcomes, we find large and positive
significant conditional correlations with entrepreneurship training. These estimates, which may
be subject to selection bias, are substantially larger and more likely to be statistically significant
than the LATE estimates from the experiment. They demonstrate the potential problems with
estimating the effects of entrepreneurship training using non-experimental data. Even with
detailed controls for baseline household income level, self-employment status, health problems,
work experience in a family business, credit history, unemployment insurance receipt, employerprovided health insurance, personality traits, and standard demographic controls, nonexperimental estimates may be strongly upwardly biased.

F. Exploring the Impact of Differential Attrition on the Estimates
Although we do not find strong evidence of differential attrition based on observables in
Section 2.C above, or that treatment effect estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of controls for
baseline characteristics (Table 4), follow-up survey response rates are higher in the treatment
group for each of the follow-up waves, raising the concern that attrition may be correlated with
unobserved heterogeneity in outcomes as well. To investigate whether differential attrition might
have a large effect on the results we follow two different approaches. First, we estimate
regressions for our main set of outcomes using the predicted probability of attrition as a sample
weight. The full set of baseline controls are used to estimate these predicted probabilities. This
18

technique places more weight on survivors who look like attriters, in an attempt to compensate
for the attriters’ absence. The estimates are robust to using these weights (Table 6 vs. Table 4).
Second, we conduct a bounds analysis using various assumptions about the treatment effects
for attriters, in the spirit of Horowitz and Manski (2000) and Lee (2002; 2009). Table 7’s
Column 4 reproduces the relevant average treatment effect estimate from Table 4. Following
Kling et al. (2007) and Karlan and Valdivia (2011), we impute to the lower (upper) bound the
mean minus (plus) a specified standard deviation multiple of the observed treatment group
distribution to the non-responders in the treatment group, and the mean plus (minus) the same
standard deviation multiple of the observed control group distribution to non-responders in the
control group. In Column 3, for example, we create a conservative treatment effect estimate by
assuming that treatment group attriters have the mean value for the dependent variable minus
0.05 standard deviations among non-attriting treatment observations, and that the control group
attriters have the mean value for the dependent variable plus 0.05 standard deviations among the
non-attriting control observations.
Table 7 indicates that the results are not overly sensitive to adding and subtracting 0.05
standard deviations from the means, but are sensitive to moving 0.25 standard deviations from
the means (Columns 1 and 7). To put the magnitudes of these changes in perspective, Table 7
also reports the treatment and control standard deviations in Columns 8 and 9, respectively (the
treatment and control means are reported in Table 4). For business ownership at Wave 1, for
example, the -0.05 adjustment reported in Column 4 assumes that the attriting treatment group
has a 2.5 percentage point lower business ownership rate than the non-attriting treatment sample
and that the attriting control group has a 2.4 percentage point higher business ownership rate than

19

the non-attriting control sample. These are large changes from a base business ownership rate of
roughly 35 to 40 percent and yet do not result in major changes in the results.22
If we focus on the disappearance of the 5 percentage point short-run treatment effect by the
60 month follow-up survey, we find it would take an extreme form of biased attrition to
regenerate the treatment effect in the long run. For the treatment effect to be 5 percentage points
at the 60-month follow-up it would require that the attritors in the treatment group have more
than a 0.10 standard deviation higher business ownership rate than non-attritors and attritors in
the control group have more than a 0.10 standard deviation lower business ownership rate than
non-attritors.
Columns 5-7 of Table 7 also show the particular and strong form that attrition would need to
take to create positive effects on outcomes other than short-run business ownership and
employment. It would have to be the case that treatment group attritors have substantially more
positive treatment effects, and/or that control group attritors have substantially more negative
treatment effects, than non-attritors. In all, the results in Tables 6 and 7 suggest that attrition
would have to be particularly strongly correlated with treatment effects to change inferences
based on our main results.

G. Hypothesis Testing Based on Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
To shed light on various rationales for training subsidies, we next explore heterogeneous
treatment effects in the data. We estimate these effects by adding several interactions between
key baseline characteristics and treatment status to our model of conditional average treatment
effects (i.e., we estimate each heterogeneous effect of interest conditional on the others). Table

22

We also estimate bounds using the trimming procedure suggested in Lee (2002, 2009). The estimated
range is similar to that reported for 0.10 standard deviations for most outcome measures.
20

8A reports estimates for our main outcomes. Each row presents results from a single regression.
We also estimate average treatment effects on sub-samples of key groups to address the policy
question of whether training benefits targeted groups in levels if not relative terms (Table 8B).
Credit/liquidity constraints are one important rationale for training subsidies: constraints may
prevent potential entrepreneurs from obtaining training, even if training is valuable. 23
Alternatively, or possibly additionally, training may help recipients relax liquidity constraints by
helping them find alternative sources of financing (e.g., microlenders, SBA lenders, Community
Development Financial Institutions, etc.) and navigate application processes. Part of the
coursework and counseling in entrepreneurship training is devoted to providing information and
assistance in finding capital. If either of these mechanisms is in play, then we might expect
subsidized training to have (relatively) strong, positive effects on the credit constrained,
conditional on other characteristics.
Our measure of baseline credit constraints comes from the application question: “Do you
have any problems with your credit history?” We construct a dummy that takes a value of 1 for
the 44 percent of the sample that responded “yes”, and either interact this dummy with treatment
status (Table 8A, Column 2) or limit the sample to those with credit problems (Table 8B,
Column 1). We do not find evidence that training has positive effects on the credit constrained:
across the two tables we find only one significant point estimate out of 36 (for business
ownership in Wave 1). We also estimate whether entrepreneurship training differentially affects
the level of invested capital in the business for those with credit problems. We do not find any
evidence that training affects investment, debt, or loan applications, overall or differentially for
the credit constrained (results not shown in tables).
23

See Parker (2009) and Kerr and Nanda (2011) for recent reviews of the literature on credit constraints
for entrepreneurs.
21

Labor market discrimination is another potential rationale for training subsidies: if employers
discriminate more than customers, then low-cost training may be a relatively efficient method for
redistributing to affected groups. 24 Entrepreneurship training may allow minority and female
entrepreneurs to overcome other barriers to starting businesses and get a foothold in business
ownership, where discrimination limiting future success might be less than in the labor market.
We include interactions for minority and female in Table 8A, Columns 3 and 4, and estimate
separate regressions for minority and female subsamples in Table 8B, Columns 2 and 3. We do
not find evidence that training has relatively strong or lasting effects for minorities or women. In
fact, treatment effects on business ownership are significantly lower for women at 6- and 18months, producing main effects on business ownership for the female sub-sample that are not
statistically significant (Table 8B, Column 3).
Human and managerial capital constraints are another important rationale for training
subsidies: if education or managerial labor markets do not function well, then subsidizing
training may improve efficiency or efficiently redistribute to the most-affected parties. Selfemployment training may be especially helpful to those lacking the main human capital factors
found to be associated with business success in the previous literature: education, previous
managerial experience, and previous experience working in a family business. 25 However,
estimates reported in Table 8A, Columns 5-7 and Table 8B, Columns 4-6, do not provide
evidence that training has relatively lasting or strong effects on those with less education, less
previous managerial experience, or less experience working in a family business.

24

See Borjas and Bronars (1989) and Fairlie and Robb (2008) for a discussion of customer and other
forms of discrimination against minority business owners, and Altonji and Blank (1999) for a review of
the larger literature on racial and gender discrimination in the labor market.
25
See Parker (2009), Fairlie and Robb (2008), and van Praag (2005) for reviews of this literature.
22

Unemployment insurance frictions are perhaps the most important, or at least most
commonly invoked, rationale for training subsidies. Entrepreneurship training may be a
relatively efficient way to insure against job loss by providing recipients with incentives to work
by creating a job for themselves (and perhaps others).26 We test this by interacting treatment
status with a measure of initial unemployment. We find that those who were initially
unemployed are more likely to have a business at the 6-month follow-up (Table 8A, Column 8
and Table 8B, Column 7). This effect disappears at later follow-ups, however: we find no effects
in the longer-run. Nor do we find any other evidence of strong or lasting effects for the
unemployed, in either relative (Table 8A) or absolute (Table 8B) terms. The results for the
unemployed do not change if we drop those who were business owners at baseline and examine
treatment effects relative to only those who were wage/salary workers.27

4. Conclusion
Although a substantial amount of money is spent on subsidizing entrepreneurship training
around the world, we know very little about its effectiveness and whether it alleviates market
frictions. We provide new estimates on the average and heterogeneous treatment effects of
26

Another explanation for why the unemployed may benefit more from job training is that they have
more time to devote to it. But we do not find any evidence that the unemployed (at baseline) receive more
or different training.
27
We define the unemployed to include anyone who is not working in a wage/salary job or self-employed
at the time of application. Participating in the GATE program implies some level of interest in work, and
our definition facilitates a straightforward classification of the sample into the two main categories of
unemployment and employment (i.e. wage/salary work or self-employment). We find similar results
when using alternative definitions of unemployment. First, we estimate both sets of regressions using UI
recipients (which was used in the final evaluation report, Benus et al. 2009). Second, we estimate
regressions using a slightly more restrictive definition of unemployment to include only those "looking
for work" at the time of application. This is the definition used in Benus and Michaelides (2010), which
builds on the final evaluation report by shifting the focus from U.I. recipients to the unemployed. They
find stronger positive estimates of treatment effects for the unemployed than those reported for U.I.
recipients in the final evaluation report. Under any and all definitions, we find positive effects on business
ownership in the short-run, but no effects on any outcomes in the long run.
23

entrepreneurship training from Project GATE, the largest and broadest entrepreneurship training
experiment ever conducted. We find evidence that the training increased average business
ownership in the short-run, but that the marginal businesses were unsuccessful and failed to
produce tangible or subjective benefits at any of the three follow-up horizons (6-, 18-, and 60months). We also find no evidence that training shifts the distribution of firms in important ways
(e.g., by disproportionately creating very successful firms) that might be missed by analysis of
average treatment effects. Although we find higher attrition among the control group, bounds
analyses confirm that only extreme forms of biased attrition would change these results.
Our analysis of treatment heterogeneity produces some novel insights about the theory and
design of training interventions. Many of the rationales put forward for subsidizing training—
countering credit or human capital constraints in enterprise development, or labor market
discrimination—are not borne out by the data. We do find evidence that GATE’s training had
relatively strong positive effects on business ownership for the unemployed in the short run, but
these effects disappear by the long run.
In all, the absence of positive treatment effects across numerous measures of business
ownership, business performance and broader outcomes, and the estimated $1,321 per-recipient
cost of providing GATE training, suggests that entrepreneurship training may not be a costeffective method of addressing credit, human capital, discrimination, or social insurance
constraints. This conclusion contrasts with the positive benefit/cost conclusion reached in the
final evaluation report submitted to DOL, and with similarly positive arguments proffered by
advocates of state-level programs.28

28

E.g., the New York Senate (2011) justified extending the SEA program by stating that it "has been extremely
successful in helping individuals who are likely to exhaust their regular unemployment insurance benefits to develop
and establish small businesses in New York…The success of this program is evident. Over 4,000 jobs have been
created and $16 million in state tax revenue has been generated at no cost to the state."

24

Our results also speak to the importance of understanding which components of training are
more and less helpful, and for which populations. Should subsidies for entrepreneurship training
be re-allocated to job training? Should content from entrepreneurship training be grafted onto job
training? Are there groups thus far not identified for whom entrepreneurship training may be
beneficial in the longer run?
Understanding more about the effects and mechanisms of entrepreneurship training is
particularly important given the continued growth and popularity of these programs around the
world. Many financial institutions with a social aim now bundle business training with their
loans. As noted above, the Department of Labor recently funded a new round of GATE programs
in four additional states based on the findings from the GATE Project, and President Obama
recently signed the Small Business Jobs Act which expands funding to SBDCs throughout the
country. Individual states also continue to extend Self-Employment Assistance (SEA) programs
that were originally authorized by Congress in 1993 and made permanent in 1997.

25

References
Almeida, Rita K., and Emanuela Galasso. 2010. “Jump‐starting Self‐employment? Evidence for Welfare
Participants in Argentina.” World Development 38 (5): 742–755.
Altonji, Joseph, and Rebecca Blank. 1999. “Race and Gender in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3C. New York, NY: Elsevier.
Benus, Jacob, Terry R. Johnson, Michelle Wood, Noelima Grover, and Theodore Shen. 1994. Self‐
Employment Programs: A New Reemployment Strategy (Final Impact Analysis of the Washington
and Massachusetts Self‐Employment Demonstrations).
Benus, Jacob, Theodore Shen, Sisi Zhang, Mark Chan, and Benjamin Hansen. 2009. Growing America
Through Entrepreneurship: Final Evaluation of Project GATE.
Berge, Lars, Kjetil Bjorvatn, and Bertil Tungooden. 2011. “Human and Financial Capital for
Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field and Lab Experiment.”
Borjas, George, and Stephen Bronars. 1989. “Consumer Discrimination and Self‐Employment,” Journal of
Political Economy 97: 581–605.
Carter, Susan B., and Richard Sutch. 1994. “Self‐employment in the Age of Big Business: Toward an
Appreciation of an American Labor Market Institution.”
Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer, and Antoinette Schoar. 2011. “Keeping It Simple: Financial Literacy and
Rules of Thumb.”
European Commission. 2010. European Employment Observatory Review: Self‐employment in Europe.
Fairlie, Robert, and Alicia Robb. 2008. Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black‐, Asian‐, and White‐
Owned Businesses in the United States. Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.
Field, Erica, Seema Jaychandran, and Rohini Pande. 2010. “Do Traditional Institutions Constrain Female
Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India.” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 100 (2): 125–129.
Gine, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on Constraints to
Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan.”
Hamilton, Bart. 2000. “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to Self‐
Employment.” Journal of Political Economy 108: 604–631.
Horowitz, Joel, and Charles Manski. 2000. “Nonparametric Analysis of Randomized Experiments with
Missing Covariate and Outcome Data.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 95 (449):
77–84.
Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. 2012. “Hoping to Win, Expecting to Lose: Theory and
Lessons on Micro Enterprise Development”. Yale University.
Karlan, Dean, and Martin Valdivia. 2011. “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of Business Training on
Microfinance Clients and Institutions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2): 510–527.
Kawaguchi, Daiji. 2004. “Positive, Non‐Earnings Aspects of Self‐Employment: Evidence from Job
Satisfaction Scores.”
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1) (January): 83–120.
Kosanovich, William T., and Heather Fleck. 2001. Final Report: Comprehensive Assessment of Self‐
employment Assistance Programs.
Lee, David S. 2002. “Trimming for Bounds on Treatment Effects with Missing Outcomes.” NBER Technical
Working Paper 277.
26

———. 2009. “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment Effects.”
Review of Economic Studies 76: 1071–1102.
Oosterbeek, Hessel, Mirjam van Praag, and Auke Ijsselstein. 2010. “The Impact of Entrepreneurship
Education on Entrepreneurship Skills and Motivation.” European Economic Review 54: 442–454.
Rodriguez‐Planas, Nuria. 2010. “Channels Through Which Public Employment Services and Small
Business Assistance Programmes Work.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 72 (4): 458–
485.

27

Table 1: Treatment/Control Comparison of Characteristics for GATE Experiment

Baseline
Treatment
Group
Philadelphia
Pittsburgh
Minneapolis-St. Paul
Duluth
Maine
Female
Black
Latino
Asian
Other
Not U.S. born
Age
Married
Has children
Highest grade completed
HH Income $25,000-49,999
HH Income $50,000-74,999
HH Income $75,000-99,999
HH Income $100,000+
Self-Emp. at appplication
Has a health problem
Has relatives or friends who
have been previously S.E.
Ever worked for relatives or
friends who are S.E.
Has a bad credit history
Currently receiving UI benefits
Has health insurance from
current employer
Autonomy index
Risk tolerance index
Unemployed at application
F-Test for all variables
Sample Size
Percent of baseline sample size

Control
Group

Follow-up Wave 1
Follow-up Wave 2
Follow-up Wave 3
P-Value
P-Value
P-Value
P-Value
for Treat- Treatment Control for Treat- Treatment Control for Treat- Treatment Control for TreatControl
Group
Group
Control
Group
Group
Control
Group
Group
Control

(1)

(2)

(4)

(5)

(7)

(8)

28.7%
13.8%
39.8%
4.6%
13.1%
47.2%
30.5%
6.2%
4.6%
7.9%
10.0%
42.08
48.1%
46.7%
14.39
32.6%
17.9%
6.9%
6.3%
18.3%
8.7%

27.5%
14.6%
39.0%
5.0%
13.9%
45.7%
30.6%
5.1%
4.5%
8.1%
10.2%
42.77
48.4%
46.1%
14.52
33.7%
17.2%
7.2%
7.0%
19.5%
8.3%

(3)
0.40
0.43
0.58
0.54
0.48
0.32
0.91
0.12
0.86
0.80
0.83
0.03
0.81
0.68
0.07
0.46
0.55
0.70
0.31
0.33
0.63

26.8%
13.7%
41.1%
4.6%
13.9%
48.5%
29.1%
6.3%
3.8%
7.7%
8.9%
42.73
49.4%
45.4%
14.53
33.0%
18.5%
7.1%
6.9%
19.3%
9.0%

25.6%
14.3%
39.1%
5.1%
15.9%
46.4%
29.8%
4.9%
3.3%
7.6%
9.2%
43.42
48.6%
45.1%
14.61
34.0%
17.5%
7.2%
7.4%
20.4%
8.9%

(6)
0.43
0.58
0.24
0.51
0.09
0.22
0.65
0.09
0.42
0.91
0.81
0.04
0.64
0.88
0.28
0.56
0.45
0.91
0.56
0.41
0.90

25.1%
14.0%
42.3%
4.7%
14.0%
48.8%
27.6%
6.4%
3.3%
7.4%
8.3%
43.16
50.2%
45.4%
14.59
32.9%
19.2%
7.4%
7.5%
19.8%
9.1%

24.0%
14.2%
40.4%
5.1%
16.3%
46.9%
28.3%
5.1%
2.9%
7.0%
8.7%
43.81
49.0%
44.6%
14.66
33.4%
17.8%
7.3%
8.0%
21.2%
8.9%

0.49
0.82
0.29
0.60
0.08
0.31
0.69
0.12
0.52
0.64
0.67
0.07
0.54
0.69
0.38
0.77
0.31
0.92
0.59
0.34
0.85

23.1%
14.5%
43.9%
5.0%
13.6%
48.1%
25.3%
6.4%
3.1%
7.4%
7.1%
43.91
51.4%
44.0%
14.75
31.9%
20.1%
8.1%
8.8%
20.3%
8.9%

22.0%
14.4%
42.0%
4.9%
16.7%
47.1%
26.0%
5.2%
2.8%
6.6%
8.1%
44.16
49.6%
42.8%
14.78
34.5%
17.2%
7.4%
8.9%
21.5%
8.4%

0.53
0.92
0.35
0.99
0.03
0.62
0.70
0.19
0.71
0.47
0.34
0.54
0.38
0.58
0.77
0.18
0.06
0.53
0.96
0.48
0.69

70.3%

70.4%

0.93

71.7%

72.0%

0.85

72.9%

72.5%

0.81

73.6%

73.1%

0.78

31.7%
45.4%
39.9%

32.0%
43.9%
38.1%

0.81
0.34
0.24

31.7%
43.3%
41.1%

31.8%
43.2%
39.7%

0.96
0.94
0.40

31.6%
41.8%
42.1%

31.7%
41.5%
39.3%

0.97
0.87
0.12

30.9%
38.9%
43.0%

31.5%
39.4%
41.1%

0.77
0.79
0.35

16.8%
1.7%
-0.2%
55.3%

18.1%
-1.7%
0.2%
55.4%

0.26
0.27
0.87
0.92
0.56

16.6%
-1.1%
2.6%
55.0%

17.5%
-1.9%
-1.1%
55.5%

0.48
0.81
0.27
0.78
0.53

16.6%
-0.7%
1.3%
55.5%

17.6%
-1.7%
-2.0%
54.6%

0.46
0.79
0.34
0.63
0.69

16.8%
-2.0%
-0.7%
55.8%

17.1%
-4.9%
-4.4%
55.4%

0.84
0.49
0.35
0.85
0.80

2,094
100.0%

2,103
100.0%

1,758
84.0%

1,691
80.4%

1,563
74.6%

1,475
70.1%

1,274
60.8%

1,176
55.9%

0.003

(9)

0.001

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.001

Notes: (1) All reported characteristics are measured at time of application, prior to random assignment. (2) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted
at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of application.

28

Table 2: Receipt of Entrepreneurship Training
R.A. to Wave 1
(6 month period)
Percent
Mean
Receiving Hours
(1)
(2)
Treatment group
Any entrepreneurship training
Attended classes, workshops or seminars
Received one‐on‐one counseling or technical assistance

81.2%
66.8%
52.5%

15.6
13.8
1.8

Wave 1 to Wave 2 Wave 2 to Wave 3
(12 month period) (42 month period)
Percent
Mean
Percent
Mean
Receiving Hours Receiving Hours
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
41.5%
35.0%
18.0%

7.3
6.6
0.8

26.1%
22.1%
10.0%

Control group
Any entrepreneurship training
44.0%
6.6
37.9%
6.7
28.7%
Attended classes, workshops or seminars
37.7%
5.8
32.7%
6.1
25.1%
Received one‐on‐one counseling or technical assistance
19.2%
0.9
13.8%
0.7
10.3%
Notes: (1)The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of application.

29

4.6
4.0
0.6

5.7
5.2
0.6

Table 3: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Business Practices

Dependent Variable
Wrote a business plan by W1

Treatment
(1)
0.5000

N
(2)
1752

Control
(3)
0.3725

N
(4)
1686

Wrote a business plan by W2

0.5974

1555

0.4666

1468

Wrote a business plan by W3

0.6761

1266

0.5662

1171

Applied for a business loan by
W1
Applied for a business loan by
W2
Applied for a business loan by
W3
Ever been or tried business
ownership after exp. by W1
Ever been or tried business
ownership after exp. by W2
Ever been or tried business
ownership after exp. by W3

0.0592

1756

0.0627

1691

0.0962

1560

0.0916

1473

0.1457

1270

0.1549

1175

0.6285

1755

0.5853

1688

0.7458

1562

0.6918

1473

0.8028

1273

0.7749

1173

Treatment‐Control
No Covars Covariates
(5)
(6)
0.1275
0.1276
(0.0168) (0.0172)
0.1308
0.1296
(0.0180) (0.0185)
0.1100
0.1108
(0.0196) (0.0200)
‐0.0035
‐0.0035
(0.0082) (0.0084)
0.0045
0.0008
(0.0106) (0.0109)
‐0.0092
‐0.0152
(0.0145) (0.0150)
0.0432
0.0458
(0.0166) (0.0162)
0.0541
0.0582
(0.0163) (0.0161)
0.0279
0.0247
(0.0165) (0.0165)

Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time
of application. (2) Treatment‐contol differences with covarariates are estimated from a linear
probability model that controls for program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in
family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health
insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance.

30

Table 4: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Business Ownership and Main Outcomes

Treatment
Dependent Variable
(1)
0.4056
Business owner at W1 survey
date
0.4307
Business owner at W2 survey
date
0.3888
Business owner at W3 survey
date
0.7856
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W1 survey date
0.8449
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W2 survey date
0.7834
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W3 survey date
1.4225
Monthly business sales at W1
survey date (000s)
1.9471
Monthly business sales at W2
survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at W3
2.4138
survey date (000s)
Has any employees at W1
0.0852
survey date
Has any employees at W2
0.0978
survey date
0.0931
Has any employees at W3
survey date
10.2821
Log household income at W1

N
(2)
1753

Control
(3)
0.3592

N
(4)
1690

1558

0.4091

1474

1273

0.3794

1173

1754

0.7604

1690

1560

0.8243

1474

1274

0.7993

1171

1631

1.8288

1579

1447

2.1327

1347

1212

2.9092

1111

1748

0.0722

1690

1554

0.0939

1469

1267

0.1104

1169

1648

10.3061

1575

Log household income at W2

10.4061

1438

10.3708

1359

Log household income at W3

10.5558

1178

10.5018

1092

Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W1
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W2
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W3

0.5167

1732

0.5170

1677

0.4938

1541

0.4893

1451

0.5136

993

0.5038

931

Treatment‐Control
No Covars Covariates
(5)
(6)
0.0464
0.0517
(0.0166) (0.0153)
0.0216
0.0208
(0.0179) (0.0172)
0.0095
0.0025
(0.0197) (0.0194)
0.0253
0.0271
(0.0143) (0.0139)
0.0206
0.0194
(0.0135) (0.0132)
‐0.0160 ‐0.0189
(0.0164) (0.0161)
‐0.4063 ‐0.3691
(0.2821) (0.2880)
‐0.1856 ‐0.1396
(0.3534) (0.3528)
‐0.4954 ‐0.6204
(0.5385) (0.5563)
0.0131
0.0140
(0.0092) (0.0095)
0.0039
0.0020
(0.0107) (0.0110)
‐0.0172 ‐0.0209
(0.0123) (0.0128)
‐0.0239 ‐0.0088
(0.0319) (0.0251)
0.0353
0.0195
(0.0357) (0.0293)
0.0541
0.0217
(0.0415) (0.0353)
‐0.0003
0.0060
(0.0171) (0.0176)
0.0045
0.0092
(0.0183) (0.0188)
0.0098
0.0117
(0.0228) (0.0236)

Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time
of application. (2) Treatment‐contol differences with covarariates are estimated from a linear
probability model that controls for program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in
family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health
insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance. (3) The Wave 3 sample for work satisfaction is restricted
to include only the employed.

31

Table 5: Distribution of Businesses by Annual Sales and Number of Employees at Wave 3, Treatment Group, Control
Group and U.S. Total
Treatment Group
Control Group
U.S. Firms SBO (2007)
All
All
New
All
All
New
Started
Individuals Businesses Businesses Individuals Businesses Businesses Total
2002‐07
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Annual sales and receipts
No business
Less than $5,000
$5,000 to $9,999
$10,000 to $24,999
$25,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $249,999
$250,000 to $499,999
$500,000 to $999,999
$1,000,000 or more

61.1%
9.7%
3.8%
6.5%
6.7%
5.6%
4.5%
1.5%
0.4%
0.4%

N/A
24.9%
9.7%
16.6%
17.3%
14.3%
11.5%
3.9%
0.9%
0.9%

N/A
26.6%
10.1%
13.0%
18.0%
12.6%
13.0%
4.7%
1.1%
1.1%

62.1%
8.9%
5.0%
6.8%
4.6%
5.7%
3.8%
1.6%
0.7%
0.9%

N/A
23.5%
13.1%
18.0%
12.0%
15.1%
9.9%
4.2%
1.8%
2.4%

N/A
23.5%
12.8%
17.5%
13.7%
14.1%
11.1%
3.4%
1.7%
2.1%

N/A
20.6%
13.7%
18.8%
12.1%
9.9%
10.2%
5.5%
4.0%
5.2%

N/A
22.4%
13.8%
18.6%
12.9%
10.7%
10.6%
5.0%
3.2%
3.0%

Employment size
No business
No employees
1 to 4 employees
5 to 9 employees
10 to 19 employees
20 to 49 employees
50 to 99 employees
100 employees or more

61.1%
29.5%
7.2%
1.2%
0.6%
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%

N/A
75.9%
18.6%
3.1%
1.6%
0.6%
0.2%
0.0%

N/A
74.0%
20.0%
3.8%
1.6%
0.6%
0.0%
0.0%

62.1%
26.8%
8.6%
1.3%
0.7%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%

N/A
70.8%
22.7%
3.4%
1.8%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%

N/A
72.2%
22.0%
2.2%
2.2%
0.4%
0.7%
0.4%

N/A
81.1%
10.6%
3.7%
2.3%
1.4%
0.5%
0.4%

N/A
85.0%
10.0%
2.6%
1.4%
0.8%
0.2%
0.1%

1116

434

278

1009

383

234

Sample size

Notes: (1) U.S. total is from the Survey of Business Owners 2007, U.S. Census Bureau, and includes all non‐farm
businesses with sales of at least $1,000 in 2007. (2) New businesses are individuals who did not own a business at the
time of application to the program.

32

Table 6: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Main Outcomes Weighted by
Predicted Non‐Response Probabilities

Dependent Variable
Business owner at W1 survey date
Business owner at W2 survey date
Business owner at W3 survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary) at W1
survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary) at W2
survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary) at W3
survey date
Monthly business sales at W1 survey date
Monthly business sales at W2 survey date
Monthly business sales at W3 survey date
Has any employees at W1 survey date
Has any employees at W2 survey date
Has any employees at W3 survey date
Log household income at W1
Log household income at W2
Log household income at W3
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at W1
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at W2
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at W3

Treatment‐Control Difference
No Covars
Covariates
(1)
(2)
0.0363
0.0442
(0.0182)
(0.0165)
0.0116
0.0208
(0.0197)
(0.0183)
‐0.0147
‐0.0143
(0.0216)
(0.0208)
0.0199
0.0213
(0.0170)
(0.0161)
0.0192
0.0188
(0.0162)
(0.0153)
‐0.0217
‐0.0223
(0.0189)
(0.0180)
‐566
‐490
(328)
(313)
‐177
‐121
(362)
(358)
‐667
‐633
(527)
(514)
0.0087
0.0102
(0.0100)
(0.0098)
‐0.0001
0.0002
(0.0118)
(0.0114)
‐0.0172
‐0.0190
(0.0140)
(0.0139)
‐0.0156
0.0001
(0.0367)
(0.0291)
0.0310
0.0169
(0.0393)
(0.0327)
0.0608
0.0360
(0.0453)
(0.0391)
‐0.0069
‐0.0028
(0.0198)
(0.0196)
0.0045
0.0076
(0.0206)
(0.0205)
0.0207
0.0159
(0.0247)
(0.0247)

Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60
months after time of application. (2) Treatment‐contol differences with
covarariates are estimated from a linear probability model that controls for
program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children, education level,
household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in
family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer
provided health insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance. (3) Sample weights
used to estimate treatment‐control differences are predicted probabilities of
non‐response in specified wave from first‐stage regression using all covariates.

33

Table 7: Entrepreneurship Training Impact Estimates ‐ Bounds Analysis

Dependent Variable
Business owner at W1 survey
date
Business owner at W2 survey
date
Business owner at W3 survey
date
Employed at W1 survey date
Employed at W2 survey date
Employed at W3 survey date
Monthly business sales at
W1 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W2 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W3 survey date (000s)
Has any employees at W1
survey date
Has any employees at W2
survey date
Has any employees at W3
survey date
Log household income at W1
Log household income at W2
Log household income at W3
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W1
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W2
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W3

‐0.25 std.
(1)
0.0084
(0.0129)
‐0.0461
(0.0128)
‐0.0937
(0.0117)
‐0.0088
(0.0116)
‐0.0297
(0.0097)
‐0.1014
(0.0097)
‐1.3027
(0.2216)
‐1.6926
(0.2370)
‐3.3971
(0.3170)
‐0.0098
(0.0078)
‐0.0377
(0.0080)
‐0.0813
(0.0076)
‐0.1060
(0.0210)
‐0.1124
(0.0213)
‐0.1673
(0.0211)
‐0.0427
(0.0144)
‐0.0635
(0.0136)
‐0.1223
(0.0110)

Lower Bounds
‐0.10 std. ‐0.05 std.
(2)
(3)
0.0346
0.0433
(0.0128)
(0.0128)
‐0.0051
0.0085
(0.0127)
(0.0127)
‐0.0331
‐0.0129
(0.0116)
(0.0116)
0.0137
0.0213
(0.0115)
(0.0115)
0.0011
0.0114
(0.0096)
(0.0096)
‐0.0508
‐0.0339
(0.0096)
(0.0096)
‐0.7411
‐0.5538
(0.2201)
(0.2199)
‐0.7548
‐0.4421
(0.2347)
(0.2344)
‐1.6728
‐1.0980
(0.3135)
(0.3131)
0.0047
0.0095
(0.0078)
(0.0078)
‐0.0131
‐0.0049
(0.0079)
(0.0079)
‐0.0434
‐0.0307
(0.0075)
(0.0075)
‐0.0431
‐0.0221
(0.0208)
(0.0207)
‐0.0184
0.0129
(0.0211)
(0.0210)
0.0133
‐0.0318
(0.0208)
(0.0208)
‐0.0146
‐0.0053
(0.0144)
(0.0143)
‐0.0206
‐0.0063
(0.0135)
(0.0135)
‐0.0415
‐0.0145
(0.0109)
(0.0109)

Upper Bounds
Standard Deviation
Unadj. +0.05 std. +0.10 std. +0.25 std. Treatment Control
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.0517
0.0607
0.0694
0.0955
0.4911
0.4799
(0.0153) (0.0128) (0.0128) (0.0129)
0.0208
0.0358
0.0495
0.0904
0.4953
0.4918
(0.0172) (0.0127) (0.0127) (0.0128)
0.0025
0.0275
0.0477
0.1083
0.4877
0.4854
(0.0194) (0.0116) (0.0116) (0.0117)
0.0271
0.0363
0.0438
0.0664
0.4105
0.4270
(0.0139) (0.0115) (0.0115) (0.0116)
0.0194
0.0320
0.0422
0.0730
0.3621
0.3807
(0.0132) (0.0096) (0.0096) (0.0097)
‐0.0189 ‐0.0002
0.0167
0.0672
0.4121
0.4007
(0.0161) (0.0096) (0.0096) (0.0098)
‐0.3691 ‐0.1794
0.0078
0.5695
6.5686
9.1599
(0.2880) (0.2199) (0.2201) (0.2215)
‐0.1396
0.1831
0.4957
1.4336
8.8079
9.7962
(0.3528) (0.2344) (0.2347) (0.2369)
‐0.6204
0.0515
0.6263
2.3506
11.9129 13.8608
(0.5563) (0.3131) (0.3137) (0.3173)
0.0140
0.0192
0.0241
0.0386
0.2793
0.2589
(0.0095) (0.0078) (0.0078) (0.0078)
0.0020
0.0115
0.0197
0.0444
0.2972
0.2918
(0.0110) (0.0079) (0.0079) (0.0080)
‐0.0209 ‐0.0054
0.0072
0.0452
0.2907
0.3135
(0.0128) (0.0075) (0.0075) (0.0076)
‐0.0088
0.0199
0.0409
0.1038
0.8992
0.9111
(0.0251) (0.0207) (0.0208) (0.0210)
0.0195
0.0755
0.1069
0.2008
0.9425
0.9434
(0.0293) (0.0210) (0.0211) (0.0214)
0.0217
0.1037
0.1488
0.2843
0.9596
1.0113
(0.0353) (0.0208) (0.0209) (0.0212)
0.0060
0.0135
0.0228
0.0509
0.4999
0.4999
(0.0177) (0.0143) (0.0144) (0.0144)
0.0092
0.0223
0.0366
0.0795
0.5001
0.5001
(0.0188) (0.0135) (0.0135) (0.0136)
0.0117
0.0394
0.0663
0.1472
0.5001
0.5003
(0.0236) (0.0109) (0.0109) (0.0110)

Notes: (1) See Table 4 for sample sizes. (2) Columns (1) and (7) impute to the lower (upper) bound the mean minus (plus) 0.25
standard deviations of the observed treatment distribution to the non‐responders in the treatment group and the mean plus
(minus) 0.25 standard deviations of the observed control distribution to non‐responders in the control group. Columns (2, 3, 5,
and 6) repeat the exercise subtracting and adding the specified standard deviations. Column 4 (unadjusted) reproduces the
estimates reported in Table 4.

34

Table 8A: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Baseline Characteristics
Credit Constraints

Dependent Variable
Business owner at W1
survey date
Business owner at W2
survey date
Business owner at W3
survey date
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W1 survey
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W2 survey
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W3 survey
Monthly business sales at
W1 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W2 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W3 survey date (000s)
Has any employees at W1
survey date
Has any employees at W2
survey date
Has any employees at W3
survey date
Log household income at
W1
Log household income at
W2
Log household income at
W3
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W1
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W2
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W3

Main
Treatment
(1)
0.0678
(0.0413)
0.0374
(0.0465)
0.0579
(0.0518)
0.0753
(0.0343)
0.0736
(0.0315)
0.0194
(0.0397)
‐1.1032
(1.2950)
‐0.8260
(1.3853)
‐2.8896
(1.9324)
‐0.0080
(0.0270)
‐0.0030
(0.0323)
‐0.0653
(0.0374)
‐0.0197
(0.0674)
‐0.0025
(0.0776)
‐0.0314
(0.1004)
0.0500
(0.0488)
‐0.0102
(0.0516)
0.0410
(0.0626)

Bad Credit *
Treatment
(2)
0.0046
(0.0330)
‐0.0035
(0.0374)
‐0.0563
(0.0426)
‐0.0038
(0.0300)
‐0.0114
(0.0287)
‐0.0066
(0.0361)
‐0.1079
(0.5433)
1.3104
(0.9378)
0.1520
(1.2492)
0.0150
(0.0199)
‐0.0104
(0.0247)
‐0.0313
(0.0288)
0.0212
(0.0551)
0.0735
(0.0671)
‐0.0642
(0.0799)
0.0141
(0.0383)
0.0310
(0.0411)
0.0518
(0.0528)

Discrimination
Minority *
Treatment
(3)
‐0.0095
(0.0310)
‐0.0442
(0.0350)
‐0.0359
(0.0388)
0.0104
(0.0280)
‐0.0083
(0.0271)
‐0.0012
(0.0333)
0.3089
(0.5576)
0.2079
(0.6170)
1.4896
(1.1132)
0.0009
(0.0179)
‐0.0053
(0.0225)
‐0.0068
(0.0257)
0.0748
(0.0525)
‐0.0659
(0.0625)
0.0670
(0.0752)
‐0.0430
(0.0358)
‐0.0515
(0.0387)
‐0.0177
(0.0483)

Human Capital Constraints

U.I. Frictions

No
Did Not Work in
Female * No College * Managerial
Fam. Bus. * Unemployed *
Treatment Treatment Exp. * Treat.
Treat.
Treatment
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
‐0.0703
‐0.0235
‐0.0258
0.0074
0.0648
(0.0307)
(0.0329)
(0.0323)
(0.0338)
(0.0304)
‐0.0670
‐0.0044
0.0348
0.0188
0.0218
(0.0348)
(0.0370)
(0.0367)
(0.0380)
(0.0347)
‐0.0067
‐0.0484
0.0841
‐0.0076
‐0.0293
(0.0396)
(0.0410)
(0.0416)
(0.0432)
(0.0393)
‐0.0422
‐0.0230
‐0.0129
0.0189
‐0.0426
(0.0277)
(0.0282)
(0.0297)
(0.0298)
(0.0272)
‐0.0237
‐0.0151
‐0.0118
‐0.0234
‐0.0083
(0.0264)
(0.0264)
(0.0291)
(0.0278)
(0.0257)
‐0.0294
‐0.0083
‐0.0217
0.0154
‐0.0303
(0.0326)
(0.0328)
(0.0352)
(0.0347)
(0.0320)
0.6251
0.1434
0.1755
‐0.5259
0.9747
(0.5883)
(0.6469)
(0.6321)
(0.7345)
(0.6650)
‐0.6128
‐0.6206
0.3505
0.5270
0.4165
(0.7721)
(0.9258)
(0.7530)
(0.8453)
(0.7799)
0.5986
0.1962
0.2942
‐0.1102
2.0182
(1.1174)
(1.2440)
(1.1958)
(1.2992)
(1.1977)
‐0.0143
‐0.0074
0.0131
0.0455
‐0.0126
(0.0189)
(0.0205)
(0.0196)
(0.0214)
(0.0195)
‐0.0126
0.0052
0.0226
0.0023
0.0133
(0.0225)
(0.0241)
(0.0228)
(0.0252)
(0.0229)
0.0196
0.0291
0.0282
0.0154
0.0245
(0.0263)
(0.0272)
(0.0272)
(0.0297)
(0.0268)
0.0616
0.0302
‐0.1052
‐0.0567
0.0055
(0.0510)
(0.0515)
(0.0544)
(0.0536)
(0.0516)
0.0439
‐0.0015
‐0.0031
‐0.0365
0.0160
(0.0594)
(0.0621)
(0.0646)
(0.0651)
(0.0593)
‐0.0004
‐0.0013
0.0869
0.0083
0.0549
(0.0714)
(0.0733)
(0.0742)
(0.0795)
(0.0715)
0.0162
‐0.0315
0.0013
‐0.0354
0.0069
(0.0360)
(0.0377)
(0.0379)
(0.0388)
(0.0361)
0.0204
0.0340
0.0451
‐0.0508
0.0183
(0.0384)
(0.0402)
(0.0409)
(0.0414)
(0.0386)
0.0050
‐0.0095
‐0.0471
‐0.0340
0.0016
(0.0479)
(0.0492)
(0.0516)
(0.0517)
(0.0481)

Notes: (1) Each row represents a separate regression. Sample sizes are reported in Table 4. (2) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are
conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of application. (3) Covariates include program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in family business, bad credit history, unemployment
compensation, employer provided health insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance.

35

Table 8B: Separate Treatment Effect Regressions for Subgroups
Credit Constraints

Dependent Variable
Business owner at W1
survey date
Business owner at W2
survey date
Business owner at W3
survey date
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W1 survey
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W2 survey
Employed (bus own or
wage/salary) at W3 survey
Monthly business sales at
W1 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W2 survey date (000s)
Monthly business sales at
W3 survey date (000s)
Has any employees at W1
survey date
Has any employees at W2
survey date
Has any employees at W3
survey date
Log household income at W1
Log household income at W2
Log household income at W3
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W1
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W2
Work satisfaction: "very
satisfied" at W3
W1 sample size
W2 sample size
W3 sample size

Bad Credit
(1)
0.0461
(0.0226)
0.0084
(0.0261)
‐0.0393
(0.0308)
0.0181
(0.0232)
0.0038
(0.0226)
‐0.0220
(0.0288)
‐0.3277
(0.2938)
0.6022
(0.5387)
‐0.3933
(0.6813)
0.0213
(0.0136)
‐0.0050
(0.0162)
‐0.0357
(0.0203)
0.0238
(0.0400)
0.0579
(0.0500)
0.0078
(0.0608)
0.0024
(0.0272)
0.0246
(0.0296)
0.0440
(0.0402)
1,491
1,265
958

Discrimination
Minority
(2)
0.0296
(0.0227)
‐0.0089
(0.0261)
‐0.0263
(0.0314)
0.0280
(0.0225)
0.0161
(0.0222)
‐0.0169
(0.0279)
‐0.2022
(0.3137)
0.0825
(0.3192)
0.1932
(0.7202)
0.0217
(0.0136)
‐0.0038
(0.0170)
‐0.0241
(0.0211)
0.0404
(0.0432)
‐0.0070
(0.0492)
0.0344
(0.0646)
‐0.0143
(0.0276)
‐0.0178
(0.0301)
0.0222
(0.0405)
1,448
1,217
915

Female
(3)
0.0106
(0.0217)
‐0.0148
(0.0243)
‐0.0036
(0.0281)
0.0092
(0.0207)
0.0123
(0.0200)
‐0.0321
(0.0233)
‐0.1254
(0.2811)
‐0.4096
(0.3178)
‐0.5205
(0.4374)
0.0105
(0.0130)
‐0.0047
(0.0149)
‐0.0145
(0.0182)
0.0163
(0.0383)
0.0392
(0.0425)
0.0224
(0.0518)
0.0145
(0.0260)
0.0228
(0.0273)
0.0146
(0.0346)
1,636
1,454
1,167

Human Capital Constraints
No College
(4)
0.0481
(0.0192)
0.0231
(0.0219)
‐0.0221
(0.0256)
0.0148
(0.0191)
0.0139
(0.0184)
‐0.0282
(0.0233)
‐0.2685
(0.3409)
‐0.1968
(0.3872)
‐0.5704
(0.7900)
0.0155
(0.0124)
0.0058
(0.0143)
‐0.0096
(0.0175)
0.0046
(0.0345)
0.0335
(0.0392)
0.0307
(0.0485)
‐0.0036
(0.0229)
0.0343
(0.0247)
0.0127
(0.0330)
2,100
1,804
1,382

No Manager. Did Not Work in
Exp.
Fam. Bus.
(5)
(6)
0.0250
0.0513
(0.0244)
(0.0182)
0.0386
0.0267
(0.0278)
(0.0206)
0.0400
0.0032
(0.0323)
(0.0232)
‐0.0005
0.0196
(0.0240)
(0.0171)
0.0051
0.0106
(0.0238)
(0.0163)
‐0.0389
‐0.0181
(0.0290)
(0.0196)
‐0.1789
‐0.5230
(0.3319)
(0.2985)
0.1230
0.0257
(0.4516)
(0.4282)
‐0.4267
‐0.6801
(0.6028)
(0.6488)
0.0291
0.0273
(0.0143)
(0.0111)
0.0156
0.0009
(0.0165)
(0.0126)
0.0048
‐0.0162
(0.0212)
(0.0148)
‐0.0686
‐0.0299
(0.0443)
(0.0308)
0.0086
0.0063
(0.0524)
(0.0349)
0.0799
0.0285
(0.0585)
(0.0408)
0.0000
‐0.0076
(0.0296)
(0.0214)
0.0409
‐0.0058
(0.0322)
(0.0228)
‐0.0183
0.0017
(0.0417)
(0.0285)
1,268
2,355
1,097
2,077
844
1,686

U.I. Frictions
Unemployed
(7)
0.0839
(0.0214)
0.0387
(0.0239)
‐0.0022
(0.0266)
0.0278
(0.0212)
0.0108
(0.0199)
‐0.0356
(0.0235)
0.0277
(0.3022)
0.0460
(0.3756)
0.1172
(0.6404)
0.0084
(0.0114)
0.0090
(0.0136)
‐0.0092
(0.0161)
‐0.0180
(0.0351)
0.0232
(0.0409)
0.0380
(0.0480)
0.0102
(0.0239)
0.0150
(0.0257)
0.0073
(0.0330)
1,870
1,639
1,335

Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of application. (2) Covariates include
program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children, education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health
problems, worked in family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health insurance,
autonomy, and risk tolerance. (3) Each row/column represents a separate regression.

36

Appendix Table 1: Regressions for Probability of Receiving
Entrepreneurship Training
W1
(1)
Female
0.0242
(0.0259)
Black
0.0843
(0.0365)
Latino
0.0688
(0.0628)
Asian
‐0.1439
(0.0846)
Other
0.0072
(0.0487)
Not U.S. born
0.0706
(0.0523)
Age
0.0100
(0.0098)
Age squared
‐0.0001
(0.0001)
Married
0.0202
(0.0306)
Has children
0.0267
(0.0286)
Highest grade completed
0.0213
(0.0112)
College education
0.0136
(0.0498)
HH Income $25,000-49,999
0.0232
(0.0326)
HH Income $50,000-74,999
0.0185
(0.0414)
HH Income $75,000-99,999
0.0808
(0.0577)
HH Income $100,000+
0.0917
(0.0565)
Wage/salary work
‐0.0133
(0.0380)
Self-employed with no employees
0.0795
(0.0460)
Self‐employed with employees
0.0118
(0.0455)
Has a health problem
0.0037
(0.0470)
0.0406
Has relatives or friends who have been
previously S.E.
(0.0319)
Ever worked for relatives or friends who 0.0078
are S.E.
(0.0306)
Has a bad credit history
‐0.0395
(0.0293)
Currently receiving UI benefits
‐0.0386
(0.0292)
‐0.0586
Has health insurance from current
employer
(0.0385)
Autonomy index
0.0066
(0.0119)
Risk tolerance index
0.0174
(0.0127)
Magerial experience
0.0142
(0.0279)
Treatment
0.1198
(0.3111)
(Continued)

W2
(2)
0.0410
(0.0276)
0.0694
(0.0403)
0.0878
(0.0643)
‐0.0679
(0.0988)
0.0260
(0.0536)
0.0498
(0.0564)
0.0056
(0.0105)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0308
(0.0334)
0.0154
(0.0311)
0.0393
(0.0123)
‐0.0304
(0.0540)
0.0250
(0.0359)
0.0199
(0.0456)
0.1354
(0.0594)
0.0795
(0.0603)
‐0.0089
(0.0425)
0.0867
(0.0457)
0.0315
(0.0472)
‐0.0063
(0.0520)
0.0216
(0.0341)
0.0248
(0.0329)
0.0277
(0.0318)
‐0.0297
(0.0312)
‐0.0900
(0.0426)
‐0.0156
(0.0131)
0.0176
(0.0140)
0.0455
(0.0299)
0.2980
(0.3319)

W3
(3)
0.0413
(0.0295)
0.1123
(0.0446)
0.1027
(0.0642)
‐0.0730
(0.1129)
0.1006
(0.0550)
0.0719
(0.0582)
0.0017
(0.0113)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0485
(0.0365)
0.0327
(0.0331)
0.0446
(0.0135)
‐0.0652
(0.0570)
0.0709
(0.0390)
0.0705
(0.0498)
0.2253
(0.0599)
0.0980
(0.0651)
‐0.0311
(0.0453)
0.0274
(0.0493)
0.0014
(0.0503)
‐0.0032
(0.0586)
0.0270
(0.0370)
0.0410
(0.0348)
0.0369
(0.0346)
‐0.0610
(0.0330)
‐0.0707
(0.0462)
‐0.0078
(0.0139)
0.0404
(0.0150)
0.0554
(0.0327)
0.4986
(0.3616)

37

Appendix Table 1: Continued
(1)
‐0.0216
(0.0327)
Black*treatment
‐0.0726
(0.0475)
Latino*treatment
‐0.0673
(0.0765)
Asian*treatment
0.1176
(0.1081)
Other*treatment
0.0194
(0.0612)
Not U.S. born*treatment
‐0.1275
(0.0683)
Age*treatment
0.0090
(0.0120)
Age squared*treatment
‐0.0001
(0.0001)
Married*treatment
0.0040
(0.0385)
Has children*treatment
‐0.0196
(0.0358)
Highest grade completed*treatment
0.0109
(0.0144)
College education*treatment
‐0.0352
(0.0624)
HH Income $25,000-49,999*treatment
‐0.0554
(0.0424)
HH Income $50,000-74,999*treatment
‐0.0216
(0.0518)
HH Income $75,000-99,999*treatment
‐0.0813
(0.0708)
HH Income $100,000+*treatment
‐0.0573
(0.0677)
Wage/salary work*treatment
‐0.0189
(0.0482)
‐0.0613
Self-employed with no
employees*treatment
(0.0557)
Self‐employed with
0.0488
employees*treatment
(0.0545)
Has a health problem*treatment
0.0285
(0.0585)
Has relatives or friends who have been ‐0.0264
previously S.E.*treatment
(0.0404)
Ever worked for relatives or friends who ‐0.0099
are S.E.*treatment
(0.0377)
Has a bad credit history*treatment
0.0457
(0.0367)
Currently receiving UI benefits*treatment 0.0552
(0.0373)
0.1029
Has health insurance from current
employer*treatment
(0.0484)
Autonomy index*treatment
‐0.0046
(0.0155)
Risk tolerance index*treatment
‐0.0091
(0.0164)
Magerial experience*treatment
0.0302
(0.0351)
Female*treatment

(2)
‐0.0557
(0.0333)
‐0.0443
(0.0500)
‐0.0716
(0.0754)
0.0108
(0.1202)
0.0126
(0.0631)
‐0.0941
(0.0703)
0.0069
(0.0125)
‐0.0001
(0.0001)
‐0.0086
(0.0401)
0.0039
(0.0369)
0.0003
(0.0150)
‐0.0327
(0.0642)
‐0.0262
(0.0443)
‐0.0321
(0.0547)
‐0.1646
(0.0720)
‐0.0680
(0.0708)
‐0.0173
(0.0508)
‐0.0610
(0.0539)
0.0310
(0.0533)
0.0052
(0.0617)
‐0.0083
(0.0414)
‐0.0086
(0.0386)
0.0010
(0.0377)
0.0533
(0.0380)
0.1439
(0.0503)
0.0166
(0.0163)
‐0.0094
(0.0169)
‐0.0100
(0.0362)

(3)
‐0.0635
(0.0352)
‐0.0424
(0.0546)
‐0.0872
(0.0770)
0.0860
(0.1342)
‐0.0407
(0.0629)
‐0.1264
(0.0763)
0.0040
(0.0134)
‐0.0001
(0.0002)
‐0.0441
(0.0429)
0.0161
(0.0390)
‐0.0124
(0.0163)
0.0356
(0.0678)
‐0.0829
(0.0472)
‐0.0875
(0.0581)
‐0.2571
(0.0722)
‐0.0968
(0.0751)
0.0127
(0.0537)
‐0.0432
(0.0584)
0.0283
(0.0569)
0.0059
(0.0682)
‐0.0123
(0.0447)
‐0.0060
(0.0402)
‐0.0225
(0.0404)
0.0827
(0.0399)
0.1085
(0.0537)
0.0137
(0.0175)
‐0.0325
(0.0180)
‐0.0212
(0.0392)

Notes: (1) All reported characteristics are measured at time of
application, prior to random assignment. (2) The wave 1, wave 2
and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time
of application.

38

Appendix Table 2: Self‐Reported Amount that Entrepreneurship Training Helped Recipients in Various Ways
Very
Useful
How would you rate the overall usefulness
of the services you have received?
Treatment group
Control group

Somewhat
Useful

51.7%
35.8%

Not Very
Useful

33.7%
40.8%

8.5%
10.8%

Treatment Group
GATE Services
Helped with applying for loans
Helped with deciding whether to pursue self. em
Helped with refining the business idea
Helped with credit issues
Helped with developing a marketing strategy
Helped with legal issues
Helped with accounting issues
Helped with hiring and dealing with employees
Helped with networking
Helped with using computers and technology
Helped with dealing with clients
Helped with providing psychological support

A Lot
Somewhat Not at All
12.6%
21.5%
65.9%
39.5%
33.1%
27.4%
34.1%
37.2%
28.8%
16.4%
25.8%
57.7%
31.4%
37.4%
31.2%
19.3%
35.5%
45.2%
23.7%
35.9%
40.4%
12.7%
24.7%
62.6%
28.7%
37.9%
33.4%
13.3%
26.5%
60.2%
16.7%
35.1%
48.2%
16.6%
31.0%
52.4%

Not at All
Useful

6.1%
12.7%
Control Group
A Lot
Somewhat Not at All
5.9%
17.2%
76.8%
23.6%
30.0%
46.4%
23.0%
32.3%
44.7%
10.9%
17.3%
71.7%
19.6%
31.6%
48.8%
11.3%
28.2%
60.6%
12.1%
26.9%
61.0%
7.3%
18.1%
74.5%
23.1%
31.2%
45.7%
12.1%
22.2%
65.7%
11.3%
30.4%
58.3%
13.1%
23.8%
63.1%

Notes: (1) Sample includes treatment and control group participants who received any entrepreneurship training by wave 1
follow-up survey (6 months). (2) Evaluation of services was asked at W1.

39

Appendix Table 3: Business Ownership, Entry and Exit
Treatment‐Control
No Covars Covariates
Dependent Variable
(5)
(6)
Business owner at W1 survey
0.0464
0.0517
date
(0.0165) (0.0153)
Business owner at W2 survey
0.4307
1558
0.4091
1474
0.0216
0.0208
date
(0.0179) (0.0172)
Business owner at W3 survey
0.3889
1273
0.3794
1173
0.0095
0.0025
date
(0.0197) (0.0194)
Started business by W1 (no
0.3203
1383
0.2578
1307
0.0625
0.0619
(0.0174) (0.0173)
business at application date)
0.3593
1219
0.3292
1130
0.0301
0.0245
Started business by W2 (no
(0.0196) (0.0195)
business at application date)
0.3202
990
0.3125
896
0.0077 ‐0.0023
Started business by W3 (no
(0.0215) (0.0219)
business at application date)
0.2202
327
0.2351
336
‐0.0149 ‐0.0277
Exited business by W1 (had
(0.0326) (0.0330)
business at application date)
0.2667
300
0.2787
305
‐0.0120 ‐0.0120
Exited business by W2 (had
(0.0363) (0.0368)
business at application date)
Exited business by W3 (had
0.3320
253
0.3633
245
‐0.0312 ‐0.0231
business at application date)
(0.0428) (0.0439)
Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time
of application. (2) Treatment‐contol differences with covarariates are estimated from a linear
probability model that controls for program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in
family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health
insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance.
Treatment
(1)
0.4056

N
(2)
1753

40

Control
(3)
0.3592

N
(4)
1690

Appendix Table 4: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Additional Business Outcomes

Dependent Variable
Number of employees at W1

Treatment
(1)
0.4245

N
(2)
1748

Control
(3)
0.3479

N
(4)
1690

Number of employees at W2

0.4093

1554

0.3751

1469

Number of employees at W3

0.4002

1267

0.6510

1169

Monthly profits (sales minus reported
expenses) at W1 (000s)
Monthly profits (sales minus reported
expenses) at W2 (000s)
Monthly profits (sales minus reported
expenses) at W3 (000s)
Business outcome index W1

0.2927

1590

0.7609

1556

0.6845

1422

0.7154

1314

0.7121

1191

1.0038

1090

‐0.0437

1590

‐0.0210

1556

Business outcome index W2

‐0.0244

1422

‐0.0283

1314

Business outcome index W3

‐0.0589

1190

‐0.0101

1088

Total business income from all
businesses owned from RA to W1 (000s)
Total business income from all
businesses owned from W1 to W2 (000s)
Total business income from all
businesses owned from W2 to W3 (000s)
Annual business income from current
owned business W1 (000s)
Annual business income from current
owned business W2 (000s)
Annual business income from current
owned business W3 (000s)

1.4426

1642

1.9168

1587

3.2534

1419

3.3268

1335

10.0230

1163

11.5932

1059

1.9774

1665

2.3939

1607

3.0215

1455

3.1941

1375

3.7731

1227

4.2242

1134

Treatment‐Control
No Covars Covariates
(5)
(6)
0.0766
0.0365
(0.1076) (0.1035)
0.0342 ‐0.0347
(0.0914) (0.0785)
‐0.2508 ‐0.3413
(0.1651) (0.1791)
‐0.4682 ‐0.4618
(0.1664) (0.1697)
‐0.0310
0.0450
(0.2046) (0.1863)
‐0.2917 ‐0.3745
(0.3259) (0.3419)
‐0.0227 ‐0.0203
(0.0237) (0.0240)
0.0040
0.0056
(0.0275) (0.0272)
‐0.0488 ‐0.0575
(0.0278) (0.0293)
‐0.4742 ‐0.2774
(0.3219) (0.3208)
‐0.0735 ‐0.1050
(0.4678) (0.4720)
‐1.5701 ‐2.4734
(3.2746) (3.4702)
‐0.4164 ‐0.1715
(0.3750) (0.3751)
‐0.1726 ‐0.2625
(0.4441) (0.4507)
‐0.4511 ‐0.7464
(1.0713) (1.1303)

Notes: (1) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of
application. (2) Treatment‐contol differences with covarariates are estimated from a linear probability
model that controls for program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children, education level,
household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in family business, bad credit
history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance.
(3) The business outcome index is an equally weighted average of z‐scores from sales, any employees,
number of employees, and profits. Z‐scores are calculated by subtracting the control group mean and
dividing by the control group standard deviation.

41

Appendix Table 5: LATE Estimates and Non‐Experimental Correlations between Entrepreneurship Training and
Outcomes for Control Group

Dependent Variable
Business owner at W1 survey date
Business owner at W2 survey date
Business owner at W3 survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary)
at W1 survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary)
at W2 survey date
Employed (bus own or wage/salary)
at W3 survey date
Monthly business sales at W1 survey
date
Monthly business sales at W2 survey
date
Monthly business sales at W3 survey
date
Has any employees at W1 survey
date
Has any employees at W2 survey
date
Has any employees at W3 survey
date
Log household income at W1
Log household income at W2
Log household income at W3
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at
W1
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at
W2
Work satisfaction: "very satisfied" at
W3

No Covars
(1)
0.1262
(0.0441)
0.0805
(0.0612)
0.0415
(0.0844)
0.0681
(0.0384)
0.0739
(0.0464)
‐0.0780
(0.0713)
‐1,092
(752)
‐236
(1108)
‐2,087
(2303)
0.0364
(0.0248)
0.0146
(0.0371)
‐0.0771
(0.0535)
‐0.0611
(0.0851)
0.1229
(0.1212)
0.2486
(0.1805)
‐0.0024
(0.0456)
0.0178
(0.0627)
0.0367
(0.1003)

Received Training ‐ No Training
LATE (IV)
Non‐Experimental
Covariates
N
No Covars Covariates
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.1345
6880
0.1965
0.1533
(0.0391)
(0.0234)
(0.0225)
0.0697
6034
0.2579
0.2212
(0.0567)
(0.0247)
(0.0251)
0.0066
4867
0.2277
0.2098
(0.0812)
(0.0277)
(0.0297)
0.0695
6882
0.0305
0.0035
(0.0361)
(0.0208)
(0.0208)
0.0684
6039
0.0484
0.0445
(0.0436)
(0.0204)
(0.0203)
‐0.0833
4865
0.0472
0.0410
(0.0679)
(0.0253)
(0.0267)
‐954
6415
836
561
(747)
(476)
(463)
‐453
5560
1,248
1,285
(1135)
(478)
(533)
‐2,604
4622
2,058
2,035
(2344)
(751)
(867)
0.0373
6870
0.0354
0.0304
(0.0244)
(0.0130)
(0.0132)
0.0067
6016
0.0505
0.0442
(0.0366)
(0.0149)
(0.0158)
‐0.0921
4847
0.0678
0.0641
(0.0544)
(0.0176)
(0.0186)
‐0.0208
6441
0.1062
0.0012
(0.0639)
(0.0466)
(0.0388)
0.0616
5566
0.0396
‐0.0447
(0.0965)
(0.0522)
(0.0442)
0.0869
4516
0.0833
‐0.0285
(0.1478)
(0.0653)
(0.0639)
0.0133
6812
‐0.0102
‐0.0126
(0.0450)
(0.0246)
(0.0263)
0.0272
5956
0.0225
0.0063
(0.0624)
(0.0266)
(0.0286)
0.0444
3827
0.0683
0.0812
(0.1026)
(0.0349)
(0.0378)

N
(6)
1685
1462
1162
1685
1462
1160
1575
1337
1101
1685
1457
1158
1571
1348
1082
1672
1441
923

Notes: (1) The first‐stage in the LATE model regresses receipt of entrepreneurship training on treatment. The second‐
stage regresses the listed outcome on predicted receipt of entrepreneurship training. (2) In the non‐experimental
regressions, the listed outcome is regressed on receipt of entrepreneurship training. The sample includes only
observations for the control group. (4) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months
after time of application. (5) Covariates include program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self‐employed at application, health problems, worked in family business, bad
credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance.

42

