NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SAHEL'S SILENT MAIZE REVOLUTION:
ANALYZING MAIZE PRODUCTIVITY IN MALI AT THE FARM-LEVEL
Jeremy D. Foltz
Ursula T. Aldana
Paul Laris
Working Paper 17801
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17801

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

This work was funded by a grant from the NBER-Africa Project. The authors would like to thank
without implicating: Ntji Coulibaly, Mamadou Coulibaly, Urbain Dembele, Hamady Djouara, Steven
Block, the CRRA-Sikasso, IER-Bamako, and participants in the University of Wisconsin development
seminar and the NBER Africa Project conference in Zanzibar. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jeremy D. Foltz, Ursula T. Aldana, and Paul Laris. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Sahel's Silent Maize Revolution: Analyzing Maize Productivity in Mali at the Farm-level
Jeremy D. Foltz, Ursula T. Aldana, and Paul Laris
NBER Working Paper No. 17801
February 2012
JEL No. O13,O33,Q12,Q16
ABSTRACT
Since independence a quiet revolution has taken place in maize production in the Sahel with Mali
increasing production more than ten-fold and yields going up ~2% a year. This research work uses
farm level panel data from southern Mali's maize growing regions to demonstrate this success in agricultural
production and technological change. We analyze the determinants of production to unpack increases
in input use from technological change. The estimations show that farmer adoption of increased fertilizer
use has driven much of the productivity growth rather than the adoption of improvements in seeds
and management. Additionally, we find strong evidence of observed and unobserved heterogeneity,
which affects both the choice of fertilizer amounts and the marginal returns to fertilizer use. The results
demonstrate the key changes behind this silent maize revolution and point to the importance of taking
into account farmer heterogeneity in estimating productivity and returns to fertilizer.

Jeremy D. Foltz
Dept. of Ag. & Applied Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
427 Lorch St.
Madison, WI 53706
jdfoltz@wisc.edu
Ursula T. Aldana
Instituto de Estudios Peruanos
Lima, Peru
utaldana@gmail.com

Paul Laris
Department of Geography
California State University
1250 Bellflower Blvd.
Long Beach, CA 90840
plaris@csulb.edu

N’i ti kaba séné, e ti balo
If you are not growing maize, you cannot feed your family (Malian Farmer, 2010)
Introduction
According to aggregate data, since 1961 total maize production in Mali has increased
more than ten-fold; bringing maize from being a minor crop to one on par with traditional
Sahelian crops of millet and sorghum (see Figure 1). This ten-fold increase in production
has come about through both a major increase in acreage and impressive improvements in
yields. Maize yields in Mali have doubled in this period while those in Burkina Faso have
tripled; in contrast yields in Senegal, Mauritania, and Niger have barely increased. The
maize revolution in the Sahel has gone relatively unnoticed in research circles. Recent
work on productivity growth of agriculture in Africa has indeed identified significant
increases in productivity in the last decade after some decades of stagnation (Block, 1994;
2010) and increases in maize production have led the way in many parts of Africa (Smale,
Byerlee, and Jayne; 2011). But commentators such as Smale et al. (2011) point out a
number of disappointing results in maize production across the continent and suggest a
key role of fertilizer in determining yield increases and the potential for maize to jumpstart a green revolution.
While the current yields in Mali of around 2 tons per hectare are still low by world
standards, the rate of yield increase over the last 45 years (~2%) is equal or better than that
of maize production in Iowa, Wisconsin, and India. The maize yield increases in the
Midwest of the US have been the work of hundreds of scientists and garnered many
laurels, and yet similar yield increases in the Sahel have gone mostly unnoticed and
unexplained. In addition these great increases in yields go in the opposite direction of
most of the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa where maize yields have stagnated since the mid1970’s.
Such a success suggests Mali has succeeded in at least partially solving exactly the issues
that most bedevil agricultural development projects in the Sahel and most of Africa:
farmers bought inputs such as fertilizer, farmers changed their agronomic techniques,
farmers paid for new seeds, farmers found markets for their production, farmers responded
to price signals. The large increases in yields in Mali would also not have been possible
without research, extension, and marketing. It is evidence of successful extension work
that brought to farmers information that induced them to add more fertilizer, invest in new
plowing techniques (i.e., animal traction), purchase improved quality seeds, and change in
their eating habits.
What has pushed the great expansion of maize production in Mali? How much is due to
expanded use of inputs such as fertilizer versus technical changes in seeds and
management? What are the key elements of this technical change? This work analyzes
these questions by documenting and analyzing the growth of maize production in southern
Mali using a novel panel data set that spans the last 20 years. In order to disentangle the

1

different factors behind the increase in maize production, we focus our efforts on
generating a consistent and non biased estimate of the impact of fertilizer use on yields.
Figure 1: The growth of maize production 1961-2009

Generally the economics literature shows estimates of high returns to fertilizer in Africa,
but that farmers do not adopt fertilizer or they use too little of it (Crawford, Jayne, and
Kelly; 2006). Standard estimates of the average fertilizer use in Africa is 1/10th of the
levels used in the rest of the world. The literature has explained this puzzle through the
presence of high levels of heterogeneity in the returns to fertilizer use.
Duflo et al. (2008) use an RCT to find high but heterogeneous returns to fertilizer in maize
production in Kenya. They find that the optimal fertilizer use is less than recommended
levels, and that the heterogeneity in returns seems related to length of use (i.e. knowledge
in how to use fertilizer). Duflo et al. (2011) find that helping farmers save for fertilizer
can nudge them into using more on their maize. Marenya and Barrett (2009) show that
returns to fertilizer in Kenya are a function of soil qualities, in particular the amount of
organic matter in the soil. Xu et al. (2009) find substantial variability in the yield response
of fertilizer based on a number of observable agronomic (timelines of application) and
household factors (access to complementary production factors). In the scientific
literature Sileshi et al. (2010) find similar variability in maize yields across the African
continent.
In the work closest in spirit to our work, Suri (2011) also finds high but heterogeneous
returns to fertilizer and hybrid corn in Kenya. Suri’s methodology accounts for

2

unobserved heterogeneity in choice of fertilizer and hybrid econometrically through a
control function approach where farmer choice of fertilizer/hybrid is a function of future
and past period’s fertilizer/hybrid use. While robust to some heterogeneity, the Suri
methodology does not allow for unobserved heterogeneity to change through time, nor
does it adequately address potential dynamics in soil fertility. Suri concludes that farmers
do not use fertilizer where it’s not available or expensive even though returns are high.
Overall these studies identify a large amount of heterogeneity in returns to fertilizer and
that the sources of heterogeneity are both observable (price of and experience with
fertilizer) and unobservable to most econometric efforts (soil organic matter, knowledge).
The presence of heterogeneity in the impact of fertilizer use poses a problem for the
estimation of this impact. While Suri’s method allows for control of unobserved
heterogeneity, her assumption that heterogeneity does not change through time is not
applicable to our data set and context. During the years covered by our data set, new
seeds where continuously appearing in the market, changing the impact of fertilizer use.
Since we do not observe the seeds used by the farmers, this technological innovation could
generate a time varying unobserved heterogeneity.
The current work estimates the impact of fertilizer use and explores the heterogeneity in
these returns for the Sikasso region in Mali. It focuses on analyzing technological change
as both a disembodied technological change and one due to observed as well as
unobserved heterogeneity in the returns to fertilizer use. With regard to observed
heterogeneity, we test whether the impact of fertilizer use on yields varies with literacy
levels and with the use of organic fertilizer. In order to address unobserved heterogeneity,
we apply a control function method first presented by Garen (1984). He developed the
method to test for unobserved heterogeneity and control for the bias that it brings. Such a
control function method allows us to control also for the endogeneity that might exist even
in the absence of unobserved heterogeneity in the impact of fertilizer use. This last type of
endogeneity is the more classic one and it is related to the potential bias that could come
from the correlation between unobserved determinants of yields and fertilizer use. All of
these efforts allow us to consistently estimate the impact of fertilizer use and,
consequently, to analyze the importance of increases in fertilizer use versus generalized
technological change in the yield increases in Mali.
The work proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data and farmer interviews that
form the basis for the analysis presented in this work and provides a descriptive analysis
of the success in maize production in Mali. Section III develops a theoretical and
econometric model to estimate the determinants of maize yields with a focus on farmer
heterogeneity and the returns to fertilizer. Specifically, it develops a model of fertilizer
choice based on farm profit functions with heterogeneity in farm returns and builds an
econometric technique based on control functions to account for farmer heterogeneity in
fertilizer responsiveness. Section IV estimates and provides results for fertilizer demand
functions and then maize yield functions that account for farmer heterogeneity. Section 5
concludes and points to open questions for future research.

3

II.

Description of the data

We use a 12-year panel data set (1994-2006) for over 100 farm households from nine
villages located in Mali’s southern maize belt. The Malian agricultural research
organization Institut d’Economie Rurale (IER) started collecting these data in 1988 from
149 farmers spread across 12 villages in 3 different communes in the Sikasso region. The
data set starts with 149 farmers in 1988 and ends with 84 in 2008 due to sample attrition.
IER researchers chose the villages to represent different agro-ecological zones within the
Sikasso region and the farmers to represent different types of farms stratified by farm
assets.1
IER researchers collected the data primarily for agronomic studies and they most closely
resemble the kind of data one might get from farm trials, except that they come from
individual farmers. With their level of agronomic detail and long time series, these microlevel panel data can answer questions that aggregate and cross-sectional data are unable to
tackle. They have details such as daily rainfall data that can solve a number of the
econometric problems that cause difficulties for many productivity studies. The data set
contains disaggregated fertilizer and chemical input data by input type and by crop.
Figure 2: Map of the Sikasso region and research sites in the Bougouni, Kadiolo, and
Koutiala districts.

II.B.

Sikasso Region Context

The Sikasso Region is the best-watered region of Mali (800-1200mm of rainfall) and the
zone best adapted to maize and cotton cultivation. Yet the Sikasso region is reputed to be

1

Most of the analysis is conducted using data from 1994-2006, because of problems matching the data from
1988-1993 with later years.

4

the location of the greatest poverty in the country (Delarue et al. 2008).2 The data comes
from three of the primary ecological zones within the region. Koutiala is where the
farmers are the most sophisticated and have a long tradition of growing cotton. Kadiolo
sub-region is the traditional maize growing area, but with less progressive farmers.
Bougouni started the 1990’s as the least developed of these regions with farmers least
touched by extension services among the sub-regions, but has developed in the last 20
years into a major maize and cotton growing area, through a combination of
extensification along with improved techniques (intensification).
In terms of the agronomy of maize production in Mali there are significant dynamics
between years since soil quality can change from one year to the next. That change in soil
quality can be a function of the previous year’s crop, especially because maize is typically
grown in rotation on a field that had cotton the previous year. In addition maize varieties
in Mali have proliferated from 1or 2 to 8 – 10 in the decade of the dataset and seed
varieties are unobserved in this data set. The main differences between varieties are
related to their suitability to soils and weed conditions, not maximum yield potential.
Thus we expect there to be significant unobserved heterogeneity in the impact of fertilizer
use, in this dataset.
Figure 3 shows the increases in maize productivity in the sample and across the three
surveyed regions. Overall it shows a 17% increase in maize yields, but that hides a near
flat change in yields in Bougouni to a nearly 35% increase in yields in Kadiolo. The
figure is suggestive of reasonably high levels of technological change that could be either
in the form of better seeds, management, or more use of inputs, in particular fertilizer.
Figure 4 shows the relationship between fertilizer use, its price and the price of maize.
What is obvious is the great increase in fertilizer use (left axis) of about 25% at the same
time that its price increased 175% (right axis) and maize prices increased only marginally
in the same period. This suggests that there has been a secular increase in fertilizer use
that is more akin to the adoption of a new technology rather than to marginal calculations
of the price/cost margins that would drive the use of a well-known variable input.
This pattern of adoption of fertilizer in maize production is well demonstrated by the
regional fertilizer data in Figure 5. There one sees that Koutiala, the region with the most
progressive and informed farmers, has fairly consistent fertilizer use across time and in a
pattern reminiscent of a variable input that obeys price signals. Meanwhile both Bougouni
and Kadiolo exhibit a pattern of fertilizer use increase that mimics the S-curves of
standard technology adoption models.
Fok et al. (2000) argue that maize is a risky crop and that the farmer’s widespread
adoption of maize could be related to a change in their risk aversion. They argue that
maize is risky due to the use of expensive inputs such as fertilizers and herbicides.
Nevertheless, as explained in Laris and Foltz (2011), maize also reduces risk because it
matures quickly, providing a good harvest in years with a short rainfall season. In
2

Many scholars knowledgeable in the economics of Mali dispute this finding in private conversations, but
no refutation of the data has yet appeared in the literature.

5

addition as shown below in figure 6 the distribution of yield outcomes of maize
production has changed over the last 20 years, reducing the risk farmers face in growing
maize. Figure 6 shows the distribution of yields in the Sikasso farm data over different
time periods. The distributions show a distinct pattern of technological change with the
distribution on average moving up in a steady fashion over the 12 years of the data. The
mean of the distribution increases and one sees for almost all quantiles of the distribution
that yields increase close to 500kg per hectare, which is suggestive of broad based
participation in the benefits of maize yield increases. In addition the downside risk of
maize production in terms of yields is greatly reduced, with many fewer farmers below
500kg/ha.
Laris and Foltz (2011) argue that an important factor behind the increase in fertilizer use is
the provision of credit for fertilizer. As the authors point out, in the area that corresponds
to the data we use, the credit for fertilizer is obtained through the parastatal CMDT
(Compagnie Malienne pour le Developpment des Textiles). This company provides
fertilizer at the beginning of the season in exchange for the cotton that this company will
receive at the time of the harvest. In some cases, the farmers use, in their maize plots,
some of the fertilizer they claim that will be used for growing cotton.
Laris and Foltz (2011) provide evidence of this link between cotton and the access to
fertilizer for maize. Their interview and quantitative evidence shows, for example, that
farmers who grow cotton get higher yields in their other field crops. The estimations that
we present below support the idea presented in Laris and Foltz, as they show that the
percentage of land under cotton is positively associated with the amount of fertilizer used
for growing maize, which contrasts somewhat with Benjaminsen, Aune, and Sidibé’s
(2010) finding of declining soil fertility in cotton growing areas.
Taken together the graphical data in figures 3,4, 5 and 6 shows increases in maize yield at
the same time that there are major increases in fertilizer use. Below we test whether the
increase in maize yield is solely attributable to the increased use of fertilizer or whether
there is an element of disembodied technological change such as improvements in seeds
and or management.

6

Figure 3: Maize yields by Sikasso region zone

Maize Yields
Koutiala

Kadiolo

Bougouni

Sikasso Avg

3,500

Kilos per Hectare

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

Year

Figure 4: Fertilizer use with maize and fertilizer prices, Lowess curves

7

Figure 5: Fertilizer use by Sikasso region zone, Lowess curves

Figure 6: Maize yield distributions over time Sikasso farm data

8

III.

Conceptual Framework

The conceptual framework for analyzing the determinants of maize yields starts with a
farmer maximizing profits on his farm:    T where T represents total land area and 
is per hectare profits. Assuming that land is fixed or that the production function exhibits
constant returns to scale the farmer can maximize per hectare profits which setting the
price of output to 1 can be described as:

  g ( , f , x, r )  p f f  px x

(1)

where g(.) reflects the yield function,  represents the level of technology, f reflects the
amount of fertilizer per hectare, x reflects other variables that affect yields, r reflects those
unobserved variables, such as soil quality that affect yields, and the relative input prices
are pf and px. The first order conditions to maximize profits with respect to fertilizer will
produce the following first order condition for optimality:   g  p f  0 , which
f
f
when solved for fertilizer will give the following fertilizer demand function for the
optimizing farmer:

f  h( , f , x, r , p f )

(2)

Note if the unobserved component, r, is additive in (1), then it does not enter into equation
(2). But if heterogeneity and the observed differences, x, enter the production function
g(.) in a non additive way, as they would in a Cobb-Douglas, generalized quadratic, or
translog production function, then they will appear in the fertilizer demand function h(.).
We use a Cobb Douglas and allow unobserved variables to appear not only as factors of
production (multiplying fertilizer use) but also in the exponent associated to fertilizer use.
This simple maximization problem has a number of immediate implications for the
observability of different levels of fertilizer use in real world data. First, assuming that r,
is not additive, optimal levels of fertilizer chosen by farmers will be a function of both
observable, x, and unobservable r, differences between farms. Second the returns to
fertilizer will be a function of both observable and unobservable variables. The
dependence of fertilizer use and of fertilizer’s impact on unobservable variables poses an
econometric problem in that these unobservables could bias our estimates of the returns to
fertilizer.

III.A. Econometric Framework
This section presents the econometric framework that will be used to estimate
technological change in maize yields (the Solow residual) and the impact of fertilizer use
on yields. While the level of technological change is a straightforward parameter
estimation, that of the impact of fertilizer is more complex due to the maximization
problem outlined above. The estimation method we use is based on a fixed effect

9

estimation that allows the demeaned error to be correlated with the demeaned fertilizer
variable and that also allows for heterogeneity in the impact of fertilizer use. Specifically
the marginal effect of fertilizer on yields can change according to both observables and
unobservables that can be different for observations across time and farms.3
Our basic yield specification is a standard one, where the impact of fertilizer on yields is
the same for all the households in all the periods.

yit   At   x xit   f f it  it

(3)

where yit is the log of yield per hectare, At is a time variable whose coefficient,  , is the
standard Solow residual measuring disembodied technological change, fit is log of
fertilizer per hectare and xit is a vector that contains other variables that determine yields.
We are interested in estimating both the rate of disembodied technical change and the
marginal product of fertilizer,  and  f . The estimate of  is straightforward, while that
of

f

requires careful attention to both observable and unobservable determinants, whose

econometric properties are delineated below.
In a panel data context it is useful to decompose the unobservable component,
time invariant and a time variant component. That is:

it , into a

it  i   it
As it is well known, access to a panel data allows for a fixed effect estimation, which
controls for the potential correlation between the independent variables and the farm or
plot specific error term, i . Nevertheless, it is likely that a fixed effect will not fully
capture or control for the farm level heterogeneity we seek to measure. Specifically, we
expect the effects of fertilizer use to be non-uniform across time, since it can change with
seeds used and time varying differences in soil and other agronomic conditions. We
therefore use a modified fixed effect estimation that allows the impact of fertilizer to
change for different individuals and at different periods. The heterogeneity in marginal
returns to fertilizer is likely to have both observable and unobservable (to the
econometrician) elements.4 Thus, we specify  ft as:

 fit     o xito   it
3

Note this focus on unobservables that effect the marginal returns to a factor of production differs from the
methods proposed by Levinson and Petrin (2003) for capturing unobservables in a measurement of overall
productivity.
4
We assume that farmers know, observe and act on the elements that are unobservable to the
econometrician.

10

o

where xit is a vector of observable variables that affect the impact of fertilizer use on

 it reflects unobservable heterogeneity on the impact of fertilizer on yields.
The parameter  it can be considered as an element from r, the unobserved variables in the
production function. We assume that the unobservable element,  it , has an expected
value of zero: E ( it )  0 .
yields and

Taking into account this specification of

 fit , and ignoring At to simplify the exposition,

the new yield equation will be given by:

yit   x xit   f it   o xito f it   it f it  it .

(4)

Equation (4) provides a less restrictive specification of the impact of fertilizer on yields.
The presence of unobserved heterogeneity will bring a bias in the estimation of the
average impact of fertilizer use (  ). In the current work, we apply Garen’s (1984) control
function method to account for unobserved heterogeneity in an estimation based on fixed
effects, which is to our knowledge the first application of control functions to a panel data
setting. 5
A fixed effects estimation controls for the potential correlation between fit and

it ,

through i . This method estimates the demeaned dependent variable as a function of the
demeaned independent variables:

yit  yi   x ( xit  xi )   ( fit  f i )   o xito ( fit  fi )   it fit   it fit  ( it  i )
(5)
Given that  it is not observable the new error of the estimation, uit will include the terms
related to this unobserved heterogeneity. That is:

uit   it f it   it f it  ( it  i ) .
The first two terms of this compounded error come from the unobserved heterogeneity
 it . These two terms are likely to be correlated with fit  fi , creating a bias in the
estimation of  . Assuming that ( it  i ) is not correlated with ( f it  f i ) , the linear
projection of the error uit over ( f it  f i ) will be given by:
5

The control function used here is similar in spirit to Suri’s (2011) method for controlling for heterogeneous
returns, but avoids the problem of using past choices to identify current choices which could be biased in a
situation with crop rotations across years on a single plot. In general, panel data should obviate the need for
a control function approach with its multiple years of data to account for individual heterogeneity. In this
case the heterogeneity is independent variable specific and changes through time, which means a simple
fixed effect cannot fully control for the heterogeneity.

11

uit   ( f it  f it )  rit
where   cov(( f it  f i )( it f it   it f it )) / Var (( f it  f i )) . Thus the estimated

 hat will be given by:  hat     . Theta is expected to be positive given
that an increase in  it is likely to be correlated with an increase in fit 6.
coefficient

As argued by Garen (1984) one can recover

 it from the residual of an estimation where

the dependent variable is fit . The idea, which comes from the first order conditions of a
firm profit function that produces the fertilizer factor demand function, equation (2), is
that if the impact of fertilizer use on yields is higher, farmers will respond by using more
fertilizer. Thus, the error from estimation of fit will be positively correlated with  it .
A second potential problem of the fixed effects estimator is that even after eliminating the
time invariant component form the error, the demeaned error, ( it  i ) , might still be
correlated with the dependent variable, ( f it  f i ) . This might happen if, for example,
the use of fertilizer responds to conditions that change over time, and, simultaneously,
these changing conditions affect yields. For example, if the use of fertilizer responds to
unobservable changes in the fertility of the soil, there will be a correlation between
( it  i ) and ( fit  f i ) . We consider the presence of unobservables in the exponent of
fertilizer and also, as an additional production factor that multiplies fertilizer use. The
presence of unobservables as an additional production factor, imply a correlation between
( it  i ) and ( fit  f i ) . This correlation will further bias the estimates of the
impact of fertilizer on yields. The control function method that we deploy allows us to
overcome these two potential problems.

 it has two components, one component that is observed by the farmer
o
before deciding how much fertilizer to use (  it ) and another that is not observed early
u
enough in the growing season (  it ) and, consequently, does not affect the farmer’s choice
The coefficient

of the amount of fertilizer. If we assume a standard production function, the factor
demand equation for fertilizer in equation (2), which describes the optimal amount of
fertilizer per hectare (in logs), will depend negatively on the price of fertilizer, positively
on the log of the other inputs used in production (per hectare) and positively on the
observable component of  it . Using a first order approximation of the fertilizer demand
equation, we have:

6

This implies a positive correlation between

fit  f i

and

12

 it fit   it fit

f it   f xit   p f mit   xo xito  zit

(6)

where mit includes variables that determine the price of fertilizer and zit is equal to the
derivative of fit with respect to  it multiplied by  it . If we estimate equation (6)
including the relevant production inputs that determine fertilizer demand and an
exhaustive list of the variables that determine the price of fertilizer, zit can be recovered
by estimating equation (4) and capturing the residuals of such estimation.
o

Expressing individual heterogeneity

o

 it as well as the error of equation (4) as functions of

zit , we have:

 it   zit  vit
it   zit  wit
where vit is equal to

(7)

 itu .

Plugging equation (7) in equation (5), we have:

yit  yi   x ( xit  xi )   ( f it  f i )   o xito ( f it  f i )   ( zit f it  zit f it )   ( zit  zit )  it
(8)
where it  (vit f it  vit f it )  wit  wi
The term

 ( zit fit  zit fit )

controls for unobserved heterogeneity, or the presence of

unobservables in the exponent associated with fertilizer use. The term

 ( zit  zit )

controls for the more classical endogeneity, that will be brought about by the presence of
unobservables as additional inputs. Under the assumption that
E (vit | zi1 , zi 2 , ziT , xit )  0 (assumption 1), we will have that
E( it ( f it  f it ) )=0 which will allow us to consistently estimate  .7

7

If

E (vit | zi1 , zi 2 ,..ziT , xit )  0

then

are one to one functions of each other given
that:

E (vit | fi1 , fi 2 ,.. fiT , xit )  0 given that fit
xit .

zit

Using the law of iterated expectations it can be shown

E ((vit fit  vit f it ) | fi1 , f i 2 ,.. fiT , xit )  0 .

Since

fit  fi

is a function of

fi1 , fi 2 ,.. fiT , we can say that E ((vit fit  vit f it ) | fit  f i , xit )  0 .
expectations, then:

and

E ((vit fit  vit fit )( fit  fi ))  0 .
13

Using the law of iterated

For assumption 1 to hold, we need to include the relevant other factors of production that
determine fertilizer demand and all potential the determinants of the price of fertilizer. If
u
this is not the case, vit will include not only  it but also the determinants of fertilizer use
that have been excluded from the estimation. If assumption 1 holds, including the
interaction of the log of fertilizer and the residual will take care of unobserved
heterogeneity. At the same time, the inclusion of the residual, by itself, will take care of
the potential time varying correlation that might exist between fertilizer use and the error,
even after controlling for unobserved heterogeneity.

IV.

Econometric Estimations and Results

IV.A. Specification of the equations
The current section estimates the impact of fertilizer use on yields at the plot level where
each observation is a specific plot in a particular year. We will use the control function
method described above which uses the residuals from the estimation of the fertilizer
demand equation in order to account for two potential biases. The first one originates in
unobserved heterogeneity while the second one comes from the potential correlation
between the demeaned fertilizer variable and unobservables, a correlation that might exist
even after controlling for unobserved heterogeneity.
As shown in the previous section, the use of fertilizer can be estimated as a function of the
other factors of production, the factors linked to observed heterogeneity and the price of
fertilizer. We consider as potential factors linked to observed heterogeneity: organic
fertilizer and the percentage of adult members (members with more than 16 years old)
who are literate.8 We use two types of measures for the price of fertilizer, one for the
relative price and the other for the availability of capital to finance fertilizer purchases.
For the relative price we use the log of the price of fertilizer divided by the average price
for maize in the household’s village. To measure capital availability we measure with
proxy variables the two main ways villagers access capital: remittances and cotton based
Additionally, if the observable determinants of fertilizer use are not correlated with the error and since

zit  zi

is, by construction, not correlated with

fit  fi

we can conclude that

E (( wit  wi )( fit  f i ))  0 .
Thus, we can conclude that

E ((it  i )( fit  f i ))  0 .

8

Literacy of household members is likely to improve the productivity of fertilizer in two important ways.
First it can help farmers understand the instructions in how to use fertilizer and second it likely increases
farmer ability to learn from extension agents and other knowledgeable outsiders. Interviews in the study
villages identified the latter effect as quite important, in that literate farmers were much more likely to have
the local extension agents and school teachers as part of their social networks. One can also think of the
literacy variable in the context of a target input model (e.g., Foster and Rosensweig, 1995, 2010) in which
higher levels of literacy improves farmer accuracy in hitting the optimal level of fertilizer.

14

loans. Households that have higher remittances face a more relaxed budget constraint,
which should affect fertilizer demand and use. As a proxy for remittances, we use the
number of permanent migrants from the household. In the Sikasso region, producers can
acquire fertilizer on credit from CMDT, the cotton parastatal, under the promise of paying
for it with cotton, after the harvest. We therefore use the percentage of land under cotton
in the current year as a determinant of access to credit to buy fertilizer.
In addition to the variables describing heterogeneity and costs/access to fertilizer, we
include key determinants of production from the yield equation: adult family labor per
hectare, a dummy for having grown cotton last year on the plot, and a time trend. We
expect that maize grown on fields that in the previous year grew cotton are likely to
require more fertilizer and have lower yields because cotton is well known for depleting
the soil. Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the variables used in the estimations of
fertilizer use and of yields.
In order to capture zit from the estimation of equation (6), we need the coefficients of the
determinants of fertilizer use to be estimated consistently. Nevertheless, some of the
independent variables included in equation (6) are likely to be correlated with zit . To
avoid a potential inconsistency in the estimation of these coefficients, we exploit the panel
structure of the data and estimate the coefficients of the variables that are not constant
through time, through a fixed effects method. Thus, we run the following estimations:

f it  f i  1 ( it1   1it )  it

(9.1)

fit  1hat 1it  2 it2  zit
where



1
it

(9.2)
denotes the subset of variables included in equation (4) that change through

time, 1 denotes the coefficients associated with these variables, 1hat denotes the
2
1
estimated coefficients of  ,  it denotes the subset of variables that do not change
through time and  2 the coefficients of these variables. That is, we first run a fixed
effects estimation of the use of fertilizer, including only those variables that change
through time. Afterwards, we run a standard estimation of the error of the first estimation
against the variables that do not change through time. The residuals of this last
estimation will be used in the estimation of yields as shown in equation (8).
The fertilizer (6) and maize yield equations (8) are estimated as fixed effect models at the
plot level with robust standard errors clustered at the farm household level. There are up
to 8 observations per plot with an average just below 3 observations per plot across 120
households in 12 years. The panel is unbalanced and the number of observations varies
between 733 and 675 depending on the variables included in the model. In all models the
fixed effects are tested to be significant.

15

Yield estimates will have log maize yields as a function of key production variables, a
time trend to capture disembodied technological change and observable and unobservable
determinants of fertilizer returns. For key production variables we include adult labor in
the household, rainfall in June during planting, rainfall in August during maize flowering,
and the area of the plot. Labor inputs are only available at the household, rather than the
plot level, and only measures household adult labor available to farm, rather than actual
labor inputs. Because farmer interviews identified hired labor as being rare in the survey
villages and representing only a small proportion of labor inputs, this measure is likely
reasonably well correlated with total labor use. We measure labor in per hectare terms.
We chose the two key periods of rainfall for maize production, planting and harvesting,
rather than total rainfall, which includes rainfall outside of the growing season, in order to
get a more precise estimate. Lack of June rainfall often leads to plants not sprouting and
farmers having to replant maize, while lack of August rainfall can affect whether the
maize will pollinate and is the most common reason for crop failures. We include the area
of the plot to control for any potential increasing or decreasing returns to scale as is
sometimes found in peasant agriculture (e.g., Chayanov, 1986 and Benjamin, 1995),
although yield estimations implicitly assumes constant returns to scale.
We estimate the yield model two ways to measure the returns to soil fertility both
observed and unobserved. The first basic model includes an observable related to
knowledge acquisition, the percent literate household members as an interaction with
fertilizer. Following the findings of Marenya and Barrett (2009) as well as many
agronomic studies (e.g. Chikowo et al., 2010; Sileshi et al. 2010; Wopereis et al., 2008)
that higher levels of soil organic matter improves the efficiency of chemical fertilizer use,
the second model includes measures of the amount of organic fertilizer (cow manure)
applied to the fields. Soils in Mali are particularly low in organic matter and cow manure
is the primary method available aside from long-term fallowing that Malian farmers can
use to improve soil organic matter. Organic fertilizer is measured as the log of 150 kg
donkey cartloads. The first version of model 2 includes organic fertilizer alone, while the
second also includes the interaction of organic fertilizer with chemical fertilizer.
In addition as a robustness check we provide estimates of the yield function in both model
one and two versions without controlling for endogeneity through the residuals of the
control function. These estimates provide the baseline from which we can understand the
importance of controlling for the endogeneity of chosen inputs in yield functions.

16

Table 1 Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Yield Estimation Variables
log (maize yields)
Maize yields
log (area of the plot)
area of the plot
Time Trend (1995=1)
Previous yr cotton dummy
Number of adults per cultivated hectare
Log (number of adults/ha)
log (Rain in june)
Rain in june
log (Rain august)
Rain in august
log (organic fert per ha)
Organic fert per hectare (150 kg)
log (fertilizer per ha)
% lit members*log (fertilizer per ha)
log (fertilizer per ha)*log (organic fert per
ha)

Measurement unit

Mean

Std
Dev

log (kg per ha)
kg per ha
log (hectares)
hectares
year (1995=1)
0-1

7.11
0.69
1494.5 942.38
-0.07
0.95
1.33
1.04
6.65
3.07
0.23
0.42
0.66
0.27
-0.498
0.44
5.00
0.33
millimeters
157.24 53.74
5.74
0.34
millimeters
328.83 111.81
log (150 kg per ha) -6.14
2.70
150 kg per ha
4.55
37.72
log (kg per ha)
3.39
3.94
0.35
0.73
-20.52 28.24

Fertilizer Demand Additional Variables
% of land under cotton
Relative per kg price of fertilizer/price of
maize
Number of migrants in the household
% of adult members that are literate

% (from 0 to 1)

% (from 0 to 1)

0.29
2.53

0.13
0.88

4.14
0.10

4.18
0.12

IV.B. Fertilizer function estimates
Table 2 shows the estimation of the fertilizer equation in two specifications. The
difference between the specifications is the inclusion of the use of organic fertilizer as an
independent variable for model 2. The model is a fixed effects estimation with robust
standard errors to correct for the correlation of the error across plots that belong to the
same household.
The estimations show no time trend in fertilizer demand once one controls for other
factors that influence fertilizer demand. There is a strong association between previous
cotton production on a plot and the following year’s fertilizer use, with an 82-86% higher

17

rate of application on plots that previously grew cotton. In addition the model 2
specification shows farmers applying lower levels of chemical fertilizer to plots that
received higher levels of organic fertilizer, suggesting farmers see these as at least partial
substitutes. These two results suggest that Malian farmers apply chemical fertilizer to
improve fields with lower natural or applied fertility, which implies that a naïve regression
of the effects of fertilizer that did not control for the endogeneity of its use would produce
biased estimates.
We do not find a statistically significant effect of labor availability, but see a strong effect
in terms of labor quality in our measure of the number of literate adults in the household.
As seen below in the yield equations levels of household literacy increase the productivity
of fertilizer (likely through learning and management effects) and it stands to reason that
this would also increase fertilizer demand.
In terms of price variables, the estimates show a weakly significant but negative effect of
fertilizer prices on fertilizer demand. We find much stronger effects on fertilizer demand
from our proxies for access to capital. While the number of migrants is not significant, the
percentage of land devoted to cotton in the household shows a large and significant effect
on the ability of farmers to purchase chemical fertilizer for their maize fields.
Table 2 Estimation for fertilizer demand
Model 1
Dep variable: log (fertilizer per ha)
Coefficient S.E.

Model 2
Coefficient S.E.

Time Trend
1 if cotton plant previous year
Log(organic fert per ha)
Log fert price/maize price
Number of migrants in the household
% land under cotton
Log (number of adults/ha)
% of adults that are literate in hh
Constant

0.087
0.861***

0.06
0.24

-1.074*
0.222
3.832***
0.176
2.5793**
1.782**

0.6
0.19
1.41
0.66
1.21
0.82

0.067
0.821***
-0.116*
-0.788
0.286
4.426***
0.479
2.622**
0.597

Number of observations

733

0.07
0.25
0.06
0.56
0.18
1.41
0.64
1.34
0.77

675

IV.C. Yield Function Estimates
Table 3 presents the fixed effects yield estimations for the baseline model and model 1.
Both estimates include a time trend to capture disembodied technical change and a set of
yield determinants including land, labor, rainfall, and fertilizer. The baseline estimation
does not include the terms associated with the residuals of the fertilizer estimation, while
the second includes the residuals and their interaction with the log of fertilizer as specified
in equation (8).

18

The baseline estimation demonstrates a number of the pitfalls of not addressing farm and
farmer heterogeneity in the demand for fertilizer. It shows a negative and statistically
non-significant impact of the use of chemical fertilizer on yields. The only positive
relation between fertilizers and maize yields is through the interaction with the percentage
of adult members that are literate in the household. In addition the baseline estimation
shows a strong time trend, suggesting a nearly 4% per year level of technical change in
maize yields.
In contrast the model 1 estimates, which control for the potential endogeneity of fertilizer
use, show much stronger effects of chemical fertilizer on yields and a much more modest
and marginally significant level of technical change of ~2%. The model 1 estimate of a
yield elasticity of 0.2 for fertilizer when combined with the literacy premium of 0.36,
yields a substantial effect of fertilizer on yields especially for the most educated
households. The positive impact of the interaction between literacy and the use of
fertilizer is consistent with the importance of adequate management in fertilizer
application. At the same time, this coefficient might reflect other variables such as a
higher presence of extension agents in areas that are more developed and that
consequently present a more educated population.
The model 1 estimates show significant effects of farmer heterogeneity in their optimal
fertilizer application and that this heterogeneity does effect yields. This second
specification shows a negative and statistically significant relationship between the
demeaned residuals of fertilizer use and the demeaned yields: our estimate of  (in
equation (7)) is negative. At the same time, the estimation shows a positive and
statistically significant impact of the interaction between fertilizer use and the residuals of
the fertilizer equation: our estimate of  (in equation (7)) is positive.
A positive and statistically significant estimation of

 implies that households that use

more fertilizer are households that benefit more from the using it. These results confirm
the presence of unobserved heterogeneity in the sample under analysis. On the other
hand, the negative and statistically significant estimate of  , implying a negative
correlation between the residuals of the fertilizer equation and yields, suggests that
fertilizers might compensate for the declining soil fertility. The residuals alone having a
significant and negative coefficient suggest that the unobservables in the fertilizer
equation that tend to increase fertilizer demand have a negative effect on maize yields (for
example unobserved low soil fertility). Meanwhile the interaction of the unobservables
with fertilizer use suggests that those unobservables increase the marginal productivity of
fertilizer. If one takes the unobservables from the fertilizer equation to be related to soil
fertility, one sees that it reduces maize yields but produces a higher marginal return to
fertilizer application as one would expect across low ranges of soil fertility common in
West African soils.

19

We find no effect of either rainfall or household labor on maize yields. The lack of a
rainfall result may be due to farmer’s ability to do ex-post farm management of the crops
in which they can make up for poor rain in June, by replanting, and poor rain in August by
extra effort in other farm tasks such as weeding. The household labor variable is likely
not measured accurately enough to demonstrate an effect on yields.

Table 3 Maize Yield Estimations: Model 1
Baseline
Dep. variable: log (maize per ha)
Coefficient S.E.

Model 1
Coefficient S.E.

Time Trend
Log(area of the plot)
1 if cotton plant prev year
Log (number of adults/ha)
log (Rain in june)
log (Rain august)
log (fertilizer per ha)
% lit members*log (fertilizer/ha)
Residuals of fert demand equation
Residuals *(log (fertilizer per ha))
Constant

0.039***
-0.006
-0.031
-0.077
-0.048
0.005
-0.015
0.343**

0.01
0.05
0.07
0.15
0.10
0.13
0.01
0.14

6.971***

0.56

0.019*
0.038
-0.173*
-0.115
-0.02
0.014
0.232***
0.364***
-0.208***
0.010***
5.941***

N

733

0.01
0.06
0.09
0.16
0.10
0.13
0.05
0.12
0.05
0.001
0.61

733

A second factor that might influence yields, as well as the impact of fertilizer on yields, is
the use of organic fertilizer, which we control for in our model 2 estimates. The next set of
estimations includes the use of organic fertilizer as an additional determinant of yields as
well as a determinant of the use of chemical fertilizer. Table 4 shows yield estimations
that include the use of organic fertilizer. The first specification shows the baseline model,
which has a positive and statistically significant impact of organic fertilizer use on yields.
The second specification corrects for the residuals of the fertilizer use equation, where this
equation includes the use of organic fertilizer as an independent variable. The results for
either fertilizer, it’s residual, or other variables do not change much from the results
shown in Table 3. The third specification includes the interaction between the use of
organic fertilizer and the use of chemical fertilizers. The estimated coefficient on this
interaction is not statistically significant, suggesting no significant complementary
interaction between organic and chemical fertilizer. While this result contrasts with that
of Marenya and Barrett (2009), this lack of significant complementarity matches well with
the fertilizer demand equation, which shows chemical and organic fertilizer to be
substitutes rather than complements.

20

Table 4 Maize Yield Estimates: Model 2 with organic fertilizer
Baseline
Coeff.

S.E.

Model 2A
Coeff.

S.E.

Time Trend
Log(area of the plot)
1 if cotton plant prev year
Log (number of adults/ha)
log (Rain in june)
log (Rain august)
Log(organic fert per ha)
log (fertilizer per ha)
% lit members*log (fertilizer/ha)
log (fert/ha)*log (organic fert/ha)
Residuals of fert use equation
Residuals *(log (fertilizer/ha))
Constant

0.036***
-0.006
-0.052
-0.111
-0.038
0.059
0.027**
-0.014
0.377***

0.01
0.05
0.08
0.16
0.10
0.12
0.01
0.01
0.13

0.009
0.025
-0.227**
-0.22
-0.026
0.064
0.054***
0.255***
0.397***

0.01
0.05
0.10
0.16
0.10
0.12
0.01
0.05
0.12

0.55

-0.238***
0.009**
5.977***

0.05
0.004
0.59

N

675

Dep. variable: log (maize per ha)

6.775***

675

Model 2B
Coeff.

S.E.

0.008
0.029
-0.228**
-0.22
-0.024
0.062
0.061***
0.247***
0.407***
-0.002
-0.243***
0.009**
5.998***

0.01
0.05
0.10
0.16
0.10
0.12
0.02
0.05
0.12
0.003
0.05
0.004
0.59

675

IV.D. Econometric Results Discussion
The estimations presented here have demonstrated the importance of controlling for the
endogeneity of fertilizer use. The results indicate that in the absence of controlling for
endogeneity, the impact of fertilizer use on yields would not be consistently estimated due
to the correlation between the unobservables and the use of chemical fertilizer. In addition,
we find that there is evidence of heterogeneity in the impact of fertilizer on yields. First,
this impact is higher for households with a higher percentage of members in the household
that are literate. Secondly, we find strong evidence of unobserved heterogeneity, which
affects both the choice of fertilizer amounts and the marginal returns to fertilizers.
The estimations show much stronger evidence for the growth in maize yields having been
driven by farmer adoption of higher levels of fertilizer use rather than improvements in
seeds and management, disembodied technical change. This is not to say that farmers did
not adopt new technologies, but rather the maize revolution came as a sequential adoption
process (e.g., Aldana et al. 2010) in which farmers adopted parts of a package in
succession: seed first, appropriate levels of organic and chemical fertilizer later.
The importance of controlling for endogeneity in fertilizer use, goes beyond a correct
decomposition of the determinants of corn yields. The naïve model ignoring this
endogeneity would have decided that most of the technical change was in seeds and
21

management and seriously underestimated the return to fertilizer. Such an underestimate
of the returns to fertilizer could seriously call into question public policies such as the
Malian government’s current program to subsidize fertilizer. Once one controls for both
observed and unobserved heterogeneity in the returns to fertilizer one sees yield
elasticities of about 0.2-0.3 for fertilizer. In addition farmers seem to respond to reduced
fertility of their soils, as happens with cotton cultivation (Benjaminsen et al. 2010), with
increased applications of fertilizer. This suggests a sophistication in African farmer
knowledge that goes beyond that commonly suggested in the economics literature. Malian
farmers are using fertilizer application rates to make both temporally and dynamically
rational decisions about the fertility of their soils.

V.

Conclusions

The success of Mali’s farmers in adopting technologies and intensifying their maize
production has created a green revolution in maize production in the region. In part
through the adoption of improved maize seeds, farming techniques, and the growing use
of fertilizer on maize fields, farmers in southern Mali have helped turn Mali from being a
food deficit country to a regional bread basket. This success has been fostered by a
combination of research efforts, extension and diffusion of ideas especially by the cotton
parastatal CMDT, and a farmer willingness to adopt new seeds and inputs. The success is
not unique, as Alene et al. (2009) show that a number of other countries have had similar
improvements in maize production.
Adoption of improved maize varieties in Mali in the late 1980s early 1990’s led first to a
growth in maize production, which was followed by a sharp growth in the use of fertilizer
in maize production from the late 1990’s to the 2000’s. This later growth in fertilizer use
(adoption of fertilizer for maize cultivation) is primarily responsible for the growth in
maize yields one sees in the last decade, as opposed to better management or seeds.
Counter to the situation one sees in many African countries, Malian farmers adopted
fertilizer for maize in growing numbers despite an increasing price for fertilizer relative to
the flat price of maize. This suggests that recent efforts to subsidize fertilizer for maize
production could have an increasing knock-on effect.
It is important to highlight that the high estimates of the impact of fertilizer do not mean
that the adoption of new seed varieties has had no impact on yields. Based on our results,
we can assert that the adoption of new seed varieties needs to be complemented by
increased use of fertilizers. This finding is aligned with Smale et al. (2011) who assert that
yields in many African countries have remained stagnated, in spite of the generalized
adoption of new seeds, due to the low levels of fertilizer use.
The results presented in this paper also highlight the importance of cash and credit
constraints in the adoption and use of fertilizer. The results show that an important
determinant of fertilizer use is given by the percentage of land under cotton. Since the
fertilizer used in corn plots is financed with the promise of delivering cotton to the
parastatal textile company CMDT, our results confirm the argument presented in Laris and

22

Foltz, (2011) and in Tefft (2010) that cotton production contributes to food security
through the credit it provides for fertilizer use.
There remains room for a great deal of improvement in maize yields in Mali and the West
African region in the future. Most of the last decade’s growth in yields is due to improved
use of inputs, but higher performing varieties of maize seed, including hybrids, are already
available on the market in Mali and could lead to a next jump in maize yields and
production. In addition new maize varieties that are drought resistant have the potential to
spread maize production into lower rainfall regions of Mali and give those farmers the
potential to access the higher fertilizer responsiveness of maize compared to sorghum or
millet. There is also room for more work on the silent green revolution in maize in Mali.
First, Mali is not alone in experiencing this growth and work that compared and analyzed
the similarly large growth of maize in Burkina Faso would provide a comparative
perspective that might help identify key institutional factors that promoted this revolution.
Expanding the analysis to the whole region could be particularly important in identifying
institutional factors, since other neighboring countries such as Senegal, Gambia, Guinea,
and Niger have been left out of the growth in maize.

23

References
Alene, A. D., A. Menkir, S. O. Ajala, B. Badu-Apraku, A. S. Olanrewaju, V. M.
Manyong, Abdou Ndiaye. 2009. “The economic and poverty impacts of maize
research in West and Central Africa” Agricultural Economics 40: 535–550.
Aldana, U., J. Foltz, B. Barham, and P. Useche, 2010.“Sequential Adoption of Package
Technologies: The Dynamics of Stacked Corn Adoption,” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 93(1): 130-143.
Benjamin, D. 1995. "Can Unobserved Land Quality explain the Inverse Productivity
Relationship?" Journal of Development Economics. (February) 46(1):51-84.
Benjaminsen, Tor A., Jens B. Aune, and Daouda Sidibé. 2010. “A critical political
ecology of cotton and soil fertility in Mali” Geoforum 41(1): 647–656.
Block, S. 1994. “ A New View of Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics. (76)3.
Block, S. 2010. “The Decline and Rise of Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa
Since 1961.” NBER Working Paper 16481.
Chayanov, A. V. 1986. Theory of the Peasant Economy. Madison WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Chikowo, R. ; Vanlauwe, B. ; Giller, K. E. ; Tittonell, P. ; Corbeels, M. ; Mapfumo, P.,
2010. “Nitrogen and phosphorus capture and recovery efficiencies, and crop
responses to a range of soil fertility management strategies in sub-Saharan Africa.”
Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, Sept., v. 88, no. 1, p. 59-77.
Crawford, C., T. Jayne, and V. Kelly. 2006. “Alternative Approaches for Promoting
Fertilizer Use in Africa.” World Bank. Agriculture and Rural Development
Discussion Paper 22.
Coulibaly, Ntji. 2008. “Fiche Technique sur Les Variétés de Mais au Mali” Institut
d’Economie Rural, Bamako, Mali.
Delarue, Jocelyne; Sandrine Mesplé-Somps; Jean-David Naudet; Denis Cogneau; AnneSophie Robilliard. 2008. “The Sikasso Paradox: Does Cotton Reduce Poverty?”
Paper presented at PEGnet conference 2008: Assessing Development Impact –
Learning from Experience, Accra (Ghana), 11 – 12 September, 2008.
Duflo, E., M. Kremer and J. Robinson. 2008. “How High are Rates of Return to Fertilizer?
Evidence from Field Experiments in Kenya” American Economics Review, Vol. 98
(2): 482-88, May 2008.

24

Duflo, E., M. Kremer and J. Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer:
Evidence from Kenya” American Economic Review.
Fok, M., M. Kone, H. Djouara, and A. Dolo. 2000. “Combined and changing effects of
market incentives, technical innovations and support on maize production in
Southern Mali”. Communication associated to a poster presented to the IAAE 24th
International Conference, Berlin (Germany), 2000.
Foster, A. & Rosenzweig, M. R. 1995. “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture," Journal of Political
Economy 103(6), 1176-1209.
Foster, A., and M. Rosenzweig 2010. “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption” Yale
University Center Discussion Paper, #984.
Garen, John. 1984. “The Returns to Schooling: A Selectivity Bias Approach with a
Continuous Choice Variable” Econometrica, Vol. 52, No. 5 (Sep., 1984), pp.
1199-1218.
Laris, Paul and Jeremy Foltz. 2011. “Cotton as Catalyst: The Shifting Role of Fertilizer in
Mali’s Silent Maize Revolution”. Mimeo, University of Wisconsin – Madison.
Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin. 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables.” Review of Economic Studies. 70:317-342.
Marenya, P. and C. Barrett. 2009. “Soil quality and fertilizer use rates among smallholder
farmers in western Kenya” Agricultural Economics 40 (2009) 561–572
Sileshi, Gudeta; Ajayi, Oluyede C.; Mong'omba, Simon; Beedy, Tracy; Akinnifesi, Festus
K.; Debusho, Legesse K. 2010. “Variation in maize yield gaps with plant nutrient
inputs, soil type and climate across sub-Saharan Africa” Field Crops Research,
Mar. 3, v. 116, no. 1-2, p. 1-13.
Smale, M., D. Byerlee, and T. Jayne. 2011 “Maize Revolutions in Sub-Saharan Africa.”
World Bank Development Group, Policy Research Working Paper, No. 5659.
Suri, Tavneet. 2011. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption”
Econometrica, Vol. 79, No. 1 (January), 159–209.
Tefft, James. 2010. “Mali’s White Revolution: Smallholder Cotton, 1960-2007.” In Steven
Haggblade and Peter B. R. Hazell, Successes in African Agriculture: Lessons for
the Future. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wopereis, M.; Vanlauwe, B.; Mando, A. 2008.“Agroecological principles of integrated
soil fertility management: a guide with special reference to Sub-Saharan Africa”

25

International Center for Soil Fertility and Agricultural Development. Muscle
Shoals, Ala.: International Center for Soil Fertility and Agricultural Development.
Xu, Z., Z. Guan, T.S. Jayne, and R. Black. 2009. “Factors Influencing the Profitability of
Fertilizer Use on Maize in Zambia.” Agricultural Economics 40: 437–446.

Appendix
Table A1 Available maize varieties in Mali, 2008.
Maize Variety
Maximum
Origin Type
Minimu
Farmer
m
Yields
rainfall
Kogoni B
2 - 3 T/HA Mali
OPV
800mm
IER
/yr
Tzersw
2 - 3 T/HA Mali
OPV
800mm
IER
/yr
Tiémantié
3.5 - 4
Mali
OPV
800mm
T/HA
IER
/yr

Date
of
Intro
1970

Other quality

90 day variety,
resists leaf disease
1983 90 day variety,
resists leaf disease
1983 100-120 day,
sensitive to leaf
disease,
SR22
4 - 5 T/HA Mali
OPV
800mm 1984 100-120 day, resists
(EV8422SR)
IER
/yr
leaf disease
Sotubaka
4 - 5 T/HA Mali
OPV
800mm 1985 100-120 day, resists
IER
/yr
leaf disease
Niéléni
3 T/HA
Mali
OPV
600mm 1996 90 day variety,
IER
/yr
resists leaf disease
Appolo
2 T/HA
Mali
OPV
500mm 1996 70 day variety,
IER
/yr
resists leaf disease
Dembanyuman 4 - 5 T/HA Ghana OPV
800mm 1998 100-120 day, resists
/yr
leaf disease
Jorobana
2 - 3 T/HA Mali
OPV
600mm 2008 80 day variety,
IER
/yr
resists leaf disease
Mali Hybride 7 6 -7 T/HA
Mali
Hybrid 800mm 2008 100-120 day, resists
IER
/yr
leaf disease
Source: Coulibaly, Ntji. 2008. “Fiche Technique sur Les Variétés de Mais au Mali” IERMali.

26

