                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ESTIMATING THE EFFECT OF LEADERS ON PUBLIC SECTOR PRODUCTIVITY:
                     THE CASE OF SCHOOL PRINCIPALS

                                          Gregory F. Branch
                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Steven G. Rivkin

                                        Working Paper 17803
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17803


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




This research has been supported by the Packard Humanities Institute and the Smith Richardson Foundation,
the Spencer Foundation, and the Hewlett Foundation. The conclusions of this research do not necessarily
reflect the opinions or official position of the Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board, or the State of Texas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gregory F. Branch, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Effect of Leaders on Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals
Gregory F. Branch, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 17803
February 2012
JEL No. H4,I2,J4

                                               ABSTRACT

Although much has been written about the importance of leadership in the determination of organizational
success, there is little quantitative evidence due to the difficulty of separating the impact of leaders
from other organizational components – particularly in the public sector. Schools provide an especially
rich environment for studying the impact of public sector management, not only because of the hypothesized
importance of leadership but also because of the plentiful achievement data that provide information
on institutional outcomes. Outcome-based estimates of principal value-added to student achievement
reveal significant variation in principal quality that appears to be larger for high-poverty schools. Alternate
lower-bound estimates based on direct estimation of the variance yield smaller estimates of the variation
in principal productivity but ones that are still important, particularly for high poverty schools. Patterns
of teacher exits by principal quality validate the notion that a primary channel for principal influence
is the management of the teacher force. Finally, looking at principal transitions by quality reveals little
systematic evidence that more effective leaders have a higher probability of exiting high poverty schools.


Gregory F. Branch                                      Steven G. Rivkin
Texas Schools Project                                  Department of Economics
University of Texas at Dallas                          University of Illinois at Chicago
Richardson, TX 75080                                   601 South Morgan UH725 M/C144
gregory.branch@utdallas.edu                            Chicago, IL 60607
                                                       and NBER
Eric A. Hanushek                                       sgrivkin@uic.edu
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu
          Estimating the Effect of Leaders on Public Sector Productivity:
                          The Case of School Principals

               by Gregory F. Branch, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin

I. Introduction
        Leadership quality is often cited as key to organizational success across such
diverse places as boardrooms, sports arenas, national legislatures, and schools. Yet it is
often quite difficult to distinguish cause and effect, as those anointed as great leaders may
simply have been in the right place at the right time. The standard analytical approach to
investigating the importance of leaders, developed in the analysis of private firms, has
concentrated on the outcomes – typically revenues or profits – associated with the top
managers who have varying backgrounds or experiences. But such an outcome-based
approach requires an empirical model that effectively isolates the contribution of
leadership from a variety of other, perhaps correlated, factors driving outcomes.
Consideration of public sector leadership introduces special challenges because of the
lack of market discipline and revenue and profit measures of outcomes.
        Analysis of the impact of CEOs on corporate results has a lengthy history, where
a variety of methods have been used to infer impacts from the pattern of market returns to
a company.1 In an important recent paper, Bertrand and Schoar (2003) provide an
innovative new approach. Using semi-parametric methods with panel data to identify the
effects of CEOs and top managers, they find that variation in the effectiveness of leaders
explains a significant portion of the variance in profits and other outcomes. By
simultaneously estimating both firm and manager fixed effects, the authors control for
time-invariant differences among firms that could contaminate estimates of the variance
in manager effectiveness.2

1
  There is an older literature with event studies on returns with changes in management (e.g., Johnson,
Magee, Nagarajan, and Newman (1985)). Other work has looked the impact of management in family
owned firms (see Bertrand (2009)) and at changes from firm founders (Bennedsen, Meisner Nielsen, Pérez-
González, and Wolfenzon (2007)). Much of research on CEO performance has been motivated by
investigations of CEO salaries (see, for example, Englmaier, Illing, and Sadka (2009) and the related
symposium).
2
  However, changes over time in a variety of unobserved factors could inflate the estimated variance of
manager behavior or productivity, even if the sample is limited to managers who work in at least two firms.
Given the endogenous matching of firms and managers, there is a strong possibility that common
unobservables are present in the multiple jobs worked during the sample period. For example, managers


                                                                                                              2
        A second strand of literature important for our analysis has focused on
management practices at the plant level, recognizing that CEOs are far removed from
much of the actual management activity. Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) and related
articles have documented the importance of differences in business and management
practices across firms and countries by relating survey data to productivity differences.
Their survey focuses on activities of plant managers in the manufacturing sector and
attempts to describe key elements of management (such as the monitoring of employees
or the provision of good hiring incentives). They find these surveyed attributes to be
correlated not only with firm performance but also with aggregate productivity at the
national level. It is at the same time not so much a direct study of the role and
importance of managers as it is an investigation of management practices.
        In this paper we combine elements of both strands of work in an investigation of
variation in the quality of management in education. We begin our investigation of
performance at the “plant” level by using the same semi-parametric approach used in
Bertrand and Schoar (2003) to estimate the variance in principal effectiveness. We then
extend the analysis in order to account more fully for the influences of time-varying
unobservables by isolating the additional year-to-year fluctuation in outcomes that
accompany changes in the principal. Following estimation of the variance in principal
effectiveness, we investigate one widely discussed mechanism through which principals
affect achievement: the management of teacher transitions. Importantly, because high
teacher turnover can be associated with both improvement and decline in the quality of
instruction, the level of turnover per se provides little information on the wisdom of
principal personnel decisions. Therefore, we focus on the relationship between the quality
of teachers who transition out of a school and the quality of principals.
        Throughout the entire analysis, we are particularly interested in the assignment of
principals to schools serving disadvantaged students. From case studies and anecdotal
accounts, the importance of principals seems most apparent when considering schools
serving disadvantaged populations. It is frequently asserted that high poverty schools are

who were profitable in their first positions may have more opportunities to gain employment at firms on the
upswing in terms of profits due perhaps to a negative random shock in the prior period. Moreover,
nonpersistent factors orthogonal to manager quality or behavior will inflate the variance of the estimated
fixed effects, even if they do not bias the estimates of the impact of individual CEOs. These are issues we
consider below.


                                                                                                              3
hurt by being unable to attract and retain good principals. The demands of leading such
schools, including the need to overcome less desirable working conditions in order to
attract and retain high quality teachers, may amplify the importance of having an
effective leader.3
         The final component of the empirical analysis considers dynamics of the principal
labor market. Do the best principals tend to move away from high poverty schools?
Since pay and career advancement in the public sector are often insulated from
performance in ways different from private sectors, it is not possible simply to track the
pay of principals. Instead, we turn to a direct investigation of the quality of movers and
stayers within schools, particularly those serving disadvantaged populations.


II. The productivity of school leaders

         A dynamic and skilled school leader is frequently described as the key element of
a high-quality school, and stories of the inspirational and effective principal are plentiful
and oft-repeated.4 The leadership and decision-making provided by a school principal is
proximate and tied directly to outcomes in her school, unlike that of a school
superintendent of a large district who operates more like a CEO in terms of providing
broad policy guidance. But there is no clarity from past work about what attributes might
lead to success.5
         A distinctive feature of this analysis is the focus on the public sector.6 Unlike
private industry, public institutions do not necessarily have a well-defined objective
function, complicating the analysis of their behavior. At the same time, with the advent
of accountability systems under No Child Left Behind (NCLB) and the complementary
state systems, schools do have a direct incentive to maximize achievement on
standardized tests.


3
  Hanushek and Rivkin (2007), Boyd et al. (2011).
4
  A large qualitative literature focuses on “effective schools” and in that generally places special emphasis
on principals and leadership issues. See, for example, Edmonds (1979), Purkey and Smith (1983), or the
case studies in Carter (2000).
5
  For some exploratory analysis of this, see Grissom and Loeb (forthcoming).
6
  One place where management has previously been considered in public employment is in welfare offices,
but much of this has concentrated on the narrower question of how managers react to different incentives;
see, for example, Courty and Marschke (2004) and Heinrich and Marschke (2010).


                                                                                                                4
       In contrast to the traditional revenue and return focus of CEO and management
studies, our study changes the performance measurement to student achievement. The
advantage of this is that it insulates the study from exogenous factors such as prices,
aggregate economic fluctuations, or prior capital investment decisions. However, test-
measurement error and other test-related issues introduce other complications that must
be addressed.
       In broad terms, we take a generally agnostic view of the attributes of principals
that are important and use school administrative data to concentrate on the more basic
question of how important is variation in principal quality. Our administrative data, with
very large longitudinal samples of principals and schools, provide a particularly rich
source of information for the investigation of leadership effects, because they enable the
direct estimation of productivity on the basis of contributions to student achievement.
       Most prior analysis of principal effectiveness has been qualitative, though a small
number of papers examine the determinants of principal effectiveness and any links with
the labor market. Brewer (1993) and Eberts and Stone (1988) find that specific principal
characteristics are related to high school student achievement, though the limited set of
covariates may fail to account for important factors that could introduce bias. Loeb,
Kalogrides, and Béteille (forthcoming) look at how a school’s value-added is related to
the movement of teachers and suggest that this relationship is likely to reflect a
principal’s influence.
       Finally, Cullen and Mazzeo (2008) investigate the link between principal salary
growth and employment transitions on the one hand and principal effectiveness as
measured by state accountability rating and achievement on the other. They find a
positive relationship between salary and both accountability rating and student
achievement. Nonetheless, the inclusion of just a limited set of student, school, and
district controls leaves open the possibility that neither accountability rating nor student
achievement provide a meaningful measure of principal effectiveness because of the
contributions of unobserved student, family, peer and school factors.
       Our central objective is to gain a better understanding of the overall impact and
importance of principals, a fundamental issue for education policy. We do this in two
different ways. First, following the general approach of Bertrand and Schoar (2003), we


                                                                                               5
estimate models that include both principal and school fixed effects and use the principal
fixed effects to generate estimates of the variance in principal effectiveness. Second, we
generate lower-bound estimates of the variance in principal effectiveness from the
relationship between year-to-year variation in school achievement and principal
transitions (following the general approach used by Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)).
This second approach accounts for some of the year-to-year fluctuations in achievement
that inflate variance estimates based on principal fixed effects but that are not caused by
principals. Nonetheless, even the second approach may be vulnerable to biases
introduced by unobserved factors. Therefore, we take a number of steps to mitigate any
bias and examine the robustness of the results in both estimation frameworks. We also
validate the estimates by assessing the impact of principal quality on decisions about
teachers.


III. The Texas Database
       The administrative data used in this project were constructed as part of the UTD
Texas Schools Project. Working with the Texas Education Agency (TEA), this project
has combined different data sources to create matched panel data sets of students,
teachers, and principals. The panels include all Texas public school teachers,
administrators, staff, and students in each year, permitting accurate descriptions of the
schools for each principal.
       The Public Education Information Management System (PEIMS), TEA’s
statewide educational database, reports key demographic data including race, ethnicity,
and gender for students and school personnel as well as student eligibility for a
subsidized lunch. PEIMS also contains detailed annual information on teacher and
administrator experience, salary, education, class size, grade, population served, and
subject. Importantly, this database can be merged with information on student
achievement by campus, grade, and year. Beginning in 1993, the Texas Assessment of
Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered each spring to eligible students enrolled in




                                                                                              6
grades three through eight.7 These criterion referenced tests, which assess student
mastery of grade-specific subject matter, are merged with the student and personnel
information. Reading and math tests each contain approximately 50 questions, although
the number of questions and average percent correctly answered varies across time and
grades. We transform all test results into standardized scores with a mean of zero and
variance equal to one for each subject, grade, and year, implying that our achievement
measures describe students by their relative position in the overall state performance
distribution.
         The personnel data combine time as a teacher and as an administrator into total
experience, so it is not possible to measure tenure as a principal accurately for those who
begin their principal career prior to the initial year of our data (the 1990/91 school year).
Therefore, for both the descriptive analysis and the achievement modeling we concentrate
on the period 1995-2001, and we allocate principals to precise experience and tenure
categories in the early career while aggregating experience for six or more years.8
         One of the strengths of our sample is the large number of principals and schools
that are observed. Over the 1995-2001 period we observe 7,420 unique principals that
yield 28,147 annual observations of principals. The large samples provide the
opportunity to investigate differences by the poverty level of the school.


IV. Principal transitions
         Our estimation relies on changes in school outcomes that come with a change in
principal. Therefore, it is important to understand the extent and character of principal
turnover. Moreover, these principal moves are important in their own right. In parallel to
concerns about teacher turnover, instability of leadership is often cited as a detriment to
school improvement in high poverty and lower performing schools.9


7
  Many special education and limited English proficient students are exempted from the tests. In each year
roughly 15 percent of students do not take the tests, either because of an exemption or because of repeated
absences on testing days.
8
  Note that the achievement tests in Texas were changed in 2002, thus making comparison of results over
time difficult.
9
  Teachers been shown to have preferences for the income, race, and achievement composition of students
along with geographic locations; see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004), Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, and
Wyckoff (2005), Scafidi, Sjoquist, and Stinebrickner (2007). Some evidence of similar preferences for
principals also exists in Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng (2010).


                                                                                                              7
         We begin by describing the distribution of principals by job tenure and the pattern
of transitions with specific attention to differences by school poverty share and
mathematics achievement. Schools with a high proportion low income students (those
eligible for a subsidized lunch) are more likely to have first year principals and less likely
to have principals who have been at the school at least six years than those with a less
disadvantaged population (Table 1).10 Nonetheless, the division of schools by initial
achievement produces much larger differences. The proportion of principals in their
initial year with a school is roughly 40 percent higher in schools with the lowest average
initial achievement than those with the highest average initial achievement; the
proportion of principals that have been at their current school at least six years is roughly
50 percent higher in the highest achievement schools. Differences are also far smaller
when ordered by the black or Hispanic enrollment share (not shown).
         Table 2 reports annual principal transitions categorized by destination, new role,
and tenure. Thirty percent of principals in our sample leave their school each year
regardless of tenure in the school (compared to 20 percent nationally in 2009).11 Perhaps
more surprising, between 1 in 5 and 1 in 6 principals annually exit the Texas public
schools, and the probability of exit does not vary much by tenure.12 The probability of
changing schools and remaining a principal rises from 5.9 percent following the first year
at a school to 8.3 percent following the third through fifth years prior to falling back to
5.7 percent for those with tenures of at least six years. By comparison, the probability of
transitioning to a non-principal role at a campus declines from 4.5 percent to 2.8 percent
as tenure increases from one to at least six years. For those with at least two years of
tenure approximately 2 percent make a transition to work as district administrators.




10
   Nationally in 2009, principal departures from a school are virtually identical for schools that did and did
not participate in the free or reduced-price lunch program (Battle (2010)). Gates et al. (2006) find similar
higher mobility in disadvantaged schools in North Carolina. As noted earlier the administrative data we
use combine years as a principal with years spent in other roles including teaching. Therefore, there is no
information on tenure as a principal beyond the years observed in the sample.
11
   See Battle (2010).
12
   Note that limiting the sample to principals with no more than 25 years of experience in order to lessen the
contribution of retirements has little impact on these patterns.


                                                                                                                 8
V. Fixed-effects Estimates of the Variation in Principal Effectiveness
        The fundamental identification challenge is the separation of the contribution of
principals from other factors that drive student achievement. In this section we describe
the value-added model used to estimate principal fixed effects and the results of that
estimation. Estimates are produced for a series of specifications and samples in order to
examine the sensitivity of the variance estimates to potential confounding factors
including test measurement error and issues surrounding test construction.

      A. Empirical model
        Our basic value-added model relates achievement (A) for student i in school s
with principal p in year y to prior achievement, observed student characteristics (X), time
varying school and peer characteristics (C), and a vector of principal-by-school fixed
effects ().13 Adding a random error (ε), the basic empirical model is:
                               Aiy   Aiy 1   X iy   Csy   sp   iy
        (1)


        The concern of course is that other unmeasured factors will be correlated with the
principal in each school and with the principal’s effectiveness. One fundamental
alternative to equation (1) is to add a vector of school fixed effects () – implying that the
impact of principals is estimated entirely on the within-school variation in achievement
through comparing student performance when different principals run each school. This
approach guards against systematic selection of the schools by students and principals,
but it also puts extra strain on the data. Below, we consider both equation (1) and the
expansion to include the school fixed effects.
        In the empirical application, the vector X includes a full set of race and ethnicity
indicators and indicators for subsidized lunch eligibility, special education participation,
female and English as a second language. It also includes indicators for school changes:
a switch to the earliest grade offered in a different school (including structural transitions
from elementary to middle school) and a switch to other than the earliest grade offered in

13
  While the general concept has been used in education for over three decades (see Hanushek (1979)), the
recent addition of extensive administrative data bases has led to expansion of both the empirical analysis
(Hanushek and Rivkin (2010b)) and the understanding of fundamental underlying estimation and
interpretation issues (Meghir and Rivkin (2011)).


                                                                                                             9
a new school. The vector C of time-varying aggregate influences includes average
demographic characteristics for students in school s in year y including proportion low
income, proportion classified as special needs, proportion that are new entrants to the
school and proportion female. All regressions also include a full set of year-by-grade
indicators to account for test and other statewide policy changes.14
         As with related prior analyses of value-added for teachers, the lagged
achievement term is included to capture past inputs from families, schools, and peers
along with overall ability differences. This formulation supports a focus on just the
contemporaneous inputs that are related to student learning in year y.

      B. Variance estimates based on three year spells
         We begin with estimates of the variation in principal effectiveness from a sample
restricted to the first three years a principal leads a school (similar to the approach taken
by Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). Because the impact of a principal on school quality
likely increases with tenure given the persistence of personnel and other decisions,
focusing on a sample of principals with the same tenure profile effectively controls for
variation in quality related to differences in length of tenure. Importantly, principal
impacts may become more positive or more negative over time, so simple linear or
polynomial controls for tenure are not appropriate. On the one hand, over time a principal
would be expected to learn about school operations, the effectiveness of various teachers,
and other school specific factors, and such learning would presumably improve job
performance. On the other hand, however, principal personnel decisions alter the stock of
teachers and the school environment, and the impact of a principal increases over time as
a principal accounts for more and more of the hiring and retention of the existing stock of
teachers.
         Table 3 reports the variance and 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the
principal-by-spell fixed-effect distribution disaggregated by the school poverty rate.
From the first column, we find that the overall standard deviation of principal
effectiveness is estimated to be 0.207. This is a very large effect – perhaps unbelievably


14
  For the actual estimation, the data are aggregated prior to running the regressions to the campus-by-grade-
by-year level to reduce the computational burden. All tables report absolute values of t-statistics based on
robust standard errors clustered by campus.


                                                                                                                10
large – because it implies that a principal one standard deviation above the mean would,
compared to an average principal, move mean achievement from the 50th percentile to the
58th percentile in one academic year. This impact is seen vividly by moving across the
given percentiles for all teachers: a principal in the top quarter of the distribution gets
average school gains of 0.11 s.d., while one in the bottom quarter has losses of 0.15 s.d..15
         Looking down the first column reveals a monotonic relationship between the
school poverty rate and the estimated variance. The variance in principal effectiveness
increases noticeably with the share of low income students in the school. An examination
of the achievement impacts at various quantiles of the principal quality distribution shows
that the increase in dispersion as the poverty level rises is most pronounced at the lower
end of the principal quality distribution: The difference in the effectiveness of the
principal between the least and most disadvantaged school equals -0.20 standard
deviations at the 10th percentile, -0.17 standard deviations at the 25th percentile, but only
0.07 standard deviations at the 90th percentile.
         It is tempting to conclude that the best principals are quite evenly distributed
across schools while the weakest principals are disproportionately found in high poverty
schools. Note, however, that we cannot distinguish between two, quite different
explanations for this pattern. High poverty schools may draw a disproportionate share of
the overall least effective principals; or, the least effective principals may be evenly
distributed but the adverse effect of low-productivity principals is larger in the most
disadvantaged schools.

     C. Test Measurement Issues
         The interpretation of these estimates is, nonetheless, complicated further by
potential test measurement issues. Not only can test measurement error and school
differences in the skill distribution of students – the two major issues to be discussed
below – contaminate the variance estimates, but these effects may differ systematically
by poverty level.



15
   Note that the median principal produces slightly negative average gains. This is a specific subset of
principals – those in their first three years of tenure in the school – and they are not far different from what
is expected for all principals.


                                                                                                                   11
         Existing research on teacher quality confirms the special measurement issues
arising in the study of achievement test results. Because the measurement of principal
effectiveness is based on student assessments, both the structure of tests and errors in test
measurement potentially complicate the estimation of principal quality.16 First, as Kane
and Staiger (2002) and Jacob and Lefgren (2005, (2006) point out in other contexts, even
in the absence of confounding influences, test-based quality estimates capture both
random error and true effects. Consequently variance estimates overstate the actual
variation in principal effectiveness, and the magnitude of any upward bias is likely to
increase as school size decreases. Following Morris (1983) we utilize a shrinkage
estimator to mitigate the impact of the test error. Normalizing average principal quality to

zero, the adjusted quality estimate  p for principal p equals
                                       a



                                 Vp        Vp 
                   p  1 
                    a
         (2)
                                          p            
                               V p  A          V p  A  

where  p is the estimated fixed effect for principal p,  is the average fixed effect for
all principals, Vp is the estimated variance of the fixed-effect estimate for principal p, and
A is the estimate of the overall variance. Essentially, the shrinkage estimator pulls
estimates toward the grand mean; the larger the error variance the more the adjusted fixed
effect is shrunk toward the grand mean.
         Second, the construction of the test may affect the translation of measured student
achievement into principal quality when differences in the achievement distribution exist
across schools. For example, in schools where many students score near the top of the
test at the beginning of the school year such that test ceiling effects become binding,
principal quality might have very little effect on standardized test scores even if the
principal is having substantial impact on the overall level of intellectual engagement and
quality of instruction in the school. This is particularly relevant for the TAAS scores that
we rely upon for our analysis, because the test is focused on lower level skills, and high
achieving students could do very well on this test even without attending school.
Consequently our test score-based-estimates of principal quality may produce a more

16
  Test measurement errors include both issues of reliability and of validity. Reliability encompasses
whether a test will consistently yield the same score for a given domain, while validity focuses on how well
the test assesses the intended material.


                                                                                                               12
compressed distribution for groups of schools with larger shares of initially high
achieving students. Because we are particularly interested in the possibility that principals
may have larger effects in schools serving predominantly disadvantaged students who
tend to have lower initial scores, producing valid comparisons across schools grouped by
poverty rate requires that this concern be addressed.
       We investigate the sensitivity of the estimates to student composition using two
alternative methods. The simplest incorporates a more flexible specification of prior
achievement in order to capture differences in expected test score growth by initial score.
Preliminary results (not reported) showed that polynomial terms for initial achievement
had little effect on the estimates of principal effectiveness. However, the inclusion of
quadratic or cubic terms may not fully address the problem given the skewness of the test
score distribution.
       Our preferred method is to weight performance by fixed weights in order to
produce estimates of principal quality not influenced by differences in the test score
distribution among schools. In particular, most schools have a mixture of students
performing at different achievement levels, and it is the varying proportions that signify
“advantaged” or “disadvantaged” in an achievement sense. Equation (3) shows the
calculation used to produce weighted school-by-grade-by-year mean test score:


                                                N
                                       1 10 sgyi        Fd
                             Asgy             
                                      Nsgy d 1 i 1 sharesgyd
                                                               Asgydi
       (3)
where Fd is the fixed weight share for test decile d, sharesgyd is the actual share of

students in school s in grade g in year y in decile d, N is enrollment, A is test score, and i
indexes child. For this, we normalize scores on schools serving poverty students. The
weights come from the distribution of 3rd grade mathematics achievement scores in 1994
for students in the top quartile of schools in terms of proportion of students eligible for a
subsidized lunch. F1 is the share in the bottom test score decile, F2 in the second decile,
and on up to F10 in the top decile. The scores of students at the low end of the distribution
receive disproportionate weight in schools with small shares of such students relative to
the weighting sample of higher poverty schools, while the scores of such students receive



                                                                                                 13
less than proportional weight in schools with a high concentration of initially low
achieving students.
        Table 4 presents three sets of estimates for all schools combined that address
these two measurement issues separately and then together. The top panel reproduces the
full-sample estimates from Table 3, the second panel contains information based on the
estimates summarized in Table 3 but shrunk to the grand mean on the basis of the
standard errors; the third panel reports the variance and quantiles for estimates of
principal fixed effects based on value-added estimates of reweighted data that eliminate
differences in the distribution of initial achievement among principals; finally, the bottom
panel reports results based on reweighted data that have been shrunk to remove the
effects of test error. Note that separate estimates by poverty quartile (not reported) follow
the pattern of change found in the full sample.
        The similarity between the results in the top two panels shows that shrinkage has
virtually no effect on the estimated distribution of principal quality. Unlike estimates of
teacher value-added that often rely on fewer than 15 observations for many teachers,
estimated value-added for principals even in quite small schools typically come from at
least several hundred test scores. Consequently the variance of the error is likely to be
quite small, and it is not surprising that shrinkage has little effect on the results.
        In contrast, there are marked differences among schools in the initial achievement
distribution, and this raises the possibility that the greater concentration of test scores at
the lower end of the achievement distribution causes the larger variance in principal
quality observed for high poverty schools. Re-weighting the scores such that the
estimates for all principals are based on the same underlying distribution among student
test score deciles lessens this concern. However, it does potentially increase the error
variance by placing greater weight on smaller cells, and this may have a particularly large
effect in very high and very low poverty schools
        Consistent with the notion that re-weighting increases the error variance, the use
of the shrinkage estimator has a much larger effect on the re-weighted data. Nonetheless,
after shrinking, the variance estimates of the reweighted data (bottom panel) remain
larger than those generated from the unweighted data (second panel), suggesting that test
limitations may introduce downward bias into estimates of principal effects on learning.


                                                                                                 14
Yet because of the possibility that reweighting could exacerbate unobserved influences
for students in small cells, we use unweighted data in the remainder of the analysis in
order to avoid overstating the variation in principal effectiveness.

     D. School Fixed-Effect Estimates
       The prior estimates show substantial variation in principal value-added, but
questions remain as to whether unobserved factors confound these estimates. If some
salient differences among schools (that are not under the control of the principal) are not
accounted for, estimates of  sp combine true principal effects with unobserved differences

in other school or student factors. To understand the potential for such bias, we include
school fixed effects () in the specifications. This eliminates the influence of time-
invariant school differences at the cost of restricting principal comparisons to others who
lead the same school. But, as a result, the estimated variance of the school fixed-effect
estimates of principal quality omits all between school variation in principal
effectiveness, potentially underestimating variations in principal quality.
       Importantly, the restriction of the sample to the first three years in a school is not
feasible in school fixed-effects models that identify principal effectiveness on the basis of
within-school achievement differences, because the numbers of schools with two
principals observed in their first three years is quite small. Therefore, in the fixed-effects
models we consider the full sample and do not control for years at the school, although
we do examine the effects of introducing controls for the first year of a spell.
       Table 5 reports variance estimates from models with and without school fixed
effects (with the latter estimates introduced to allow for potential differences due to
sample composition). The first column shows that estimates are very similar to the
comparable estimates in Table 4 for the sample restricted to the first three years at a
school even though they include the wider range of tenure. But, the second column shows
that the inclusion of the school fixed effects substantially reduces the variation in
estimated principal quality.
       In both the separate poverty categories and for the sample taken as a whole, the
inclusion of school fixed effects reduces the estimated variance of principal quality by
half. Although some of this reduction likely reflects the elimination of influences from



                                                                                                 15
confounding factors, some of it also likely reflects the elimination of real between-school
variation in principal effectiveness. Looking down the second column, we see that the
variance in effectiveness still increases monotonically with poverty concentration. In
fact, the relative increase in the variance of effectiveness is noticeably larger when
looking at just within-school variation.
         The overall estimate of the variance of principal effectiveness from within-school
variance, while smaller than the previous estimates, remains substantial. It indicates that
a one standard deviation increase in principal effectiveness raises school average
achievement by slightly more than 0.1 s.d, a magnitude roughly comparable to the
estimates of the within-school variance in teacher quality.


VI. Direct Estimation of a Lower Bound on the Variance in Principal
Effectiveness
         The previous estimates of the distribution of principal quality began with
estimation of the impact of individual principals and used these to understand what the
overall distribution looks like. Although unobserved factors that are orthogonal to
principal quality do not bias estimates of individual principal effectiveness, they do
inflate the estimates of the variance in principal quality (and were the subject of various
corrections). An alternative approach focuses on how the variance in achievement growth
changes across student cohorts as new principals assume leadership in a school. From
this, it is possible to estimate the variance in principal effectiveness directly and in so
doing to circumvent some of the complications of the prior estimation.17
         We begin with a modified version of the basic achievement equation from
equation (1), where we aggregate across the students in a school to get the average
achievement gain.18 Equation (4) relates the average gain in achievement in school s in
year y to principal quality (), the quality of other school factors including student
composition not under the control of the principal (δ), a school fixed effect (γ), and the
school average error that includes unobserved student influences:

17
   This approach is similar to that in Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005), which identified teacher quality
impacts through the movement of teachers in and out of schools.
18
   For ease of presentation, this depiction restricts the coefficient on lagged achievement to equal 1; family
and other time-varying school inputs are also combined into a single term.


                                                                                                                 16
(4)           Asy   sy   sy   s  sy
          Consider the difference between successive years y and y ' in average gains in
achievement. This eliminates all school effects that do not vary across the two years, leaving
only year-to-year differences in principal quality, other school influences, and other unobserved
time-varying factors as determinants of the difference in achievement gain.

(5)            A  A   
                   s
                    y
                                 s
                                  y'
                                           s
                                            y
                                                                       
                                                  sy '    sy   sy '  sy  sy '    
          Squaring this difference yields a natural characterization of the observed achievement
differences between years as a series of terms that reflect the variances and covariances of the
principal and other school effects plus a catchall component e that includes all random error and
cross-product terms between specific principal and other year-specific effects.

                                  sy    sy '   2 sy sy '   sy   sy '  2 sy  sy '  es
                             2             2             2                   2          2
(6) As  As
       y     y'



Taking the expectation of Equation 6 and assuming principals are drawn from common
distributions over the restricted time period of the observations yields:



                                   2                                         
                                       2
(7) E Asy  Asy '                             2
                                                      y y '  2  2    y y '  E (es )



where  2 is the variance of principal quality and   y  y ' is the covariance in principal quality

across the two years. Similarly,  2 and   y  y ' are the variance and covariance other school

influences across years, again assumed to come from a common distribution.
          Our focus is on the term ( 2    y y ' ) that characterizes the influence of principal

quality on squared changes in school-average achievement growth. Specifically, we
relate principal turnover to the difference between the variance and covariance terms by
regressing the squared difference in achievement gain on a dummy variable indicating
that a school has a different principal in years y and y’. The parameter on that dummy
variable would be equal to two times the variance in principal quality under three key
assumptions: 1) the effect of a principal is fixed (no change over time); 2) principals are
assigned randomly to schools; and 3) principal turnover is orthogonal to other school
changes that affect achievement gain.



                                                                                                            17
       This interpretation comes directly from these three assumptions. In schools with
the same principal for years y and y’, the variance and covariance terms are equal and the
principal contributes nothing to the variation in achievement gain. In schools with
different principals in years y and y’, the covariance term is zero (under assumption 2),
and the principal contributes  2 to the year-to-year difference in achievement gain as
shown in Equation (7).
       Violation of the first assumption would almost certainly bias downward the
estimate of the variance in principal quality. In our framework any contributions of an
incumbent principal to year-to-year differences in school quality would be incorporated
into the counterfactual squared difference in achievement gain attributed to factors other
than the principal. If ignored, such changes will bias downward estimates of principal
effects based on the coefficient for the different principal dummy. Because any such
changes are most likely to occur in the initial years in a school, we include a dummy
variable indicating that a difference is calculated over the first two years of a principal
spell in some specifications.
       Similarly, violation of the second assumption would also bias downward the
estimate of the variance in principal quality. If individual schools tended to draw
principals from a particular part of the quality distribution because of their salary
structure, quality of central administration, or other factors, the covariance term will be
positive rather than zero in schools with different principals in years y and y’. This would
again reduce the difference in the expected value of ( 2    y y ' ) between schools with

different principals and schools with the same principals and thus attenuate the variance
estimate. Essentially our approach ignores all between school variation in principal
effects, because they cannot be identified.
       In contrast, violation of the third assumption could potentially bias upward the
coefficient on the different principal dummy variable. A range of shocks including
changes in student demographics could increase both the probability of principal turnover
and amplify fluctuations in achievement between cohorts. Therefore, it is imperative to
account directly for variation over time in student characteristics that could be related to
principal turnover. Although unobserved influences cannot be directly accounted for, the



                                                                                                 18
sensitivity of the estimate to the inclusion of significant time varying factors provides
information on the likely existence and strength of unobserved factors that might
confound the estimate.19
        The sensitivity of the turnover coefficient to the period over which we calculate
the squared differences also provides information on the validity of the estimates. Given
the likely increase over time in the impact of a new principal, we would expect smaller
principal turnover coefficients for specifications using squared differences in gains for
adjacent years straddling the transition than for specifications using squared differences
for non-adjacent years with a one year gap (e.g. 1999 and 1997 versus 1998 and 1997).
The opposite finding of larger turnover coefficients for adjacent years would suggest the
presence of additional turbulence around principal transitions and raise doubts about the
validity of the estimates.
        Table 6 reports the different lower-bound estimates of the variation in principal
effectiveness, depending on the comparison group and different controls for student
demographics. The estimates consider both adjacent and non-adjacent-year variances
and the inclusion of first year principal indicators. The different-principal coefficient is
positive and highly significant in all specifications, consistent with the existence of
significant variation in principal quality. Note that the inclusion of an indicator for
observations that span the first two years of a principal spell increases only slightly the
estimated variance (compare Columns 2 and 3 and Columns 5 and 6).
        More importantly, the pattern of estimates provides support for the interpretation
of the results as capturing the variation in principal effects. First, the non-adjacent-year
specifications (col. 4-6) produce estimated standard deviations of principal effects that
are roughly 10 percent larger than the comparable adjacent-year specifications. This is
consistent with an increase over time in the influence of new principals and not consistent
with the hypothesis that other changes or shocks coincident to the principal turnover bias
upward the estimate of the variance in principal effects.
        Second, the lack of sensitivity of the different-principal coefficient to the
exclusion of the highly significant set of demographic characteristics suggests that neither


19
  Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) describe an informal approach to measuring the bias from unobserved
factors on the basis of the sensitivity of the results to the inclusion of observed characteristics.


                                                                                                         19
observed nor unobserved factors inflate the estimates of the variation in principal
effectiveness. Comparisons of Columns 1 and 2 and Columns 4 and 5 show that the
exclusion of these variables has virtually no effect on the magnitude of the different-
principal coefficient. As a result, we interpret these estimates as lower bounds on the
variance in principal effectiveness.
         Although roughly half as large as the fixed-effects estimates, these magnitudes for
the lower bound remain educationally significant. A one standard deviation increase in
principal quality translates into an increase of roughly 0.05 standard deviations in average
student growth. By comparison, within-school estimates suggest that a one standard
deviation increase in teacher quality raises achievement by somewhat more than 0.1
standard deviations.20 However, teachers affect only their students, while principals
affect all students in a school. Therefore, the overall impact from moving across the
principal quality distribution substantially exceeds the benefit from a comparable
movement across the teacher quality distribution.
         Table 7 reports different principal coefficients for both the adjacent-year and
interrupted-year specifications by poverty quartile. All coefficients are positive, though
only those for the third poverty quartile reach significance at the five percent level.
Nonetheless, although much noisier, the pattern of estimates mirrors that observed in
previous tables: the lower-bound for the variance in principal quality increases
monotonically with the poverty share.
         Taking both the fixed-effect and the direct-estimation approaches together, three
main findings emerge from the analysis: 1) there is significant variation in principal
effectiveness; 2) variation increases with the school poverty share; and 3) the magnitude
of the estimates falls substantially following the inclusion of school fixed effects and
again following the focus on the additional variance associated with a change in
principal. Although the latter finding is not definitive evidence that unobserved school
differences bias estimates of principal effectiveness, the pattern of estimates is certainly
consistent with this belief. Moreover, the findings indicate that sampling error introduces
upward bias into the variance estimates.

20
  Hanushek and Rivkin (2010b) review estimates of the within-school variance in teacher quality and find
an average of 0.11 s.d. for reading and 0.15 s.d. for math. The estimated benefits are similar to those of a
ten student reduction in class size in early grades (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005).


                                                                                                               20
         Finally, the estimates in Tables 6 and 7 ignore any between-school variation in
principal effects. This suggests that the findings likely understate the actual variance in
principal effects.


VII. Principal Quality and Teacher Turnover
         The prior estimates rely on indirect measures of principal impact, namely student
learning gains during a principal’s tenure in a school. It does not include any
observations about what a principal actually does to improve or limit learning. In part to
validate the prior estimates of principal effectiveness, we turn to the interactions of
principals with teaching staff. This additional investigation, however, also bears directly
on a number of current policy discussions.
         A primary channel through which principals can be expected to improve the
quality of education is by raising the quality of teachers either through improving the
instruction by existing teachers or through teacher transitions that improve the caliber of
teaching (see, for example, Loeb, Kalogrides, and Béteille (forthcoming)). Teacher
turnover per se has been subject to considerable policy attention, given the well-known
difficulties experienced by new teachers. However, the benefits of reducing turnover
clearly depend on both the composition of entering and exiting teachers and the transition
rate.
         Because it is difficult to separate improvement in the quality of instruction by
current teachers from other changes that raise achievement, we focus on teacher
turnover.21 We expect highly rated principals to be more successful at retaining more
effective teachers and moving out less effective teachers. In contrast, we expect less
highly rated principals to be less successful in raising the quality of the teaching stock,
because of less skill in evaluating teacher quality, less emphasis on teacher effectiveness
in personnel decisions, or less success at creating an environment that is attractive for
better teachers. Although better principals may also attract and hire more effective


21
  The estimation of teacher quality has been an active area of research, particularly in terms of value-added
models. See, for example, Hanushek and Rivkin (2006, (2010b), Rothstein (2010), and McCaffrey, Sass,
Lockwood, and Mihaly (2009). One result from this research is clarity about the difficulty of estimating
teacher effectiveness with small samples of students, and this makes it difficult to identify the impact of
specific principals on individual teachers.


                                                                                                                21
teachers, the absence of quality measures for new teachers and the fact that many
principals may have little control over new hires lead us to focus specifically on turnover.
        Unfortunately, our data do not contain information on personnel decisions that
would enable us to separate voluntary and involuntary transitions, and existing evidence
suggests that teachers rather than principals initiate the majority of transitions. In
addition, the Texas administrative data do not match students and teachers, meaning that
we must draw inferences about teacher quality from grade average information. Although
this avoids problems introduced by non-random assignment to classrooms that potentially
biases estimates of teacher value-added (see Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2006) and
Rothstein (2010)), it prevents direct comparisons of the quality of individual stayers and
leavers. An alternative, however, that we pursue below is to focus on the aggregate
mobility patterns.

     A. The magnitude of teacher turnover
        Teacher turnover has been a significant concern, especially in high poverty
schools (see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) and Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, and
Wyckoff (2005)).22 Prior to examining the relationship between principal quality and the
pattern of teacher exits, we describe variation in the magnitude of teacher turnover by
principal quality and school poverty.
        Figure 1 shows that the teacher transition rate is highest in schools with the least
effective principals, regardless of the rate of school poverty. This pattern is consistent
with concerns about working conditions being a primary contributor to exits (see, for
example, Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004), Hanushek and Rivkin (2007)). However,
in the remaining three categories, there is little difference in overall turnover, with the
exception of the highest poverty schools in which turnover in the 2nd quartile of principal
quality is closer to the bottom quartile than the others. In fact turnover in the top principal
quality schools is uniformly higher than that in the next category.
        Prior analyses of teacher turnover suggest that the quality of movers differs
systematically by destination. Hanushek, Kain, O'Brien, and Rivkin (2005) and
Goldhaber, Gross, and Player (2011) both find that district-switchers tend on average to

22
  For the quality dimension of teacher turnover, see Hanushek and Rivkin (2010a) and Goldhaber, Gross,
and Player (2011).


                                                                                                         22
outperform teachers moving within the district and those exiting the public schools
entirely. Consistent with that finding and the importance of leadership, Figure 1 shows
that it is the rate of departure to other districts that tends to be much higher in schools
with the least effective principals and lower in schools with the most effective principals.
In fact district switching decreases monotonically as principal quality rises in all four
poverty categories and differences in the rate of district switching is consistent with
higher quality principals losing a smaller share of their more effective teachers.

     B. Principal quality and teacher selection
         With accurate information on teacher effectiveness and transitions, we could
investigate whether better principals are more likely to dismiss the least effective teachers
and reduce the probability that the more effective teachers depart voluntarily. In the
absence of such information, however, we focus on the relationship within schools
between the share of teachers that exit each grade and the grade-average value-added and
observe how this varies with our estimates of principal quality. Specifically we
investigate whether the relationship between the teacher exit rate in a grade and grade-
average value-added is more negative in schools with higher quality principals.23
         This is obviously an imprecise test of whether better principals are dismissing
their least effective teachers or retaining their most effective, as small grade average
differences in mean value-added provide imperfect information on the probability that
there is a very low performing or very high performing teacher in one grade as opposed
to another. Nonetheless, while there will be cases in which the lowest performer teaches
in the grade with the higher average teacher quality and vice versa, a very low performer
is more likely to teach in the grade with the lower average achievement, and a very high
performer is more likely to teach in the grade with higher average achievement.
         We therefore employ a generalized difference-in-differences approach to
investigate the variation in the relationship between grade differences in the rate of
teacher exit and average value-added by principal quality. Equation (8) relates teacher
turnover (T) in grade g in school s following year y to estimated value-added in grade g,

23
  Note that it is not necessary for our purposes that the good principals explicitly make decisions to dismiss
poor teachers. Teachers could be making these decisions based upon the atmosphere and actions of the
principals (Boyd et al. (2011)) as long as the level of an influence over different quality teachers is
correlated with principal quality.


                                                                                                                 23
school s, and year y ( Agsy   Ags , y 1 ),24 quartile of estimated principal quality (Qi),
student characteristics (X), average value-added interacted with quartiles of estimated
principal quality, and a vector of campus-by-year fixed effects. Note that the estimates of
principal quality come from the analysis of principals’ first three years in a school
(Section V.B, above).


                                        4             4
(8)      Tgsy  1 ( Agsy   Ags , y 1 )   2 p Q   
                                                        ( Agsy   Ags , y 1 )Q
                                                                                       X    
                                              p 2
                                                       p
                                                         p 2
                                                               p                     p         sy  gsy



Our primary interest is the relationship between principal quality and changes in the
quality of the teaching force. If higher quality principals are more likely to succeed in
retaining effective teachers and moving out ineffective teachers, we would expect
4  3  2  0. That is, we expect the grade differences in teacher turnover and average
value-added to be more negatively related in schools with a higher quality principal.
        The inclusion of school-by-year fixed effects fully accounts for all fixed and time-
varying unobserved differences between schools that raised such concern in the
estimation of principal effectiveness. In this framework only variation between grades
and within schools and years are used to identify the relationship between principal
quality and the pattern of teacher exits. Therefore, we are able to use the more precisely
estimated principal quality estimates based on the sample of principals in their first three
years from a specification without school fixed effects. Note that the direct impacts of
principal quality on the magnitude of teacher turnover (the  2 p ' s ) are not separately

identified, because principal quality does not vary within school and year.
        An additional issue with the estimation of Eq. (8) is that it relies both on
achievement measures that contain error but also on estimated parameters from prior

stages (  and the Qp s ). These measurement errors will tend to attenuate the estimates

of interest. Before estimating equation (8), both the grade level value-added and principal
quality estimates are shrunk toward the grand means of zero using Bayesian shrinkage
estimation described above.

24                                                                                        is the
  This measure of average test score gain is an approximation of grade value-added where 
production function estimate of the persistence of prior achievement (see equation 1).


                                                                                                           24
           Table 8 reports estimates of our difference-in-differences model from
specifications using the sample of all schools and the sample of schools in the highest
poverty category.25 As noted, the high poverty schools have the largest variance in
principal quality and greatest rate of teacher turnover, elevating the concern about where
the exiting teachers are drawn from in the school.
           The results in Column 1 reveal a negative relationship between teacher turnover
and grade average value-added that increases monotonically as principal quality rises,
though only the interaction with the top quartile of principals is statistically significant.
This pattern is consistent with the belief that management of the stock of teacher quality
constitutes an important pathway through which principals affect school quality. The
results in Column 2 are similar for the sample of high poverty schools: all coefficients are
negative but only the coefficient on the interaction with the top quartile of principals is
statistically significant.
           Despite the aggregation to the grade level and reliance solely on the variation
within school and year, the results provide strong evidence of more negative teacher
selection out of a school in buildings run by highly effective principals, thus validating
our prior quality estimates. In the absence of information on principal behavior and the
proximate causes of each transition, it is not possible to know the precise actions that
underlie the observed relationships. Nonetheless, it reinforces views about the importance
of school leadership.


VIII. The Quality Dimension of Principal Transitions
           Many bemoan high rates of turnover for both teachers and administrators in
schools with high concentrations of poverty. Yet, as noted, the magnitude of any turnover
problem clearly depends on whether high or low quality personnel are leaving. No prior
analysis has been able to describe systematically any differences that might exist in the
mobility patterns of high- and low-quality principals.
           In order to focus on this issue, we describe principal transitions following their
third year in a school by principal quality and by the share of students eligible for a
subsidized lunch. Following the taxonomy in the descriptive section above, principals are

25
     Estimates for the remaining poverty categories (not reported) are quite imprecise.


                                                                                                25
observed to follow a variety of career moves: remaining in the same school as principal,
remaining in the same school in another capacity, taking a principal position in another
school, taking a different position in another school, moving to a central administrative
position, or exiting the public schools entirely. Again principals are divided into four
quality quartiles on the basis of estimates produced from the sample of the first three
years in a school for specifications without school fixed effects. In this section the sample
includes only principals with fewer than 25 years of total experience in order to minimize
complications introduced by the retirement decision.26
         As seen in Table 9, principals in the lowest quartile are least likely to remain in
their current position and most likely to leave the public schools entirely.27 With the
exception of the lowest poverty schools, however, there is not a monotonic relationship
between the probability of remaining in the same position and principal quality.
Principals in both the second and third quartiles are substantially more likely to remain
than those in the bottom quartile. The most effective principals are always more likely to
remain in the same position than those in the bottom quality quartile, but are generally
more likely to move than those in the middle quality range. Overall, the probability of
exiting the public schools entirely moves as the mirror image of the probability of
remaining in the same position.
         One troubling aspect of Table 9 from a policy perspective is the substantial share
of low performing principals who transition to principal positions at other schools. This is
particularly striking in the two highest poverty categories where over 12 percent of poor
performers make such a move. In contrast, less than 7 percent of the poorest performers
in the two lower poverty categories become principals at other schools. This may reflect
the fact that it is difficult to separate the difficulties of the school circumstances from the
quality of the principal in high poverty schools – leading both the principals and the
district administrators to give principals from high poverty schools another chance at a
different school.



26
  The experience restriction, however, has virtually no effect on the observed transition patterns.
27
  Because of the very small shares of principals that transition to other positions, Table 9 focuses on
principal transitions to other schools and out of the public schools entirely. (Appendix Table a1 reports
shares for these other transitions).


                                                                                                            26
       The simple conclusion, nonetheless, is that the operation of the principal labor
market – constrained in a variety of ways by inertia in salaries, historical absence of good
performance measures, and other restrictions in public sector operations – does not
appear to screen out the least effective principals. Instead they frequently just move to
different schools, perhaps reflecting the bargain necessary to move out an ineffective
leader in a public sector organization. Potentially this is where the CEO (superintendent)
enters. A good superintendent may be good at decisions on retention and assignment of
principals. We cannot directly look at this here, however, and this merits additional study.


IX. Conclusions
       An important facet of many school policy discussions is the role of strong
leadership, particularly of principals. Leadership is viewed as especially important in
revitalizing failing schools. This discussion is, however, largely uninformed by
systematic analysis of principals and their impact on student outcomes. More generally,
assertions about the importance of leaders in many occupations and circumstances lack
empirical backing.
       Understanding the impact of principals on learning is a particularly difficult
analytical problem. The non-random sorting of principals and students among schools,
the varying evolution of principal influence with tenure, and other school changes over
time complicate efforts to identify principal effectiveness. The fact that the magnitude of
the estimated variance declines substantially following the inclusion of school fixed
effects and again following the focus on the additional variance associated with a change
in principal suggests that direct estimates of principal fixed effects combine real value-
added with sampling error and other influences.
       Nonetheless, the lower bound results based on direct estimation from principal
turnover – the most conservative of the alternative estimation approaches – suggest the
existence of substantial variation in principal effectiveness. A principal in the top 16
percent of the quality distribution (i.e., one standard deviation above average) will lead
annually to student gains that are 0.05 s.d. or more higher than average for all students in
the school. The finding that the variance increases with the school poverty rate is
consistent with both the hypothesis that principal skill is more important in the most


                                                                                               27
challenging schools and the hypothesis of larger variation in underlying skills of leaders
entering high poverty schools – explanations that need not be mutually exclusive.
       There are many channels through which principals influence school quality,
though the precise mechanisms likely differ among districts due to variation in the
regulatory and institutional structures that define principal authority. Because all
principals participate in personnel decisions, we focus on the composition of teacher
turnover. For the best principals, teacher turnover is concentrated in the grades within
their schools with lower value-added, supporting the belief that improvement in the stock
of teacher quality provides an important channel through which principals can raise the
quality of education. Moreover, this relationship is strongest in high poverty schools,
consistent with the finding of larger variation in principal quality in these schools.
       Finally, patterns of principal transitions indicate that it is the least and most
effective that tend to leave schools, suggesting some combination of push and pull
factors. This pattern is again particularly pronounced in higher poverty schools. A
troubling finding on transitions shows that a substantial share of ineffective principals in
high poverty schools take principal positions in other schools and districts. Much more
needs to be learned about the dynamics of the principal labor market, just as much more
needs to be learned about the underlying factors that contribute to teacher transitions.
       We have emphasized the importance of variations in principal quality. But, it is
also worthwhile putting this analysis into the context of understanding the importance of
managers in the public sector. Recent work has emphasized the role of managers and
leaders in profit making firms. Several different approaches have been introduced. One
considers how important CEOs might be to differences in firm performance (Bertrand
and Schoar (2003)). The other goes into more depth about the specific managerial
processes that promote higher performance (Bloom and Van Reenen (2010)).
       Borrowing from both perspectives and moving into the public sector, we focus on
plant-level (school) management and address the fundamental question of how big is the
variation of quality of public managers. In simplest terms, even with the constraints on
public sector operations and the diffuse performance incentives, public sector managers
appear to have a large impact on outcomes. From a policy viewpoint, added attention to
the selection and retention of high quality managers would have a very high pay-off.


                                                                                               28
References

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. "Selection on
        observed and unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic
        schools." Journal of Political Economy 113, no. 1 (February): 151-184.
Battle, Danielle. 2010. Principal Attrition and Mobility: Results From the 2008-09
        Principal Follow-up Survey. Washington, DC: National Center for Education
        Statistics (June).
Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel
      Wolfenzon. 2007. "Inside the Family Firm: the Role of Families in Succession
      Decisions and Performance." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 2: 647-
      691.
Bertrand, Marianne. 2009. "CEOs." Annual Review of Economics 1: 121-149.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. "Managing with Style: The Effect of
       Managers on Firm Policies." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4
       (November): 1169-1208.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2010. "Why do management practices differ
      across firms and countries?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, no. 1 (Winter):
      203-224.
Boyd, Don, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2005. "The draw of
      home: How teachers' preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools."
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24, no. 1 (Winter): 113-132.
Boyd, Donald, Pam Grossman, Marsha Ing, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and
      James Wyckoff. 2011. "The influence of school administrators on teacher
      retention decisions." American Educational Research Journal 48, no. 2: 303-333.
Brewer, Dominic J. 1993. "Principals and student outcomes: Evidence from U.S. high
      schools." Economics of Education Review 12, no. 4 (December): 281-292.
Carter, Samuel Casey. 2000. No Excuses: Lessons from 21 High-Performing, High-
        Poverty Schools. Washington, D.C.: The heritage Foundation.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob l. Vigdor. 2006. "Teacher-Student
        Matching and the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness." Journal of Human
        Resources 41, no. 4 (Fall): 778-820.
Courty, Pascal, and Gerald Marschke. 2004. "An Empirical Investigation of Gaming
       Responses to Explicit Performance Incentives." Journal of Labor Economics 22,
       no. 1 (January): 23-56.
Cullen, Julie B., and Michael J. Mazzeo. 2008. "Implicit Performance Awards: An
       Empirical Analysis of the Labor Market for Public School Administrators."
       University of California, San Diego (December ).
Eberts, Randall W., and Joe A. Stone. 1988. "Student achievement in public schools: Do
        principals make a difference?" Economics of Education Review 7, no. 3: 291-299.


                                                                                          29
Edmonds, Ronald R. 1979. "Effective schools for the urban poor." Educational
     Leadership 37, no. 1 (October): 15-24.
Englmaier, Florian, Gerhard Illing, and Efraim Sadka. 2009. "Introduction to the
      Symposium on Executive Pay." CESifo Economic Studies 55, no. 3/4
      (September/December): 399-404.
Gates, Susan M., Jeanne S. Ringel, Lucrecia Santibañez, Cassandra Guarino, Bonnie
       Ghosh-Dastidar, and Abigail Brown. 2006. "Mobility and turnover among school
       principals." Economics of Education Review 25, no. 3 (June): 289-302.
Goldhaber, Dan, Betheny Gross, and Daniel Player. 2011. "Teacher career paths, teacher
      quality, and persistence in the classroom: Are public schools keeping their best?"
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30, no. 1 (Winter): 57-87.
Grissom, Jason, and Susanna Loeb. forthcoming. "Triangulating principal effectiveness:
       How perspectives of parents, teachers, and assistant principals identify the central
       importance of managerial skills." American Educational Research Journal.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1979. "Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of
      educational production functions." Journal of Human Resources 14, no. 3
      (Summer): 351-388.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O'Brien, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2005. "The
      market for teacher quality." Working Paper No. 11154. National Bureau of
      Economic Research (February).
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2004. "Why public schools lose
      teachers." Journal of Human Resources 39, no. 2: 326-354.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2006. "Teacher quality." In Handbook of the
      Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch.
      Amsterdam: North Holland: 1051-1078.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2007. "Pay, working conditions, and teacher
      quality." Future of Children 17, no. 1 (Spring): 69-86.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010a. "Constrained Job Matching: Does
      Teacher Job Search Harm Disadvantaged Urban Schools?" NBER w15816.
      Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (March).
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010b. "Generalizations about using value-
      added measures of teacher quality." American Economic Review 100, no. 2
      (May): 267-271.
Heinrich, Carolyn J., and Gerald Marschke. 2010. "Incentives and their dynamics in
       public sector performance management systems." Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management 29, no. 1 (Winter): 183-208.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. 2005. "Principals as agents: Subjective performance
       measurement in education." mimeo J.F. Kennedy School of Government (June).
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. 2006. "When principals rate teachers." Education Next
       6, no. 2 (Spring): 59-69.


                                                                                              30
Johnson, Bruce, Robert P. Magee, Nandu J. Nagarajan, and Harry A. Newman. 1985.
      "An analysis of the stock price reaction to sudden executive death: Implications
      for the management labor market." Journal of Accounting and Economics 7, no.
      1-3: 151-174.
Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2002. "Volatility in school test scores:
       Implications for test-based accountability systems." In Brookings Papers on
       Education Policy 2002, edited by Diane Ravitch. Washington, DC: Brookings:
       235-269.
Loeb, Susanna, Demetra Kalogrides, and Tara Béteille. forthcoming. "Effective Schools:
       Teacher Hiring, Assignment, Development, and Retention." Education Finance
       and Policy.
Loeb, Susanna, Demetra Kalogrides, and Eileen L. Horng. 2010. "Principal preferences
       and the uneven distribution of principals across schools." Educational Evaluation
       and Policy Analysis 32, no. 2 (June): 205-229.
McCaffrey, Daniel F., Tim R. Sass, J. R. Lockwood, and Kata Mihaly. 2009. "The
      Intertemporal Variability of Teacher Effect Estimates." Education Finance and
      Policy 4, no. 4 (Fall): 572-606.
Meghir, Costas, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2011. "Econometric methods for research in
      education." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, edited by Eric A.
      Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: North
      Holland: 1-87.
Morris, Carl N. 1983. "Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications."
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 78, no. 381 (March): 47-55.
Purkey, Stewart C., and Marshall S. Smith. 1983. "Effective Schools: A Review." The
       Elementary School Journal 83, no. 4 (March): 427-452.
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, schools, and
       academic achievement." Econometrica 73, no. 2 (March): 417-458.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. "Teacher quality in educational production: Tracking, decay, and
       student achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 1 (February):
       175-214.
Scafidi, Benjamin, David L. Sjoquist, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2007. "Race, poverty,
        and teacher mobility." Economics of Education Review 26, no. 2 (April): 145-159.




                                                                                           31
Table 1. Distribution of Principals by Tenure at Current School and Student Demographic Characteristics

                      Quartile of                     Years of Principal Tenure
                    distribution of                           (percent)
                        student                                                         6 or
                    characteristics    1         2          3          4          5     more    All


                        lowest        17.8     15.3        12.6      10.2         8.2   36.1   100.0
   proportion
                          2nd         19.8     15.9        12.3      9.7          7.9   34.5   100.0
    eligible for
                          3rd         20.5     17.1        13.7      9.7          7.9   31.1   100.0
 subsidized lunch
                       greatest       19.5     17.1        13.2      10.5         8.2   31.6   100.0

                        worst         22.7     19.4        14.3       9.8         7.4   26.3   100.0
   mathematics          2nd           20.4     16.7        12.7      10.0         8.4   31.9   100.0
   achievement           3rd          18.1     15.3        12.5      10.1         7.9   36.3   100.0
                        best          16.4     14.0        12.2      10.2         8.5   38.8   100.0
Table 2. Principal Transitions by Tenure


                                     Years of tenure as principal at school
                                                   (percent)
Transition                           1           2         3 to 5     6 or more

Remain principal
  Same campus                       72.5       68.0        69.2        70.8
  New campus, same district          3.9        4.9         6.0         4.7
  New district                      2.0         2.5         2.3         1.0
Other school job
  Same campus                        0.8        0.6         0.3         0.2
  New campus, same district          2.0        2.1         2.2         2.1
  New district                       1.7        1.7         1.1         0.5
Job in Administration
 Same district central office        0.7        1.3         1.6         1.3
 New district central office        0.5         0.7        0.7         0.4
Exit Texas public schools           16.0       18.1        16.7        19.0

             Total                  100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0
Table 3. Distribution of Principal Value­Added by Poverty Quartile


                                     Average Annual School Achievement Growth
                                       by Percentile of Principal Effectiveness
School Low-
Income Share         Standard
(quartile)           Deviation        10th      25th      50th      75th       90th
 Lowest               0.158          -0.180    -0.063     0.032     0.134     0.215
 2nd                  0.176          -0.243    -0.142    -0.032     0.086     0.190
 3rd                  0.207          -0.301    -0.162    -0.036     0.103     0.207
 Greatest             0.263          -0.383    -0.236    -0.068     0.114     0.285
 All                   0.207         -0.286    -0.153    -0.019     0.109     0.222

Note: Students are classified as low income if they are eligible for a subsidized lunch.
The sample of principals includes all observations for principals in their first three years
of tenure at a school. Principal value-added is measured by the principal fixed effect that
comes from a regression of mathematics achievement on lagged achievement, principal
demographic characteristics, student demographic characteristics, and measures of
student mobility. Full grade-year controls are also included




                                                                                               34
Table 4. Distribution of Principal Value­Added with Alternative Adjustments
for Test Measurement Error

                                         Average Annual School Achievement Growth
                                           by Percentile of Principal Effectiveness
                        Standard
                        Deviation      10th       25th       50th       75th        90th

Unadjusted                 0.207      -0.286     -0.153     -0.019      0.109      0.222


Shrunk Estimatesa          0.200      -0.280     -0.150     -0.020      0.106      0.214

Re-weighted
                           0.270      -0.182     -0.082      0.031      0.174      0.417
Estimatesb

Shrunk and
Re-weighted                0.241      -0.162     -0.071      0.032      0.164      0.385
Estimatesc

Note: The sample of principals includes all observations for principals in their first three
years of tenure at a school. Principal value-added is measured by the principal fixed
effect that comes from a regression of mathematics achievement on lagged achievement,
principal demographic characteristics, student demographic characteristics, and measures
of student mobility. Full grade-year controls are also included.
    a. Bayesian shrinkage according to Eq. (2).
    b. Weighting by testing deciles according to Eq. (3).
    c. Both a. and b. adjustments applied.




                                                                                               35
Table 5. Estimated Standard Deviation of Principal Value­Added by Poverty
Quartile and Whether the Specification includes School Fixed Effects



School Low-Income Share   Without school   With school fixed
(quartile)                 fixed effects        effects
    Lowest                    0.179              0.077
    2nd                       0.192              0.095
    3rd                       0.230              0.118
    Greatest                  0.277              0.138

    All                       0.224              0.110




                                                                            36
Table 6. Lower­Bound Variance in Principal Quality Estimated from the Year­to­year Squared Difference in School
Average Student Gains

                                               Adjacent-year difference                     Interrupted-year difference
                                                       With student controlsa                         With student controlsa

Different principal                      0.0052         0.0048         0.0049          0.0058         0.0056         0.0058
                                         (3.41)         (3.16)         (3.24)          (4.35)         (4.28)         (2.87)

Principal in 1st year                                                  0.0036                                        0.0026
                                                                       (2.97)                                        (2.72)
Principal in 1st year*different
                                                                                                                     -0.0002
principal
                                                                                                                     (0.11)
N                                        27,767         27,767         27,767          23,232         23,232         23,232
F test for student demographicsb                         29.05          28.21                          32.41          32.03

Estimates derived from regression results

Within-school variance of principal
                                             0.0026        0.0024         0.0025         0.0029            0.0028       0.0029
quality
Within-school standard deviation of
                                             0.051         0.049          0.050           0.054             0.053       0.054
principal quality
Note: Different-principal coefficients come from regressions of the year-to-year squared differences in school average student gains on an
indicator for a different principal in the two comparison years. The absolute value of T-statistics are in parentheses.
    a. Student controls include ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic status, limited English proficiency, special education status and student
        mobility measures (shares).
    b. F-test that coefficients on all student demographics and mobility measures equal zero.
Table 7. Lower­Bound Variance in Principal Quality Estimated from the Year­to­year Squared Difference in School
Average Student Gains by Poverty Quartile

                                                                               Poverty Quartile
                                       lowest                         2nd                             3rd                         greatest
                               Adjacent    Interrupted       Adjacent    Interrupted       Adjacent         Interrupted   Adjacent      Interrupted
                                 year          year            year          year            year               year        year            year
 Different Principal            0.0017        0.0015          0.0019       0.0024           0.0048            0.0066       0.0090         0.0081
                                (1.75)        (1.51)          (1.57)        (1.68)          (2.31)             (2.59)      (1.37)          (0.96)

 N                               6,809          5,566          6,860         5,684          6,945             5,855        7,153          6,127


 Estimates derived from regression results
 Within-school variance of
 principal quality
                                0.0009         0.0008         0.0010         0.0012         0.0024            0.0033       0.0045        0.0041
 Within-school standard
 deviation of principal          0.029          0.027          0.031         0.035          0.049             0.057        0.067          0.064
 quality


Note: The different-principal coefficients come from regressions of year-to-year squared difference in school average student gains on an
indicator for a different principal in the two comparison years. All regressions include the student demographic variables listed in Table 6 and
indicators for comparisons that include the first year of principal tenure in a school. The absolute value of T-statistics are in parentheses.
Table 8. Estimated Effects of Grade Average Value­added and Principal Quality
on Grade­Level Teacher Turnover for All Schools and the Schools in the Top
Quartile in Terms of the Poverty Rate

                                                                Highest poverty
                                          All schools
                                                                   schools

 Grade-level value-added                    ‐0.023                   0.006
                                            (1.80)                   (0.33)

 Grade-level value-added *2nd               ‐0.018                   ‐0.065
 quartile principal quality                 (0.89)                   (1.79)

 Grade-level value-added *3rd               ‐0.029                   ‐0.025
 quartile principal quality                 (1.35)                   (0.65)

 Grade-level value-added *4th               ‐0.079                   ‐0.102
 quartile principal quality                 (3.68)                   (3.16)


Note: Principal quality is measured by principal fixed effect for principals in first three years (see
Table 3). The campus by year fixed-effect regressions (following Eq. (8)) also include the full set
of student demographic variables. Regressions are weighted by enrollment. The absolute value of
t-statistics are in parentheses.




                                                                                                         39
Table 9. Principal Transition Distribution for Principals with less than 25
years of experience Quartile of Principal Quality and Poverty Quartile

                                                      Quartile of principal qualitya
       Poverty Quartile and Principal
         Transition in Fourth Year               worst             Q2              Q3         best
Lowest quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      58.6           68.0            73.5        76.3
       Moves campus, principal                      4.6            4.1             4.6         4.3
       Moves district, principal                    2.3            1.6             3.8         4.3
       Exit Texas Public Schools                   27.6           21.3            12.1         8.6
Second quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      52.4           70.2            81.5        71.7
       Moves campus, principal                      3.9            2.2             0.8         6.6
       Moves district, principal                    1.0            6.0             2.4         5.7
       Exit Texas Public Schools                   34.0           14.9             9.7        15.1
Third quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      44.4           55.3            63.8        58.1
       Moves campus, principal                      7.5            5.7             9.5         8.1
       Moves district, principal                    4.5            4.9             1.9         7.3
       Exit Texas Public Schools                   35.3           25.2            19.1        23.4
 Highest Quartile low-income
      Same campus, principal                       62.6           73.2            72.3        67.4
      Moves campus, principal                       8.6           11.0             6.9         7.3
      Moves district, principal                     3.6            1.2             3.0         1.5
      Exit Texas Public Schools                    21.6           12.2            15.9        21.0


Note: a. Principal quality from estimates for principals with three or less years of tenure in school
(see Table 3). Transition status refers to the year subsequent to the third year in a school.
Complete moves in Appendix Table a1.




                                                                                                        40
Appendix Table a1. Principal Transition Distribution for Principals with less
than 25 years of experience, by Quartiles of Principal Quality and Poverty

                                                      Quartile of principal qualitya
       Poverty Quartile and Principal
         Transition in Fourth Year               worst            Q2              Q3         best
Bottom quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      58.6          68.0            73.5        76.3
       Same campus, other                           1.2           0.0             0.8         0.0
       Moves campus, principal                      4.6           4.1             4.6         4.3
       Moves campus, other                          0.0           0.8             1.5         2.2
       Same district, distr. Admin                  0.0           4.1             1.5         2.2
       Moves district, principal                    2.3           1.6             3.8         4.3
       Move district, other                         3.5           0.0             1.6         0.0
       Move district, district admin                2.3           0.0             0.8         2.2
       Exits                                       27.6          21.3           12.12         8.6
Second quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      52.4          70.2            81.5        71.7
       Same campus, other                           1.0           0.0             0.0         0.0
       Moves campus, principal                      3.9           2.2             0.8         6.6
       Moves campus, other                          2.9           0.8             0.8         0.9
       Same district, distr. Admin                  1.9           0.8             1.6         0.0
       Moves district, principal                    1.0           6.0             2.4         5.7
       Move district, other                         1.9           3.7             2.4         0.0
       Move district, district admin                1.0           1.5             0.8         0.0
       Exits                                       34.1          14.9             9.7        15.1
Third quartile low-income
       Same campus, principal                      44.4          55.3            63.8        58.1
       Same campus, other                           0.8           0.0             0.0         0.0
       Moves campus, principal                      7.5           5.7             9.5         8.0
       Moves campus, other                          0.8           2.4             2.9         1.6
       Same district, distr. Admin                  3.8           2.4             1.0         0.8
       Moves district, principal                    4.5           4.9             1.9         7.3
       Move district, other                         2.3           1.6             1.9         0.8
       Move district, district admin                0.8           2.4             0.0         0.0
       Exits                                       35.3          25.2            19.1        23.4
Top Quartile low-income
      Same campus, principal                       62.6          73.2            72.3        67.4
      Same campus, other                            0.0           0.0             0.0         0.0
      Moves campus, principal                       8.6          11.0             6.9         7.3
      Moves campus, other                           0.7           1.2             1.0         1.5
      Same district, distr. Admin                   0.0           0.0             1.0         0.0
      Moves district, principal                     3.7           1.2             3.0         1.5
      Move district, other                          0.7           1.2             0.0         0.7
      Move district, district admin                 2.2           0.0             0.0         0.7
      Exits                                        21.6          12.2            15.8        21.0

Note: a. Principal quality comes from estimates for principals with three or less years of tenure in
school (see Table 3). Transition status refers to the year subsequent to the third year in a school.

                                                                                                       41
Figure 1. Teacher Transitions by Principal Effectiveness and Share of Students
in a School Eligible for a Subsidized Lunch




                          Lowest Quartile Disadvantaged                    2nd Quartile Disadvantaged

             Bottom                                          Bottom

               2nd                                             2nd

                3rd                                             3rd

               Top                                             Top

                           3rd Quartile Disadvantaged                     Highest Quartile Disadvantaged

             Bottom                                          Bottom

               2nd                                             2nd

                3rd                                             3rd

               Top                                             Top


                      0          .1         .2          .3            0          .1          .2         .3
                                         Quartiles Principle Effectiveness
                                        Change School                      Change District
                                        Exit Sample




                                                                                                        42
