                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INTERJURISDICTIONAL HOUSING PRICES AND SPATIAL AMENITIES:
     WHICH MEASURES OF HOUSING PRICES REFLECT LOCAL PUBLIC GOODS?

                                          H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                            Omar Farooque

                                         Working Paper 17809
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17809


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012




This paper was begun under the Andrew Young Summer Policy Internship program, under NSF award
0452702. We thank Kelly Bishop, James Marton, and especially Nicolai Kuminoff for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and Omar Farooque. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Interjurisdictional Housing Prices and Spatial Amenities: Which Measures of Housing Prices
Reflect Local Public Goods?
H. Spencer Banzhaf and Omar Farooque
NBER Working Paper No. 17809
February 2012
JEL No. H4,R2,R30

                                             ABSTRACT

Understanding the spatial variation in housing prices plays a crucial role in topics ranging from the
cost of living to quality-of-life indices to studies of public goods and household mobility. Yet analysts
have not reached a consensus on the best source of such data, variously using self-reported values
from the census, transactions values, tax assessments, and rental values. Additionally, while most
studies use micro-level data, some have used summary statistics such as the median housing value.

Assessing neighborhood price indices in Los Angeles, we find that indices based on transactions prices
are highly correlated with indices based on self-reported values, but the former are better correlated
with public goods. Moreover, rental values have a higher correlation with public goods and income
levels than either asset-value measure. Finally, indices based on median values are poorly correlated
with the other indices, public goods, and income.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

Omar Farooque
Department of Economics
302 Arthur Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-2600
omarfarooque2015@u.northwestern.edu
            INTERJURISDICTIONAL HOUSING PRICES AND SPATIAL AMENITIES:
          WHICH MEASURES OF HOUSING PRICES REFLECT LOCAL PUBLIC GOODS?

                                       H. Spencer Banzhaf
                             (Georgia State University, NBER, PERC)

                                          Omar Farooque
                                     (Northwestern University)



Housing is the most important asset and largest expenditure category in most households' budg-
ets. Accordingly, accurate data on the value of homes is a lynchpin in many economic studies.
For example, because housing accounts for about 30 percent of households' expenditures, hous-
ing costs play a key role in computing geographic comparisons in the cost-of-living, such as the
US ACCRA index, as well as intertemporal indices of inflation.

       An accurate representation of home values is also a critical step in many empirical studies
of local public goods. Through the process of capitalization, home values are deeply intertwined
with spatial public goods such as school quality, crime, air quality, hazardous waste sites, and
green spaces, and the taxes that pay for them. The differences in housing values associated with
differences in these public goods and taxes have long been used by economists to infer people's
demand for such goods.1 Prominent examples of such "hedonic" methods include applications to
intercity quality-of-life measures (Albouy 2010, Blomquist, Berger and Hoehn 1988), education
(Black 1999, Figlio and Lucas 2004), crime (Bishop and Murphy 2011), racial segregation (Baja-
ri and Kahn 2005), air quality (Chay and Greenstone 2005, Grainger 2011, Smith and Huang
1995), superfund sites (Gamper-Rabindran, Mastromonaco, and Timmins 2011, Greenstone and
Gallagher 2008), cancer risks (Davis 2004), and property taxes (Palmon and Smith 1998).

       More recently, economists have emphasized the importance of general equilibrium ef-
fects in evaluating households' demand for public goods and the effects of public policies (Ku-
minoff, Smith, and Timmins 2010). Changing the geographic distribution of local public goods
will induce households to move, with attending effects on local real estate prices, local peer


1
 Early examples include Oates (1969) and Ridker and Henning (1967). For an overview of the literature,
see Palmquist (2004).

                                                  1
groups, and tax revenues. For example, Sieg et al. (2004) show that improving air quality in
some neighborhoods can cause what they call "environmental gentrification," which benefits
landlords at the expense of poor renters, leading to very different distributional welfare effects in
general equilibrium (see also Tra 2010). Calabrese et al. (2006) consider the implications of
household sorting on endogenous neighborhood demographics for voting on public goods.
Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2007) emphasize the importance of accounting for endogenously
formed neighborhood demographics and their interactions with school quality and unobserved
locational goods. Walsh (2007) illustrates the importance of endogenous development patterns
when understanding the effect of open space policies. And Kuminoff (2011) emphasizes the
importance of the choice of job location as well as residential location when households maxim-
ize utility over public goods, commutes, and housing prices.

       To incorporate these housing feedbacks in an equilibrium model, an emerging strategy in
the public economics literature is to use a two-stage discrete-continuous model, in which house-
holds first choose a community and then a quantity of continuous housing. A crucial step in this
strategy is the estimation of community-level price indices. From there, one approach then
leverages insights from hierarchical models, in which the demand for high-quality communities
makes them more expensive, to estimate community-level quality indices based on these price
indices. These quality indices, in turn, can then be decomposed into a function of observed
public goods (see e.g. Calabrese et al. 2006, Epple and Sieg 1999, Kuminoff 2011, and Sieg et al.
2004 ). A second approach applies insights from the industrial organization literature (Berry,
Levinson, and Pakes 1995) to locational choice, estimating a preference for communities that can
be decomposed into the utility for public goods and disutility for high housing costs (see e.g.
Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan 2007, Bayer, Keohane and Timmins 2009, and Tra 2010).

       The most fundamental step in this entire body of research is an accurate estimate of the
spatial variation in quality-adjusted housing prices. But economists and other analysts have not
yet settled on best practices for estimating those indices. In particular, researchers have used a
variety of data sources on housing values, including recorded transactions prices, survey data of
owner-reported housing values (available from the US Census), tax assessments, and rental
prices. Transactions prices often are considered the gold standard, well worth the additional
expense of obtaining them, but there has been little actual evidence to justify this presumption.


                                                  2
          A related issue is whether to use micro-level data or aggregate summary statistics. Most
studies use micro-level housing data from one of the above sources, but others have relied on
aggregate statistics, such as the median housing value in the county or census tract conditioned
on community-level housing variables (e.g. Chay and Greenstone 2005, Grainger 2011, Green-
stone and Gallagher 2008). Again, there has been little evaluation of these judgments.2

          Each of these approaches has inherent benefits and shortcomings. In this paper, we eva-
luate them in two ways. Our first strategy is simple and direct: we construct community-level
price indices using a variety of data sources, all of which have been used in the peer-reviewed
literature, and compare them to one another. This strategy is one way to gauge how sensitive
spatial housing price indices are to data sources, but cannot indicate which data are preferable.
Our second strategy employs an "ascending bundles" criterion suggested by Sieg et al. (2002).
Using the insights from equilibrium models of locational choice, they note that more expensive
communities should be those with better public goods and other locational amenities. Accor-
dingly, those community price indices that best correlate with observed amenities would appear
to be most sensible. By this criterion, the "best" index is one that has the best fit when regressed
on local amenities.3 By a similar logic, these communities will also be inhabited by the richest
households. By this criterion, the "best" index is one that has the tightest correlation with aver-
age income in the community.

          We find that indices based on self-reported values in the US Census are highly correlated
with indices based on transactions prices, though the latter are somewhat better correlated with
public goods. This finding suggests that while households may provide accurate estimates of the
value of their structures (perhaps because of insurance assessments), they do a poorer job of
recognizing components of their property values capitalizing local amenities. Indices based on
rental prices perform even better when judged by the criterion of correlation with public goods,
as well as income. This may be because rents represent current conditions, whereas asset values
reflect expected future conditions. Finally, whether based on self-reported asset values or rental


2
    See Gamper-Rabindran, Mastromonaco, and Timmins (2011) for one recent discussion of this issue.
3
 Sieg et al. (2002) apply their approach only to functional form and related issues using a single data
source. They do not address the question of the type of price information (surveys, transactions, apprais-
als, or rents), which has been a larger question in the literature. We apply their basic approach to this
question.

                                                    3
values, indices that rely on the community's median price, rather than micro data, are not as
strongly correlated either with the other indices or with amenities or local incomes. The median
price does not appear to aptly represent community-wide conditions.

Approaches to Estimating Community Housing Price Indices

Perhaps the most fundamental question when it comes to constructing a community-level hous-
ing price index is whether to use asset values or rental prices. Often, this choice is determined by
the research context, and sometimes researchers make use of both types of data (e.g. Calabrese et
al. 2006, Greenstone and Gallagher 2008). Rental prices may be most relevant for short-term
service flows, but only if rental contracts adjust rapidly to changes in public goods and taxes. If
rents are sticky, they may be out of equilibrium over long periods. Observed asset prices may be
more likely to be in equilibrium at a point in time, but reflect anticipated future service flows.4

        Even when asset values are desired theoretically, in many cases they must be converted
to annual user costs (see e.g. Poterba 1992). Concluding that this conversion is too sensitive to
assumptions about the opportunity cost of capital and expected capital gains, the US Bureau of
Labor Statistics has for many years used rental properties as a proxy for the cost of owner-
occupied housing in the Consumer Price Index (see e.g. Gillingham 1983). The BLS's approach
has the advantage of side-stepping the imputation of user costs from asset prices. When survey-
based data must be used, this approach also has the advantage that households presumably are
much more likely to know their monthly rent with accuracy than the market value of their home.5
But it has the disadvantage of relying only on rental properties, which may be very different
from the owner-occupied housing stock (Glaeser and Gyourko 2007).

        When asset values are to be used, they generally come from one of three sources: sur-
veys of owners (e.g. the American Community Survey or American Housing Survey), tax as-
sessments, and actual transactions prices. Each of these sources also has its characteristic advan-
tages and disadvantages. Survey-based data is readily available from the US Census and has
been used by Albouy (2010), Bajari and Kahn (2005), Bayer, Keohane, and Timmins (2009),

4
  See e.g. the discussion in Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) of these issues and an excellent example of
the comparative use that can be made of both types of data.
5
  Calabrese et al. (2006) find that though tax assessments correlate well with self-reports of values at the
community level, the same is not true for rental units. However, this may be a consequence of biases in
tax assessments or in the user cost formula they use in their exercise.

                                                      4
Greenstone and Gallagher (2008), and many others. This data source is by far the most conve-
nient, if publically available data are used. It also has the advantage of being a representative
sample of all homes.

       However, one disadvantage with publically available census housing data, at least in the
US, is that they are available as micro data only at large geographies, such as a public-use micro
area (PUMA), an area with about 100,000 people. One solution to this problem is to use the
restricted data, but of course this requires sacrificing the convenience of public data. An alterna-
tive approach is to forego the micro data and use aggregate, community-level statistics such as
the median home value in a county or census tract (e.g. Chay and Greenstone 2005, Grainger
2011, Greenstone and Gallagher 2008). Most economists would probably agree that, if availa-
ble, the micro-level data is preferable, for two reasons. First, it makes use of a broader sample of
houses. This can be particularly important if only a subset of the distribution of housing quality
is affected by a policy (see discussion in Gamper-Rabindran, Mastromonaco, and Timmins
2011). Second, micro data appropriately matches each house's value to its own characteristics,
facilitating the conditioning out of observed house-level variables, as with a hedonic regression.
But the extent of the tradeoff between accessibility and precision is also still an open question.

       Regardless of whether one uses micro or macro data from the Census, there is good rea-
son to question homeowners' ability to assess the value of their home. In early work, Kain and
Quigley (1972) found no systematic bias in self reports (though they did find lots of noise). But
since that early work, other studies have found that homeowners systematically overstate the
values of their homes as compared to observed transactions data. Ilhanfeldt and Martinez-
Vazquez (1986) estimate the overvaluation to be 16 percent; DiPasquale and Somerville (1995)
find an effect of about 8-10 percent, and Goodman and Ittner (1992) and Kiel and Zabel (1999)
estimate somewhat more modest overvaluations on the order of 5 percent. The gap between self-
assessed values and market values may also vary over time, especially during times of large
movements in market prices (Anenberg 2011, Kuzmenko and Timmins 2011).

       More importantly, for our purposes, Goodman and Ittner (1992), Ihlanfeldt and Martinez-
Vazquez (1986) and Kuzmenko and Timmins (2011) find that these errors in self-reported values
are correlated with observables typically included in hedonic regressions, suggesting estimated
coefficients in these regressions would be biased. Regressing estimated errors in self assess-


                                                 5
ments on various characteristics, they find the errors are correlated not only with house-level
variables but also neighborhood variables (Ihlanfeldt and Martinez-Vazquez, Kuzmenko and
Timmins) or regional dummies (Goodman and Ittner).

        However, Kiel and Zabel (1997, 1999) have cast doubt on these findings. In particular,
Kiel and Zabel (1999) find no such relationship between house- or community-level observables
and divergences between self-reported values and observed transactions. Kiel and Zabel (1997)
further constructed inter-temporal housing price indices using both data sources, and found little
difference in appreciation rates. Interestingly, however, they do find that recent home buyers are
the most likely to overestimate the value of their home.6 Yet the implications of this inter-
temporal result for cross-sectional indices is unclear. If households poorly appraise time-
invariant effects, cross-section comparisons may be substantially biased, even while inter-
temporal indices are accurate.7 Needless to say, there appears to be little consensus at this time
on the accuracy of owner-reported home values.

        Given their innate suspicion of self-assessed values, many economists have preferred to
use actual transactions data (e.g. Bishop and Murphy 2011, Black 1999, Davis 2004, Figlio and
Lucas 2004, and Sieg et al. 2004). This approach is generally considered the gold standard, since
it uses observed, rather than stated, market prices. But this data source does have some disad-
vantages. Perhaps most importantly, such data are difficult to come by and typically must be
purchased at some expense. Moreover, it raises sample selection issues, since the sample of
homes that are sold may not be representative of the housing stock as a whole. Clapp and Giac-
cotto (1992), Gatzlaff and Haurin (1997, 1998), Ihlanfeldt and Martinez-Vazquez (1986), Jud
and Seaks (1994), and Kiel and Zabel (1999) all consider the issue of selection bias—again, with

6
  See also Follain and Malpezzi (1982) for a similar finding. Kuzmenko and Timmins (2011) find that
recent home buyers more correctly predict the values of amenities as well.
7
  For example, suppose in Community 1 in Year 1 the monthly housing costs can be decomposed into a
$600 housing component (for the structure itself) and a $600 community component (for local public
goods and amenities). Suppose in Community 2 it is $400 and $200 respectively. Suppose further that in
Year 2 there is pure inflation which increases all these figures by 10%. Finally, suppose that, in their self-
reports, households know the housing component exactly in each year, but totally ignore the public goods
component. Then in both communities the reported ratio of inter-temporal differences of 1.1:1 would be
exactly right (i.e. 660/600 is the same as 1320/1200 and likewise 440/400 is the same as 1100/1000). But
the ratio of reported cross sectional differences (in either year) would be 3:2 while the true value is 2:1.
In other words, inter-temporal indices based on self-reports would be accurate but cross-sectional indices
would not be.

                                                      6
mixed results.

       Although less common, some studies also make use of assessed values, usually when at-
tention is restricted to land values (e.g. Walsh 2007). Because homes typically are appraised for
tax or mortgage purposes, appraisal data has the advantage of being available on a large sample
of homes, suggesting selection may be less of a concern. As experts, assessors are also probably
are more accurate than home-owners in their assessments of real estate values. However, they
are not infallible. At best, they forecast actual values with some measurement error. At worst,
they may systematically ignore spatially varying factors, creating biases in cross-sectional com-
parisons. Similarly, appraisers and appraisal firms may use different rules across jurisdictions.
Ihlanfeldt and Martinez-Vazquez (1986) find that, for the Atlanta metro area, assessor estimates
are correct on average, but that they systematically misprice a number of amenities.

Data

To assess the importance of these judgments about housing data sources, we construct communi-
ty-level housing price indices using each type of data and then compare them. In particular, we
construct cross-sectional housing indices for the Los Angeles metropolitan area (including Los
Angeles, Orange, and parts of Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura counties) in the year
2000. We define the "communities" of interest as the PUMAs created by the US Census Bureau.
Our full data set includes 99 urban PUMAs in the LA area. Figure 1 shows these PUMAs, with
the study area shaded. As seen in the figure, in major cities like LA, the PUMAs are reasonably
small. Because some PUMAs are discontiguous, we also consider only the subset of 91 conti-
guous PUMAs in the area.

       Defining the communities as PUMAs allows us to compare the full range of approaches
from the literature. First, using publically available data from the 2000 decennial census Inte-
grated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), we have micro-level data on individual owner-
reported housing values and rents, matched to individual housing characteristics. Naturally, we
also have aggregate level data (e.g. median price or rent). Additionally, we have assembled
transactional data and assessments for the year 2000 in the area, purchased from SiteXdata
(owned by Fidelity National Data Service), which collects and distributes real estate information.
These transactions prices are geocoded and can be matched to the PUMAs, allowing a compari-
son to the survey data at the same level of geography.

                                                 7
        The survey data on home prices from the US Census raises two statistical issues: it is
both top coded at $999,999 and categorized by price bins (or brackets). We addressed this prob-
lem by explicitly modeling the censoring, though we also consider other approaches such as
simply giving each observation a value equal to the median of each range. While these issues
raise additional complications in the comparisons, Kiel and Zabel (1997) find that top coding and
bracketing have little impact on intertemporal price indices. Our results confirm their finding:
We also find little sensitivity to this issue in our cross-sectional indices.

        The data on tax assessments raises another issue. Since passage of Proposition 13, Cali-
fornia has used an acquisition-value tax system in which tax assessments are tied to the most
recent sale, with upward adjustments capped at 2 percent per year (see O'Sullivan, Sexton, and
Sheffrin 1995). Consequently, assessment-based indices in this application ought to be quite
close to the transactions-based indices. Accordingly, the results for the assessment-based index
are of less interest in this application than they might be in other parts of the country.

        Each data set includes data on housing structures that can be used to hedonically adjust
each community house index for the size and quality of dwelling units. The US Census data
reports the number of bedrooms, number of other rooms, ordinal data on lot size, a dummy
variable for condominiums, and dummy variables for natural gas connections and various heat-
ing sources. For rental units, the Census data also includes an indicator for whether meals are
included and various ordinal variables for the number of units in the building. The transactions
and tax assessment data from SiteX is limited to single-family units, consistent with most studies
using such data. It includes the number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, cardinal data on lot
size, dwelling unit size, and a dummy variable for a swimming pool. These data are summarized
in Table 1.

        A final issue raised by these data is the fact that these house-level controls are not per-
fectly overlapping across data sets. One perspective on this issue is that, inevitably, when choos-
ing data sources researchers are in fact committing themselves to using certain control variables,
and these differences are an inherent part of the choice. From this point of view, these differenc-
es in the data are as relevant as any other and should be factored into any comparison. Another
perspective is that differences in available hedonic control variables may cloud inference about
the dependability of the price data itself. From this point of view, these differences should be


                                                   8
factored out. As discussed below, we consider both perspectives, hedonically adjusting the price
indices for either all available controls or alternatively only for those that are common to all
datasets. We find little sensitivity of the results to this choice.

        Finally, in addition to the house-level data, we gathered community level data on public
goods and other amenities. These include school quality, commute times, air quality, and prox-
imity to the coast. For school quality, we use the 9th grade Standardized Testing and Reporting
(STAR) test, summing the math and reading scores.8,9 For commute times, we used the average
time reported in the US Census, by PUMA. For air quality, we gathered ozone data from the US
EPA at monitors in the five-county LA area and all bordering counties. At each monitor, we
collected the average annual number of exceedences of the 1-hour ozone standard from 1998-
2000. We then imputed these values to each census tract, using an inverse-distance weighted
average of the two nearest monitors, and then aggregated tracts up to PUMAS using housing
units as weights. And for the coastal variable, we simply assigned a coastal indicator variable
equal to one if a PUMA borders the Pacific Ocean. Table 2 provides summary statistics of these
variables.

Methods and Results

For the microdata-based indices, we model housing prices as a log-linear function of house-
specific structural parameters x and community fixed effects α. That is, for house h in communi-
ty c using data source and data treatment d, prices are modeled as
                  ′
lnPhcd = αcd +        xhcd + εhcd.

For each of our base or "preferred" models, the vector x includes all the available regressors
listed in Table 1 for each data source d, with age entered flexibly through a set of nine dummy
variables. Following the standard approach in the literature, we then compute the price index for
Community c from the community fixed effect, as exp(αcd), and renormalize the indices on (0,1)



8
 Additionally, we considered math and reading scores as separate variables, but could not reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient on each was identical. Accordingly, we simply summed the two scores.
9
 Because geo-coded boundary maps were not available at the school level, we impute test scores to each
census block group by assigning it to the nearest high school within its school district. We then aggre-
gated up to the PUMA.

                                                    9
for each data source/treatment d.10

         For the median-based indices, we have only one observation per community. In this
case, we estimate the following model:

ln(median Pcd) = αd +           cd   + εcd,

where     cd   is the mean value of the structural variables in community c for data source d. Note
 cd   may include the mean values of dummy variables, e.g., for age categories, giving the propor-
tion of the housing stock falling in each category; in this way, other summary statistics besides
the mean may be captured. Then the price index is computed from the community-level residual
as exp(αd + εcd).

Are Cross Sectional Price Indices Sensitive to Data Sources?

Our first set of results addresses the question of the sensitivity of community housing price
indices to the data used. To address this question, we simply compute the correlation matrix of
all the price indices we have considered. These results are shown in Table 3. The table is di-
vided into six sections, each corresponding to one of the six main data sources: transactions
prices, micro-based indices of self-reported asset prices, median-based indices of self-reported
asset prices, tax assessments, micro-based indices of rental prices, and median-based indices of
rental prices. The first row/column in each section corresponds to our preferred approach for
using each data source. In these preferred models, we control for all available hedonic variables
and, for the self-reported asset prices, we account for the binning and top-coding of the data
using a generalized Tobit regression. The other rows/columns in each section correspond to
alternative treatments of the data, discussed in detail below.

         Comparing for now only the preferred models in the first rows/columns of each section to
one another, we first note that indices based on self-reported values from the US Census are
quite close to transactions data, a result consistent with Kiel and Zabel's (1997) comparison of
inter-temporal price indices. The correlations between the indices using transactions prices and
self-reported values is 0.96. The relationship is depicted in Panel A of Figure 2. These results
would appear to justify the use of more easily obtainable Census data as a proxy for expensive
10
   An alternative approach would predict the price of a house with specific characteristics in each com-
munity, allowing β to vary and omitting the fixed effect (see e.g. Malpezzi, Chun, and Green 1998, Sieg
et al. 2002).

                                                    10
transactions data—as long as micro-level data is available with which to hedonically adjust for
house size. However, as we will see below, the transactions data are more tightly correlated with
public goods.

        Moreover, this picture changes when we consider the median self-assessed price in the
community. The correlation between the median-price self-report index and the transaction-
based index is only 0.54. Significantly, even the correlation between the median-based self-
reported index and the micro-based self-reported index is only 0.60 (Panel B of Figure 2), sug-
gesting that relying on the median price substantially changes the pattern of cross-sectional
prices regardless of the actual source of those prices.

        Second, in this application to Los Angeles, indices based on transactions data are very
close to those based on tax assessments. The correlation between the indices using these two
data sources is above 0.99. This tight correlation is depicted in Panel C of Figure 2. As noted
previously, this is not surprising in our application to California, where tax assessments are
formally based on past transactions prices.

        Next, we find that indices based on rental prices deviate somewhat from those using asset
values. The correlation of rental prices with transactions prices is 0.86 (depicted in Panel D of
Figure 2), while the correlation with self-reported asset values is only about 0.80 (Panel E).
Again, though, the pattern is very different for the median-based index using rental prices. Its
correlation with the micro-based rental index, depicted in Panel F of Figure 2, is only 0.46. In
fact, its correlation with the median-based asset-price index is almost as high (0.44), suggesting
the use of the median per se drives the variation as much as the type of price.

        Turning now to the variants of these indices within each group, we find the results are not
at all sensitive to the treatment of the data. In particular, for any of the data sources, confining
the hedonic price model to a parsimonious set of regressors common to both the census and
transactions data sources makes little difference.11 The correlations with these parsimonious
indices and our preferred indices are all 0.99. Similarly, the correlations across data sources
change only slightly when we confine the comparison to a common set of regressors. For exam-
11
  The "parsimonious" models restrict the hedonic model to only bedrooms, other rooms (census) or
bathrooms (SiteX), the measures of lot size, and age. Of course, the implication of omitted variables for
predicting prices is ambiguous and different than their implication for obtaining unbiased estimates of
regression parameters (see Malpezzi, Chun, and Green 1998 for discussion in the housing context).

                                                    11
ple, the correlation between the transactions-price index and the self-assessment index remains
about 0.96, whereas the correlation between the transaction-price index and rent index falls
slightly from 0.86 to 0.82. Additionally, for the self-reported data, ignoring the binning and top-
coding of the census data makes little difference.12 Correlations involving these types of com-
parisons also are all over 0.99. We also considered restricting the analysis to the 91 contiguous
PUMAs. Again, that restriction made little difference, with each of the correlations virtually
unchanged.

        In summary, it appears that the asset-based price indices using micro data all have very
similar cross-sectional patterns, regardless of the data source (transactions, census self reports,
tax assessments). Rent-based price indices give a somewhat different pattern. And the greatest
outliers are the median-based indices, whether based on asset prices or rents. However, simply
noting such similarities and differences in the correlations cannot speak to which approach does
a better job of reflecting patterns in spatial amenities and demographics. We consider this ques-
tion in the following section.

Relationship with Spatial Amenities

Economic intuition suggests that spatial amenities should be capitalized into property values. As
Sieg et al. (2002) argue, this intuition suggests a criterion for evaluating spatially delineated price
indices: better price indices should be more closely correlated with public goods and incomes.
Sieg et al. apply this logic to the computational formulae for computing indices (simple hedon-
ics, imputation methods, etc.). In this section, we apply their logic to the various data sources
that researchers have traditionally used.

        Table 4 shows the relationship between each of the indices we have considered and a set
of important spatial amenities. The amenities include the average ninth grade test score on the
California Star test, the average commute time to work, the number of days exceeding the na-
tional 1-hour ozone standard, and a dummy variable for whether the community borders the
coast. Columns 1-3 of the table shows simple correlations between each index and each of these
variables, omitting the coastal dummy. (Because of their close connection to transactions-based
price indices, we now omit the indices based on tax assessments.) The table shows that all the

12
  In this variant, we simply run OLS after assigning a price equal to the midpoint of the bin and, for the
top-coded observations, a price of $999,999.

                                                    12
indices have strong pairwise correlations with at least some of the amenities, although the
strength of the correlations is notably lower for the median-based indices. However, because the
various indices are more or less correlated with different amenities, it is difficult to make any
conclusions about the relative performance of the indices without first deciding which amenities
are of more interest.

       Accordingly, we next regress each price index on the entire bundle of four amenities.
The next four columns of Table 4 show the coefficients from this regression (the constant term is
not shown). The fifth column shows the R2 from this regression. As a measure of fit, the R2 of
the regression represents a gauge of the correlation between the price indices and the spatial
amenities, taken as a bundle. As an alternative indicator of fit, the last three columns of the table
show the number of normalized rank violations between the price index and the index of public
goods as computed from the respective regression (the proportion of possible pairwise compari-
sons that are off in rank by 1, 5, or 10 places). When the data are sorted by their price rank, the
rank violations are computed as follows:

                                           2
                                                         1
                                               1
for k {0, 4, 9}.

       Comparing the R2s, we again find that, within data sources, there is little difference
across methods of computing the indices. However, there are substantial differences across data
sources. Consider first the indices based on market transactions relative to those based on self-
reported values. As shown in Table 3 we found those two sets of indices were highly correlated
(with a correlation of 0.96). From this, one might conclude that it makes little difference which
data source is used. However, we get a very different impression when we compare the relation-
ship between each with the set of spatial amenities. Here, we find that the indices based on
market transactions perform better. When regressed on public goods, the hedonic index based on
market transactions has an R2 of 0.53, compared to 0.42 for the hedonic index based on self-
reported values.

       Apparently, though the two indices are tightly correlated, and thus based on some com-
mon factors, a substantial portion of the remaining residual can be accounted for by public
goods. To confirm this intuition, we first "partial out" that portion of the transactions-price index


                                                   13
that can be explained by the self-reported index. We then regress the remaining residual on the
index of spatial amenities. The latter regression has an R2 of 0.18, and a joint test of the signific-
ance of the amenities has a p-value of <0.01. In other words, it appears that households do not
fully account for cross-sectional variation in public goods and spatial amenities when estimating
the value of their own home.

        The indices based on rental prices perform even better than the market transactions indic-
es, based on the criterion of fit with spatial amenities. The R2 of these regressions are in the
neighborhood of 0.68, substantially better than the values of 0.53 and 0.42 for the transactions-
based and self-report-based indices respectively. As discussed previously, in a world of no
transactions costs, rents theoretically would be expected to better reflect current levels of ameni-
ties, in contrast to asset values which reflect the expected future stream of amenities, which in
turn are unobserved by the analyst. However, this might not be true if rents do not fully adjust to
current conditions because of transactions costs, whereas observed asset prices of property
(which are conditional on the property selling) do reflect current conditions. Our results suggest
that the former effect dominates, so rents better reflect current conditions than asset prices.
Because current conditions are in principle observed by the analyst but the future conditions
expected by market participants is not observed, this is a strong argument for using rents rather
than asset values in Tiebout-like applications in the public economics literature.

        A final result of interest is that neither the median-based index of self-reported asset val-
ues nor the median-based index of rental prices performs very well by this criterion. The R2 of
the regressions of these indices on spatial amenities is only 0.10 and 0.15 respectively, and, with
the exception of air quality, the individual coefficients on amenities are statistically insignificant.
These median-based price indices also have more rank violations with the amenities index than
the other price indices. It appears that relying on the median price, rather than making use of
micro data, entails a substantial loss of information.13


13
   Gamper-Rabindran, Mastromonaco, and Timmins (2011) make a related argument that only a portion
of the housing-price distribution may be affected by an amenity, especially if that amenity is located at a
discrete point in space. They consider the example of superfund sites, which tend to be located in neigh-
borhoods with the lowest housing costs. In such cases, the "median home" may not reflect the
(dis)amenity, whereas prices in the lower part of the distribution might. However, all neighborhoods
likely would benefit from a marginal improvement in their public schools, commute time, and air pollu-
tion, the amenities which we consider.

                                                    14
Relationship with Income

       Just as economic intuition suggests that prices should be correlated with local amenities,
it also suggests that it is the richer households who will pay these higher prices to enjoy the
amenities. In models of vertically differentiated communities, this relationship is known as the
"ascending bundles" property (e.g. Epple and Sieg 1999). This property provides an additional
criterion: just as a good price index of community real estate prices (consistent with economic
theory) should be correlated with an index of local amenities, so too should it be correlated with
average income in the community. We consider this criterion next, using both simple correla-
tions and the normalized rank violations. The results are displayed in Table 5 and Figure 3. The
results are similar to those using the criterion of local amenities. The transactions-based indices
and the self-report-based indices perform reasonably well and similar to each other, each having
a correlation with incomes of about 0.68 (Panels A and B of Figure 3). The rent-based indices
again perform somewhat better, with a correlation with income of about 0.83 (Panel D). Finally,
both median-based indices again perform much worse, with correlations with income of only
0.28 and 0.29 (Panels C and E).

Conclusions

The capitalization of local amenities into real estate values plays a crucial role in many applica-
tions in public, urban, and environmental economics. It goes almost without saying that an
accurate measure of real estate values is a crucial component of such empirical applications. We
compared a variety of measures used in the literature by constructing spatial price indices for
99 communities in the Los Angeles area. We considered the correlation among different price
indices, as well as the extent to which they reflect differences in spatial amenities and household
income across communities.

       We find that indices based on self-reported values in the US Census are highly correlated
with indices based on transactions prices. Indices based on median values, rather than micro
data, appear as outliers in the comparisons. When considering the extent to which the indices
capture spatial differences in contemporaneous amenities and income, indices based on rents
appear to perform the best, with transactions prices and self-reports coming in second and third.
Indices based on median values or rents perform the worst by these criteria.



                                                 15
         These results suggest that, despite their potential to be sticky over time, rents represent
current conditions better than asset values, which reflect expected future conditions. Among
asset-based approaches, actual transactions prices appear to better capture local amenities than
do self-reports, perhaps because households do not consider these factors. Nevertheless, the two
measures are closely correlated, and so self-reports may be a practicable alternative in some
cases.




                                                  16
References

Albouy, David. 2010. "What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Capi-
      talization of Amenity Values." Mimeo.

Anenberg, Elliot. 2011. "Uncertainty, Learning, and the Value of Information in the Residential
      Real Estate Market." Mimeo.

Bajari, Patrick, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2005. "Estimating Housing Demand with an Application
        to Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
        23: 20-33.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Robert McMillan. 2007 "A Unified Framework for Mea-
       suring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods." Journal of Political Economy 115:
       588-638.

Bayer, Patrick, Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins. 2009. "Migration and Hedonic
       Valuation: The Case of Air Quality." Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
       agement 58: 1-14.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Automobile Prices in Market Equili-
       brium." Econometrica 63: 841-890.

Bishop, Kelly C., and Alvin D. Murphy. 2011. "Estimating the Willingness to Pay to Avoid
       Violent Crime: A Dynamic Approach." American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
       ceedings 101: 625-9.

Black, Sandra. 1999. "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 578-99.

Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger, and John P. Hoehn. 1988. "New Estimates of Quality of
      Life in Urban Areas." American Economic Review 78: 89-107.

Calabrese, Stephen, Dennis Epple, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg. 2006. "Local Public Good
       Provision: Voting, Peer Effects, and Mobility." Journal of Public Economics 90: 959-
       81.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
       the Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy 115: 376-424.

Clapp, John M., and Carmelo Giaccotto. 1992. "Estimating Price Indices for Residential Prop-
       erty: A Comparison of Repeat Sales and Assessed Value Methods." Journal of the Amer-
       ican Statistical Association 87: 300-306.

Davis, Lucas W. 2004. "The Effect of Health Risks on Housing Values: Evidence from a Can-
       cer Cluster." American Economic Review 94: 1693-1704.

DiPasquale, Denise, and C. Tsuriel Somerville. 1995. "Do House Price Indices Based on Trans-

                                               17
       acting Units Represent the Entire Stock? Evidence from the American Housing Survey."
       Journal of Housing Economics 4: 195-229.

Epple, Dennis, and Holger Sieg. 1999. "Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdiction."
       Journal of Political Economy 107: 645-81.

Figlio, David N. and Maurice E. Lucas. 2004. "What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and
        the Housing Market." American Economic Review 94: 591–604.

Follain, James R., and Stephen Malpezzi. 1981. "Are Occupants Accurate Appraisers?" The
        Review of Public Data Use 9: 47-55.

Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, Ralph Mastromonaco, and Christopher Timmins. 2011. "Valuing
     the Benefits of Superfund Site Remediation: Three Approaches to Measuring Localized
     Externalities." NBER Working Paper 16655. http://www.nber.org/papers/w16655.

Gatzlaff, Dean H., and Donald R. Haurin. 1997. "Sample Selection Bias and Repeat-Sales
       Index Estimates." Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 14: 33-50.

Gatzlaff, Dean H., and Donald R. Haurin. 1998. "Sample Selection and Biases in Local House
       Value Indices." Journal of Urban Economics 43: 199-222.

Gillingham, Robert. 1983. "Measuring the Cost of Shelter for Homeowners: Theoretical and
       Empirical Considerations." Review of Economics and Statistics 65: 254-65.

Glaeser, Edward, and Joseph Gyourko. 2007. "Arbitrage in Housing Markets." NBER Working
       Paper 13704.

Goodman, John L., and John B. Ittner. 1992. "The Accuracy of Home Owners' Estimates of
     House Value." Journal of Housing Economics 2: 339-57.

Grainger, Corbett A. 2011. "The Distributional Effects of Pollution Regulations: Do Renters
      Fully Pay for Cleaner Air?" Mimeo. Accessed at http://www.aae.wisc.edu/
      cagrainger/Renters_June30_2011.pdf

Greenstone, Michael, and Justin Gallagher. 2008. "Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence
       from the Housing Market and the Superfund Program." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       123: 951-1003.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith R., and Jorge Martinez-Vazquez. 1986. "Alternative Value Estimates of Own-
        er-Occupied Housing: Evidence on Sample Selection Bias and Systematic Errors."
        Journal of Urban Economics 20: 356-369.

Jud, G. Donald, and Terry G. Seaks. 1994. "Sample Selection Bias in Estimating Housing Sales
        Prices." Journal of Real Estate Research 9: 289-98.

Kain, John F., and John M. Quigley. 1972. "Note on Owner's Estimate of Housing Value."
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 67: 803-6.

                                              18
Kiel, Katherine A., and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1997. "Evaluating the Usefulness of the American
       Housing Survey of Creating House Price Indicies." Journal of Real Estate Finance and
       Economics 14: 189-202.

Kiel, Katherine A., and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1999. "The Accuracy of Owner Provided House Val-
       ues: The 1978-1991 American Housing Survey." Real Estate Economics 27: 263-8.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V. 2011. "An Intraregional Model of Housing and Labor Markets for Esti-
     mating the General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Public Goods." Mimeo.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins. 2010. "The New Economics
     of Equilibrium Sorting and its Transformation Role for Policy Evaluation." NBER
     Working Paper 16349.

Kuzmenko, Tatyana, and Christopher Timmins. 2011. "Persistence in Housing Wealth Percep-
     tions: Evidence from the Census Data." Mimeo.

Malpezzi, Stephen, Gregory H. Chun, and Richard K. Green. 1998. "New Place-to-Place Hous-
      ing Price Indexes for US Metropolitan Areas, and their Determinants." Real Estate Eco-
      nomics 26: 235-74.

Oates, Wallace E. 1969. "The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property
       Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis. Journal
       of Political Economy 77: 957–71.

O'Sullivan, Arthur, Terri A. Sexton, and Steven M. Sheffrin. 1995. Property Taxes and Tax
       Revolts: The Legacy of Proposition 13. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Palmon, Oded, and Barton A. Smith. 1998. "New Evidence on Property Tax Capitalization."
      Journal of Political Economy 106: 1099-1111.

Palmquist, Raymond B. 2004. "Property Value Models." In Karl-Göran Mäler and Jefferey
      Vincent, eds., Handbook of Environmental Economics, volume 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier
      North Holland.

Poterba, James. 1992. "Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers." American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 82: 237–242.

Ridker, Ronald G., and John A. Henning. 1967. "The Determinants of Residential Property
       Values with Special Reference to Air Pollution." Review of Economics and Statistics 49:
       246–57.

Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh. 2002. "Inter-
       jurisdictional Housing Prices in Locational Equilibrium." Journal of Urban Economics,
       52: 131-53.

Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh. 2004. "Estimating the
       General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods."

                                              19
      International Economic Review 45: 1047-77.

Smith, V. Kerry, and Ju-Chin Huang. 1995. "Can Markets Value Air Quality? A Meta-Analysis
       of Hedonic Property Value Models." Journal of Political Economy 103: 209–27.

Tra, Constant. 2010. "A Discrete Choice Equilibrium Approach to Valuing Large Environmen-
       tal Changes." Journal of Public Economics 94: 183-96.

Walsh, Randall P. 2007. "Endogenous Open Space Amenities in a Locational Equilibrium."
       Journal of Urban Economics 61: 319-44.




                                           20
Table 1: Mean Values of Hedonic Variables

                          Transactions   Assessment
                                                                Census Data
                              Data          Data
                            Owner-         Owner-         Owner-          Renter-
       Variable          Occupied Units Occupied Units Occupied Units Occupied Units
# Observations              109,140        83,635         339,469         237,306
Observed Sale Price         $292,448          --             --              --
Assessed Value                 --         $324,281           --              --
Self-Reported Value            --             --          $273,625           --
Monthly Rent                   --             --             --             $774
Bedrooms                      3.208          3.204          3.119           1.920
Other rooms                    --             --            2.877           1.979
Bathrooms                     2.091          2.097           --              --
House size
                             1732                1732        --             --
(square feet)
Lot more than 9 acres
                              --                 --         0.042          0.021
(0/1)
Lot size (acres)              0.2043         0. 2039        --              --
Age                          39.16          39.67          34.94          33.65
Condo (0/1)                    --             --            0.045           --
Natural gas (0/1)              --             --            0.887          0.741
Electric heat (0/1)            --             --            0.097          0.236
Solar heat (0/1)               --             --            0.001          0.004
BTLP gas (0/1)                 --             --            0.010          0.016
Wood heat (0/1)                --             --            0.003          0.002
Swimming pool (0/1)           0.1807         0.1827         --              --
Meal included (0/1)            --             --            --             0.008
2 unit structure (0/1)         0              0              0             0.044
3-4 unit structure
                              0                  0           0             0.127
(0/1)
5-9 unit structure
                              0                  0           0             0.126
(0/1)
10-19 unit structure
                              0                  0           0             0.110
(0/1)
20-49 unit structure
                              0                  0           0             0.100
(0/1)
50+ unit structure
                              0                  0           0             0.113
(0/1)




                                            21
Table 2: Values of Locational Amenities

                                       Standard
 Variable                   Mean      Deviation Minimum    Maximum
 Test Score                 1386        26.13      1333     1446
 Commute Time               28.83       3.082      17.8      36.4
 Ozone exceedences          3.836       4.879        0      23.05
 Coastal (0/1)             0.1111         --         0        1
Statistics based on 99 observations (one per community).




                                            22
Table 3. Correlation Coefficients among Community Price Indices




                                                                                                                                         Self‐Reported Value –
                                                                                         Self‐Reported Value –




                                                                                                                 Self‐Reported Value –
                                                                   Self‐Reported Value
                                           Transactions Price –




                                                                                                                                                                                     Assessment Value –
                      Transactions Price




                                                                                                                                                                  Assessment Value




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rental Price ‐‐
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rental Price –
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Parsimonious
                                                                                                                      Parsimonious




                                                                                                                                                                                        Parsimonious
                                              Parsimonious




                                                                                              no censoring




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rental Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Median
                                                                                                                                                Median
Transactions Price     1
Transactions Price
– Parsimonious       0.996                       1
Self‐Reported
Value                0.956                 0.966                    1
Self‐Reported
Value –              0.951                 0.962                  0.999                        1
Parsimonious
Self‐Reported
Value – Ignoring     0.963                 0.971                  0.999                  0.998                         1
censoring
Self‐Reported
Value – Median       0.543                 0.542                  0.598                  0.610                   0.598                         1

Assessment Value     0.998                 0.993                  0.955                  0.950                   0.963                   0.545                     1
Assessment Value
– Parsimonious       0.993                 0.998                  0.966                  0.962                   0.971                   0.545                   0.995                    1

Rental Price         0.861                 0.842                  0.800                  0.791                   0.809                   0.371                   0.849               0.829                 1
Rental Price –
Parsimonious         0.84                  0.818                  0.776                  0.767                   0.786                   0.360                   0.826               0.803                0.997               1
Rental Price –
Median               0.402                 0.372                  0.346                  0.344                   0.352                   0.439                   0.410               0.377                0.455           0.472                1



                                                                                                                                23
Table 4. Relationships between Community Price Indices and Spatial Amenities

                                                                     Regression Coefficients                       Normalized Rank Violations
                              Simple Correlations
                                                                 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)                     with Amenities Index

                            Test    Commute                  Commute                            Coastal                                   10
                                            Ozone Test Score                       Ozone                    R2     1 Place   5 Places
                           Score     Time                     Time                             Community                                Places
                                                           0.321***     -1.019**   -1.597***     12.034*
Transactions Price          0.508     -0.384    -0.466      (0.051)      (0.453)    (0.195)      (6.488)
                                                                                                           0.528     0.13      0.10      0.07
Transactions Price –                                       0.332***      -0.918*   -1.596***     11.113
Parsimonious
                            0.496     -0.358    -0.442      (0.054)      (0.466)    (0.199)      (6.748)
                                                                                                           0.483     0.14      0.11      0.07
                                                           0.254***       -0.552   -1.379***      6.388
Self-Reported Value         0.447     -0.317    -0.443      (0.043)      (0.369)    (0.175)      (4.953)
                                                                                                           0.420     0.14      0.10      0.08
Self-Reported Value –                                      0.251***       -0.501   -1.368***      6.296
Parsimonious
                            0.440     -0.306    -0.439                                                     0.409     0.14      0.10      0.08
                                                            (0.044)      (0.366)    (0.174)      (4.929)
Self-Reported Value –                                      0.281***       -0.598   -1.504***      6.929
Ignoring Censoring
                            0.462     -0.324    -0.453                                                     0.442     0.14      0.10      0.08
                                                            (0.047)      (0.398)    (0.185)      (5.294)
Self-Reported Value –                                        0.048        0.385    -0.809***      7.071
Median
                            0.110     -0.035    -0.263      (0.055)      (0.434)    (0.223)      (5.529)
                                                                                                           0.103     0.30      0.26      0.22
                                                           0.535***      -0.772*   -1.782***      4.278
Rental Price                0.686     -0.381    -0.439      (0.047)      (0.448)    (0.228)      (4.812)
                                                                                                           0.682     0.12      0.09      0.06
Rental Price –                                             0.544***       -0.706   -1.725***      4.357
Parsimonious
                            0.703     -0.375    -0.428      (0.047)      (0.438)    (0.232)      (4.664)
                                                                                                           0.696     0.12      0.09      0.06
                                                             0.067        -0.641   -1.119***      3.940
Rental Price – Median       0.142     -0.224    -0.344      (0.068)      (0.683)    (0.370)      (7.180)
                                                                                                           0.153     0.26      0.22      0.18
All models based on 99 observations (one observation per community).
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***Statistically significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level.




                                                                         24
Table 5 Relationship between Community Price Indices and Average Community Income


                                                              Normalized Rank Violations
                                       Simple
                                      Correlation        1 Place       5 Places    10 Places

Transactions Price                        0.68             0.19          0.15         0.10
Transactions Price –
                                          0.67             0.19          0.15         0.11
Parsimonious
Self-Reported Value                       0.68             0.19          0.15         0.11
Self-Reported Value –
                                          0.67             0.19          0.15         0.11
Ignoring censoring
Self-Reported Value –
                                          0.68             0.19          0.15         0.11
Parsimonious
Self-Reported Value – Median              0.28             0.29          0.25         0.20

Rental Price                              0.83             0.13          0.10         0.06

Rental Price – Parsimonious               0.85             0.13          0.09         0.06

Rental Price – Median                     0.29             0.28          0.25         0.21
All models based on 99 observations (one observation per community).




                                                 25
Figure 1. Map of Study Area.




                               26
        Figure 2. Comparison of Community Price Indices across Data Sources

Panel A. Indices using self-reported values vs.                        Panel B. Median-based vs. micro-based indices
transactions prices                                                    using self-reported values
            100




                                                                                        100
            80




                                                                                                    80
                                                                          Median Self-Reported Value
  Self-Reported Value
               60




                                                                                          60
      40




                                                                                 40
            20




                                                                        20
            0




                                                                                        0
                        0   20    40             60    80   100                                          0   20    40            60         80   100
                                  Transaction Price                                                               Self-Reported Value




Panel C. Indices using tax assessments vs. trans-                      Panel D. Indices using rental prices vs. transaction
actions prices                                                         prices
          100




                                                                                        100
          80




                                                                                        80
 Assessment Values
             60




                                                                                  60
                                                                        Rental Price
    40




                                                                        40
          20




                                                                                        20
          0




                                                                                        0




                        0   20   40             60     80   100                                          0   20    40             60        80   100
                                 Transaction Price                                                                 Transaction Price




Panel E. Indices using rental prices vs. self-                         Panel F. Median-based vs. micro-based indices
reported values                                                        using rents
            100




                                                                                        100
            80




                                                                                        80
                                                                        Median Rental Price
            60




                                                                                    60
  Rental Price
  40




                                                                           40
            20




                                                                                        20
            0




                                                                                        0




                        0   20    40            60     80   100                                          0   20    40                  60   80   100
                                 Self-Reported Value                                                                    Rental Price




                                                                  27
          Figure 3. Comparison of Community Price Indices with Average Income

Panel A. Transactions Prices                                                          Panel B. Self-Reported Values
                 100




                                                                                                 100
                 80




                                                                                                 80
                                                                                       Self-Reported Value
 Transaction Price
             60




                                                                                                    60
   40




                                                                                           40
                 20




                                                                                                 20
                 0




                                                                                                 0
                                  0   50000                    100000   150000                               0   50000                    100000   150000
                                              Average Income                                                             Average Income




Panel C. Median-based Self-Reported Values                                            Panel D. Rental Prices
                 100




                                                                                                 100
                             80




                                                                                                 80
   Median Self-Reported Value
                   60




                                                                                                 60
                                                                                       Rental Price
          40




                                                                                       40
 20




                                                                                                 20
                 0




                                                                                                 0




                                  0   50000                    100000   150000                               0   50000                    100000   150000
                                              Average Income                                                             Average Income




Panel E. Median-based Rental Prices
                 100
                 80
 Median Rental Price
    40       60  20
                 0




                                  0   50000                    100000   150000
                                              Average Income




                                                                                 28
