NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DYNAMIC INTERACTION OF
EXCHANGE RATES AND TRADE FLOWS

William H. Branson

Working Paper No. 1780

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1985

Paper prepared for Conference on International Trade and Exchange
Rates in the Late Eighties, Brussels, June 6-8, 1985. NSF Grant
PRA 8211940 provided financial support. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1780
December 1985

The

'namnic Interaction of Exchange
Bates and Trade F1czs

ABSTRACT

During the fifteen years since 1970, the theory of exchange—rate
determination has been completely transformed. In the late 1960s, the
standard model of the foreign exchange market had supply and demand as
stable functions of exports and imports, with the expection that a
floating rate would move gradually with relative price changes. However,
the period of floating rates that began in the early 1970s has revealed
that exchange rates exhibit the volatility of financial market prices.
This experience, coupled with development of theory, led first to the
"monetary" approach to exchange rate determination and then to the "asset
market" approach.
The monetary approach to exchange rate determination had essentially
one—way causation from money to exchange rates, sometimes via purchasing
power parity. The broader asset market approach assumes two—way causation.
The exchange rate, in the asset—market view, is proximately determined by
financial—market equilibrium conditions. It, in turn, influences the trade
balance and the current account. The latter, in its turn, is the rate of
accumulation of national claims on foreigners, and this feeds back into
financial market equilibrium. Thus the asset market approach contains a
dynamic feedback mechanism in foreign assets and exchange rates. This
approach is called here a "fundamentals" model of exchange rate dynamics.
Recent work on rational expectations adds a layer of expectations to the
model. It is assumed that following an unexpected disturbance the market
can anticipate where the fundamentals will move the system, and move the
exchange rate in anticipation of that fundamentals path.

This paper integrates the traditional elasticities and absorption
approaches into the general equilibrium fundamentals model, and then add
the expectations layer. The model is used to interpret recent shifts in
U.S. fiscal policy and portfolio preferences for the dollar.

William H. Branson
WoodrcM Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

William H. Branson
16.5. 1985

The Dynamic Interaction of Exchange Rates and
Trade Flows.
I.

Introduction.

During the fifteen years since 1970, the theory of exchange-rate

determination has been completely transformed. In the late 1960s, the
standard model of the foreign exchange market had supply and demand as
stable functions of exports and imports, with the expectation that a

floating rate would move gradually with relative price changes. However,
the period of floating rates that began in the early 1970s has revealed
that exchange rates exhibit the volatility of financial market prices.
This experience, coupled with development of theory, led first to the
"monetary" approach to exchange rate determination and then to the "asset
market" approach. For a thorough review of these developments, see tiussa

(1984). The term "asset market" approach appears in Branson (1975).
Initial papers viewing exchange rates as determined proximately by
financial markets were Branson (1977), Dornbusch (1976), Kouri (1976),
and Mussa (1976).

The monetary approach to exchange rate determination had essentially
one-way causation from money to exchange rates, sometimes via purchasing

power parity. The broader asset market approach assumed two-way
causation. The exchange rate, in the asset-market view, is proximately
determined by financial-market equilibrium conditions. It, in turn,

influences the trade balance and the current account. The latter, in its
turn, is the rate of accumulation of national claims on foreignes, and

this feeds back into financial market equilibrium. Thus the asset market
approach contains a dynamic feedback mechanism in foreign assets and
exchange rates.

This system is shown schematically in Figure 1. Initial stocks of
assets and values for exogenous variables such as the government budget
and technology determine "temporary equilibrium" values for endogenous

variables such as the interest rate r, the exchange rate e, output y, and

the price level P via an open-economy textbook model. These in turn
determine the balance on current account which is the rate of change of

-2-

foreign assets. This feeds back into financial markets, moving the
system towards and equilibrium where the current account balances, if the
system is stable.

This outlines what is called below a "fundamentals" model of

exchange rate dynamics. Recent work on rational expectations adds a
layer of expectations to the model. It is assumed that following an
unexpected disturbance the market can anticipate where the fundamentals
will move the system, and move the exchange rate in anticipation of that
fundamentals path.
This paper provides an exposition of a popular model of the
interaction between goods and asset markets in determining the

interaction between exchange rates and the current account. It tries to
integrate the traditional elasticities and absorption approaches into the
general equilibrium fundamentals model, and then add the expectations

layer. The model is used to interpret recent shifts in U.S. fiscal
policy and portfolio preferences for the dollar.
Section II reviews the elasticities approach and its many special
cases. This is integrated with the absorption approach in Section III,

in a textbook macro model. Section IV then adds a financial sector and
exchange-rate determination to develop a bare-bones fundamentals model.
The expectations layer came in Section V, along with an interpretation of

recent events. The model performs fairly well in this regard.

-3—

II. Effects of Changes in Exchange Rates on Trade.
The most convenient point to begin the analysis of the
interdependence between trade and exchange rates is with the effects of
changes in exchange rates on trade, the second arrow in Figure 1 above.
This puts us on familiar starting ground, since the analysis revolves
around the well-known "Marshall-Lernert' elasticities conditions. These
can be derived from a log-linear model of export and import supply and
demand, as is shown in Branson (1972) and Branson and Katseli (1980).

Here the analysis is partial equilibrium, assuming domestic output and
prices of non-traded goods are unchanged as the exchange rate changes.
General equilibrium considerations will be brought into play in section

III. One way to think about the trade elasticities conditions is as
"impact effect" to be used as input to a large macro model which will
calculate the subsequent general equilibrium response of the economy.
The full elasticities condition can be stated as follows:

s

d (l+s )
dB =

(px)0[{

d- s

-

()mm)Q

(1-s-d )

_

d11e

(1)

Here dB is the change in the home-currency value of the trade balance;

(p x)and (p u1) are the initial values of exports and imports; s,
smx> ö and dm, m < 0 are the price elasticities of supply and demand

for exports and imports;

is the percentage change in the exchange rate

measured as units of home currency per unit of foreign exchange (so

0

>

is a depreciation of the home currency). The elasticities condition in
(1) gives the sign and magnitude of the effect on the trade balance over

whatever run the elasticities are measured. We can interpret the
condition in several special cases: the "insular economy," the "small
country," and the "rigid economy."
The Insular Economy of Marshall and Lerner.

The usual statement of the Marshall-Lerner conditions assumes an

economy that Kenen (1985) has labelled insular. In this case s and

,

go to infinity (all supply curves are flat). This would be likely in a

country that is small in the world market so S
export sector so s - c•

and has a small

Here the elasticity condition (1) reduces to

-4-

dB =

{(px0)[-d]

-

mm)ø[1+dm]}

If trade is initially balanced so (px)0 =

(2)

(pm)

condition (2) reduces

further to the usual statement of the Marshall-Lerner conditions: dB and
e have the same sign if l+d + d > 0. (remember that d , d < 0).
x
m
As long as the trade demand and supply curves have the usual signs

x m

for their slopes, as assumed above, a devaluation with

> 0 will

increase the volume of imports. The elasticity conditions here tell us
what happens to the real home-currency value of the trade balance. It is
"real" because we are taking domestic non-traded prices as given and
computing volume effects plus the relative price effect of the

devaluation. As we see in the next section, the elasticities conditions
take us from the partial equilibrium level of equations (1) and (2) to
the macro level.

The assumptions associated with the "insular" economy, which
simplify equation (1) to the usual Narshall-Lerner conditions, may call
into question the relevance of this particular version of the elasticity

condition. The combination of assumptions that (a) the economy is small
in the world market for its imports, but (b) the export sector is a small
and flexible part of the economy may be applicable only to a small set of

countries, including the UK before World War II. The assumption that
trade is balanced transforms the strict Marshall-Lerner conditions from a

policy-relevant statement to a "thought experiment" about how a model

works. Actual devaluation would generally take place with a trade

deficit, i.e., mm)ü> (px)0. If the price-elasticity of demand dm in
equation (1) is greater than -1, this would give additional weight to the

possibility that devaluation would have perverse results. These
reservations about the strict Marshall-Lerner calculations lead us to
consider alternative assumptions on elasticities: the small country and
the rigid economy.

The Small Country and the Rigid Economy.

The trade theorist's small country takes world prices as insensitive

to anything it does. In our framework, this translates into
the assumptions that Sm d go to infinity. In this case, the
elasticities condition (1) reduces to

-5-

[(p

dB =

x)0[l+s I

- mm)ü{1mj}

(3)

If trade is initially balanced, the elasticity condition further

reduces to s- d> 0, which is necessarily so, except in the extreme
case of the rigid economy, to be discussed just below. This is the basis
for the conventional wisdom that devaluation will always improve the

trade balance in a small, open economy. But if the initial
condition is a trade deficit and -l < d

<

0, a perverse result may

appear even in this case. It is not difficult to find examples of

countries that devalue with (pm)0 twice (px)0. See, for example,
Branson (1986) in the Kenyan experience in 1979-80.
The rigid economy is a separate case from the small, open economy,
but we can see the basic point by considering an economy that is both.
The trade structure of many developing countries has a high percentage of
exports coming from sectors with a low supply elasticity in the short

run, but little domestic consumption of the exportable. This makes
s

low, and the extreme example of

- 0 is illuminating. The same

trade structure includes a high percentage of intermediate inputs such as
oil in imports, with a low demand elasticity determined by a structure of

production that is rigid in the short run. In the extreme,

d - 0.

In the illustrative extreme case of a rigid small economy,

these assumptions lend to the (non-elasticity) condition that

dB =

[(px)0-

(1)mm)O}e.

(4)

It should be clear that (4) is a limiting case of (3); very low values

s and d would give qualitatively similar results.
In the rigid economy, a devaluation shifts the export demand and
import supply curves up along vertical export supply and import demand

curves. This results in no change in volume and an equiproportionate

increase in p and p, whether the economy is small or not. Thus the
rigid economy looks like a fully escalated economy, as noted below and
analyzed at greater length in Branson and Macedo (1985).

The importance of the Marshall-Lerner assumption of initial balance

comes out with greatest force in conditions (3) and (4). Devaluation or

-6-

depreciation generally occurs with a trade deficit. If this combines
with relatively inelastic import demand for intermediate inputs, it can

cause the initial deficit to increase with devaluation. Since the
elasticities conditions here give the effect of the trade balance in home
currency, this would result in a deflationary devaluation, to use the

term of Cooper (1971) and Krugman and Taylor (1978). The devaluation
would pull demand out of the system. Thus the elasticities condition
controls the effect on home-currency aggregate demand of a change in the

exchange rate. This will be the starting point for the macroeconomic
analysis in section III.
Indexation and Non-traded Goods.

In the elasticities analysis, a change in the exchange rate alters
trade volumes implicitly by changing the prices of traded goods relative

to non-traded goods. The rigid economy is a limiting case in which
inelasticity eliminates volume effects. This result can also be obtained
with wage indexation, which eliminates relative price effects. The
following model provides an illustration.

Suppose changes in home-currency prices of traded goods are given by
changes in the exchange rate with world prices exogenous:

Here a

denotes percentage change: Z

dZ/Z. The consumer price index

i is a weighted average of the prices of traded and non-traded goods:
1

ce + (1_a)pN.

+ (l_a)pN

(6)

The price of non-traded goods is a mark—up over wage costs and wages are
indexed to the CPI:

PN_W_1.

(7)

If we insert (2) into (6) for
and then from

=

W

=

e.

we obtain the basic result that i
So wage indexation links the price of

e

—7—

non-traded goods to the exchange rate, eliminating the relative-price

effects of a change in the exchange rate. This replicates the result of
the rigid economy.

The initial, partial-equilibrium effects of exchange-rate changes
calculated using elasticities formulas must be fed into a
general-equilibrium macroeconomic model to obtain the full, if temporary,

equilibrium results. This takes us to integration with the absorption
approach. From this point on, we will assume that the appropriate

elasticities condition holds, so that dB/ > 0.

Essentially, we assume a

devaluation or depreciation increases demand in home-currency terms.

-8-

III. Exchange Rate Changes at the Macro Level.
The next step is to integrate the elasticities conditions into a
simple macro model. This will allow us to see the general conditions
under which a devaluation or depreciation will reduce a trade deficit,

taking into account general equilibrium repercussions. The basic point
that will emerge is that the domestic price reaction that reduces the
relative price effect of the exchange rate change itself reduces real
balances and expenditure, reducing domestic absorption. This makes room
for the increase in the trade balance to persist in the temporary general
equilibrium.

Our "model" is the national income equilibrium condition or IS

curve, augmented by an aggregate supply curve. We look at a specialized
country that produces a single exportable output, but consumes both the
exportable and an import. This could be generalized to a world of
countries producing differentiated bundles of outputs, and trading. The
basic outline of the absorption approach, and its relation to the
elasticities conditions can be shown clearly with this minimum model. We
will expand it to include a financial sector in later sections.
The national income equilibrium condition is that output equals
expenditure:

y =

M

a(y,r,,g)

+

eP

x(——)

-

eP

aP

—v— m(e,—).

(8)

Here y is the real value of GDP, a is absorption as a function of income
< 1, the interest rate r, real balances hIP, and
(
output with 0 <

ay

exogenous government purchases. For the present, we assume the country
is small in financial markets. Since we are analyzing the effects of
an in the exchange rate here, we assume the expected change is zero, so
r is fixed by an uncovered interest parity condition r r. M is the

money stock, fixed by the authorities in the temporary equilibrium. The price
level P is endogenous.
The trade balance is stated in real home-currency terms. Exports
depend on their price relative to world prices, with P = 1. Real

imports depend on absorption and relative prices. The multiplicative
term eP/P transforms nominal imports in foreign prices into real imports

—9-

in home currency. The effects of relative price changes are the usual X

> 0 and me < 0.

The ambiguity associated with the elasticities

conditions is expressed by the multiplicative price term on imports. We
assume sufficient elasticity that an increase in e increases
[x -

eP'/Pm],

the real trade balance in home currency.

Equation (8) includes two endogenous variables y and P. An
aggregate supply curve closes the system:

P =

P(y).

(9)

Here we will make the Keynesian assumption that 0 < P

<

. The

particular analytic results below would also hold if we made the

neoclassical assumption that P -

. This

indeed will be the simplifying

assumption of sections IV and V. Substituting the supply curve (9) into
the national income condition gives us the aborption equation:

M

y(P) -a[y(P),r ,—g] =

eP

x(—)

-

eP

—j

eP

(10)

m(a,—p--).

An increase in P increases output more than absorption since

< 1

a

and through the real balance effect on absorption. Either would be

sufficient. If Py -

, a price increase leaves output unchanged but

reduces abosrption via the real balance effect. If the appropriate
elasticities conditions hold, an increase in P reduces the trade balance
x -

eP' m. Equilibrium condition (10) is illustrated in Figure 2. The

intersection of the y - a and trade balance curves gives the trade
deficit (left of zero) in equilibrium.

A devaluation shifts the trade balance curve in Figure 2 up. This
pulls up the domestic price level, increasing y -

a.

As the price level

rises, output rises along the supply curve given by equation (9), and

absorption rises less. A devaluation that put the trade balance curve
through the point where y - a intersects the vertical axis would result

in elimination of the initial deficit. A direct reduction in absorption
via a reduction in N or y would shift y - a down, pushing the domestic

price level down. A shift in y - a to the point where the trade balance
curve intersects the vertical axis would also eliminate the intitial

-10-

deficit. The devaluation, shifting the trade balance curve, is an
example of "expenditure-switching" policy; the direct cut in absorption

is "expenditure-reducing" policy. Clearly a combination of the two could
eliminate the deficit with no predictable change in the price level.
This is the usual macro policy prescription: devalue and reduce
government spending.

The essential point of Figure 2 is the demonstration that the
increase in the domestic price level following a devaluation in general
will not be sufficient to eliminate the impact effect of the devaluation

on the trade balance. This impact effect is the shift of the trade
balance curve in Figure 2. The increase in P increases y - a, leaving a
positive effect on the trade balance in the new temporary equilibrium.
The essential point of this section of the paper is to show how the
elasticities calculations of the effects of exchange rate changes on
trade, the second arrow in Figure 1, can be integrated into a macro

framework without changing the qualitative results. So this step in the
dynamics of Figure 1 is consistent with those dynamics being embedded in

a broader macro framework. Next we will add asset markets with imperfect
substitutability to the goods market equilibrium conditions (10) to study
the effects of macroeconomic disturbances on exchange rates and exchange
rate dynamics.

—11—

IV. Macroeconomic Effects on Exchange Rates.
In sections II and III we studied the effects of exogenous changes
in exchange rates on trade and equilibrium output and the price level.

Here we turn to macroeconomic determinants of the exchange rate and

interest rates. We add a simple specification of financial-market
equilibrium that includes just enough complexity to make the basic

points. In this section we outline the "fundamentals" model with static
expectations, filling in the first and third arrows in Figure 1. In the
next section we study dynamics with rational expectations. A basic point
in this section is that movements in interest rates and the exchange rate

are determined by the interaction of the financial and real sectors. The
particular example we will focus on is a major shift in fiscal policy.
National Income Equilibrium.

To simplify the analysis, we will assume here that the supply curve
in equation (9) is vertical; Py neoclassical assumption.

This can be interpreted as a

I would prefer to interpret this as implying

that the focus is on full-employment effects. The point will be that
various disturbances give rise to changes in interest rates and exchange

rates at full employment, putting aside cyclical effects. We assume the
appropriate trade elasticities conditions hold, so that a rise in eP/P
increases the trade surplus in home currency. So we will write
a, a) to denote the trade surplus in home currency, with P = 1,
and a introduced as a shift parameter representing phenomena such as
technical advance in traded goods production.

With these simplifications, the goods market equilibrium condition
(8) can be re-written as
-

W

y a(r,,g) +

e

x(,a,a).

(11)

Output y is suppressed in the absorption function since it is constant.

We assume home and foreign assets are imperfect substitutes, so that r

can move relative to the world interest rate r. Real wealth is an
argument in the absorption function in place of real balances to allow

for foreign asset holdings. Income on foreign assets is implicitly
included in x in equation (11) for simplicity. Later it will be treated
explicitly.

-12-

The goods market equilibrium condition (11) has three endogenous
variables, r, P, and e. If we think of the three-dimensional space with
r, P, and 1 on the axes, this is a negatively-sloped plane in that
space.
An increase in the price level reduces demand via both absorption and net

exports. This requires some combination of a reduction in interest rates
or an increase in the exchange rate e to maintain goods market
equilibrium.

Figure 3 shows the combinations of r, P, and e that yield goods
market equilibrium for given N, g, and c. The exchange rate is inverted
on the left-hand axis to permit us to see the plane in the positive
orthant. An increase in N, g, or c will shift the plane out, increasing

the intercepts. Any of these will increase demand for the home good,
requiring some combination of an increase in P and r, and fall in e
(appreciation) to hold demand equal to full-employment output. Below we
will focus on the effects of a major shift in fiscal policy.
The Financial Sector and General Equilibrium.
The specification of the financial markets is a representation of
the portfolio—balance model of Branson (1977, (1983), with restrictions
similar to those in Katseli and Nariori (1982) and Branson and Henderson
(1985). We consider one country with two non-traded assets, a bond B and

money M. The asset holders in the country also hold foreign-denominated
assets F, which they accumulate or decumulate through a current-account

surplus or deficit. We could think of this as a stylized specification
of a medium-sized or small European economy.
The world interest rate is taken as given, and therefore suppressed.
For a two-country model of this type, see Branson and Henderson (1985).
Since the exchange rate is endogenous, we now assume that it is freely
flexible; the previous sections give us the effects of exchange rate
changes in trade, but now these are determined in the model.

To simplify (and perhaps improve realism), we assume that the demand
for money is based only on transactions, not portfolio diversification.
Thus increñients to wealth at a given level of income go into B or F.

With these restrictions, the financial market equilibrium is specified by
the following equations:

-13-

=

B

eF =

m(r,

e);

(12)

b(r, e, p)(W-M);

(13)

f(r,

(14)

e, p)(W-M);

W=M+B+eF.

(15)

Given y, the demand for real balances depends on the opportunity Costs r

and e, the expected change in the exchange rate. In this section we
will assume e = 0; in section V we will assume rational expectations,
i.e. that e is the actual rate of change of e.
The demands for bonds and foreign assets are scaled to total wealth
less money holdings; this is the result of excluding a portfolio

motivation for holding money. The holdings of net foreign assets F are
multiplied by e to convert them to home-currency units. The demand for

money increases as r ore falls. The demand for bonds rises as r
increases and falls as e increases, and vice versa for the demand for F.
The p parameter represents a shift of demand from foreign to domestic

assets, so f < 0 and b > 0.

This will represent a "safe haven" effect
p
p
when we apply the model to the U.S. case. The adding-up constraint (15)
imposes the usual constraint across equations, so that only two of

(12)-(14) are independent. If we assume static expectations so e 0, and
take P as given from the national income equilibrium, (12)-(15) can be
solved for r and e, as in Branson (1977) (1983).
The financial market equilibrium values of r and e, given P, are

given by the LM line in Figure 3. As P increases, the demand for money
rises. This pulls r up, increasing the demand for bonds and reducing the
demand for net foreign assets. This in turn reduces e and raises l/e.
An increase in p representing a shift in portfolio preferences from F
toward B, would rotate the LM line in the direction of the arrow in
Figure 3, parallel to the l/e axis.

The simultaneous equilibrium of the real and financial sectors is

given at point A, where the UI line pierces the IS plane. The two
independent LN equations plus the IS equation give us three equilibrium

conditions in the three endogenous variables r, P, e. We can now move on

-14-

to study the effects of changes in the exogenous variables on the
temporary equilibrium represented by point A.

In particular, we wish to

focus on fiscal policy g and the safe-haven effect p.
Effects of Fiscal Policy.
The first experiment we study is a fiscal expansion, represented by
an increase in g. The direction of the impact effects on the exchange
rate in this static expectations case gives the direction of the shift
of the e = 0 locus in the rational expectations case of section V. This
is because here we assume e = 0 and find the solution for the jump in e

consistent with this. Thus while the static expectations case is of
interest in itself, it also provides an input for the rational

expectations analysis of section V. The discussion here will be
heuristic, in terms of the graphical representation of the model. The
mathematics are given in an appendix available from the author.
A fiscal expansion, represented by an increase in g, shifts the IS

plane in Figure 3 out. With the LN line positively sloped in the
positive orthant, this increases the temporary equilibrium values of P
and r, and reduces e.

The increase in demand raises P. This increases

the demand for money and r. This, in turn, induces a portfolio shift out
of foreign assets and reduces e.
A useful way to view the effects of the increase in g at full
employment is to see that a combination of private absorption and the
trade surplus must be reduced by an amount equal to the increase in g.
This "crowding out" is achieved by a combination an increase in P and r
that reduces private absorption, and a fall in the real exchange rate e/P
that reduces the trade surplus. This is exactly the result obtained in
the United States with the expansion of the "structural deficit"

beginning in 1982. See Branson, Fraga, and Johnson (1985) for a full
analysis of this case.
If the original equilibrium point A was a full equilibrium with
balanced trade, so F

0, then the new equilibrium is only a "temporary"

equilibrium. This is because the fall in e/P causes a trade deficit and
capital inflow as part of the financing of the budget deficit implicit

in the g increase. So in the new equilibrium F

x <

0; the economy is

decuniulating net foreign assets. This takes us to the dynamic adjustment

mechanism that carries the economy to a new full equilibrium. The path

-15-

of

that adjustment will be discussed below, after we introduce the

effects of changes in F on the UI line.
Effects of a Shift in the Trade Balance.
The shift parameter a was included in net exports in equation (11)
to represent changes in competitiveness that are exogenous to the model.
An increase in a, generating a trade surplus, also shifts the IS plane

out, increasing r and P and reducing e. The rise in r and P reduces
absorption, so the real appreciation (fall in e/P) does not fully offset

the original effect of a on the trade balance. The result is a trade
surplus with reduced absorption. So in the new temporary equilibrium,
F = x <

0, and the economy is accumulating net foreign assets, shifting

the LN line in a way to be discussed below.
Effects of Changes in Portfolio Preferences.

A shift in portfolio preferences from foreign to domestic assets for
given return differentials is represented by an increase in p in the

portfolio demand equations (13) and (14). If we think of the economy
here as the United States, this could be a representation of the "safe
haven" effect.

The increase in p rotates the LN line in the plane defined by the

l/e axis and the UI line, as indicated by the arrow in Figure 3. The
temporary equilibrium point moves to the left and down along the IS

plane, which remains fixed. The result is a decrease in r, P, and e.
The portfolio shift moves r and e, and to stay on the IS plane P must

fall. The fall in r and P both increase private aborption, so with
given y, x must fall. Therefore e/P must decrease, so e falls more than

P. The result is a new temporary equilibrium with F

x <

0,

taking us

to the dynamics.

Both the fiscal expansion and the safe haven effects generate a real

appreciation, i.e., a fall in e/P. But they differ in their effects on
the interest rate. The fiscal expansion raises it, while the shift in

portfolio preference reduces it. This may lead us to conclude that
fiscal expansion has dominated the safe haven effect in the United States
since 1980.

Dynamics of Foreign Asset Accumulation.

The equilibrium conditions (11)-(15) define a "temporary
equilibrium" in P, r, and e, given the existing stocks of M, B, and F.

-16-

But we see that a change in fiscal policy or portfolio preferences
changes the trade balance, which in turn changes the rate of accumulation

of net foreign assets F. Thus the original equilibrium
was a full stock equilibrium with F =

0, the new equilibrium has F

0,

so it is a temporary equilibrium. As net foreign assets accumulate or
decumulate, the temporary equilibrium itself moves. If this dynamic
process is stable, it moves toward a new stock equilibrium where F is
again zero.

The equation of motion for the stock of net foreign assets is

F =

x (,a,ci) - r"F.

(16)

Here net exports x is in foreign exchange, and rF is investment
income. The exchange rate, the price level, and absorption all depend on
the stock of net foreign assets F through the temporary equilibrium

conditions (ll-(15). If on balance dF/dF <

0,

the dynamic system

moving F in the static expectations case is stable. The expression for
dF/dF is

+

+

= x(e-P,)

+

Xa

rrF+ aW -

+ r.

(17)

Here xe is the derivative of net exports with respect to e/F, which
is assumed to be positive.

eF and

are the effects of changes in F on

e and P in the temporary equilibrium. eF is negative, but the sign of
is unclear. An increase in F through a current account surplus has
conflicting effects on demand. Since rF is negative and wealth is in the
absorption function, an increase in F increases absorption. But the
effect on trade is negative because an increase in F reduces e. We
assume that F is smaller than eF in order to obtain this offsetting

trade effect. In the absorption term xa is negative, as is ar .

The

wealth effect on absorption is positive, and we assume that an increase
in F increases W/P, so 1 -

is

positive. Thus the trade terms in

expression (17) are negative, and they must exceed r to ensure
stability. This is the "super Narshall-Lerner condition" of Branson
(1977).

—17—

We can now trace the dynamics of fiscal expansion in the model with

static expectations. This extends the analysis in Branson (1977) to
include fiscal policy. The IS plane shifts out, reducing e and raising P

and r. The real exchange rate e/P falls, and a current account deficit
develops as a way to finance the budget deficit. The current account
deficit gradually reduces the stock of net foreign assets F. This
rotates the LM line up and towards the r, P plane in Figure 3.

The reduction in F increases e, reducing the trade deficit, and

increases r, reducing absorption further. Here we see an example of
"overshooting," with the initial fiscal expanding reducing e, and the

subsequent dynamics increasing it. The combination of depreciation and a
further increase is the interest rate progressively shifts the burden of
financing the fiscal expansion away from the current account and toward

absorption. This dynamic process continues until the current account is
back in balance, and the increase in g has fully crowded out domestic
abosrption at full employment.

Following a shift in portfolio preferences toward the home asset, a
new temporary equilibrium is reached with F =

x

<

0.

The dynamic

adjustment proceeds as in the fiscal policy case, with F decreasing and r

and e rising. Here we see an example of undershooting in response to a
real disturbance to the trade account. The exchange rate continues to
rise until the current account is back to zero and the system has
returned to stock equilibrium.

These examples provide illustrations of the dynamics of exchange

rate and current account adjustment with static expectations. This is
the "fundamentals" model of exchange rate dynamics. We now add to this
model another layer of analysis by introducing rational expectations.

-18-

V. Exchange Rate Adjustment with Rational Expectations.
The static expectations solutions and dynamics give us the basic
inputs needed to study the rational expectations dynamics that are likely
to drive the actual interaction between exchange rates and the current

account. The dynamic analysis of this section begins with the model of
Branson (1983), which deals with the case of a net international

creditor. We then go on to analyze the case of an international debtor,
and the dynamics of a switch from creditor to debtor. This discussion is
foreshadowed in Buiter (1984). Here we see most clearly the interaction
of movements in exchange rate and the current account.
Financial Sector Equilibrium.

In a stochastic world, rational expectations mean that expectations
are unbiased predictors of movements in the relevant variables. There
may be a wide error distribution around the empirical forecast, however.
Agents with rational expectations know they will always forecast

incorrectly; their forecasts will be right only on average! We interpret
the assumption in a non-stochastic model as "perfect foresight." The
seeming precision of this assumption, however, is due to the need to
simplify from a stochastic to a deterministic framework; it is not
fundamental to rational expectations in general.

Now we assume that

in equations (12)-(14) is both the expected and

actual percentage change on the exchange into the future. Two of these
three equations can be solved for equilibrium values of r and , given e

and F. The equation for

can be combined with equation (16) for F

dynamic system in e and F. Begin with the total differentials of
equations (12) and (14):

d() =

mdr
=

W-fl

+

f rdr

mde;
+

fde
e

+

f pdpp

these can be solved for dr and d in matrix form as:

—19-

f - m

dr

e

0 0 I d()

1

e

d()
W-tl

=
IAI

de

-f

where IAI =

r

01 —f

m

r

(17)

dp

PH

7

m

f- f m..< 0. The sign of the determinant is unclear. If

re re

m and f are the same order of magnitude and f- < - m as it must since
r
r
e
b + frn.. + m.. = 0, then IAI < 0. We assume this is the case. It may even
be plausible to assume that m is close to zero.
The solution for d can be written out:

de =

H

1

eF

ThT fr((: + rnrd()

-

fpmrdP

1.

the coefficients are the partial derivatives of the implicit dynamic
equation for :

e =

44,p);

4< 0;

>

0,

>

0.

(18)

This is essentially the same solution as obtained in Branson [1983, eq.
(9)], with the "safe haven" parameter added.

The e, F loci for

= 0 are shown in Figure 4, which is the same as

Buiterts (1984) Figure 2.C.l. These are the two branches of the
rectangular hyperbola along which eF is constant at the value consistent
= 0, for given H/P and p. The eF solution could be positive
with

(creditor) or negative (debtor). The

0 loci give the adjustment of e

to changes in F with static expectations. With rational expectations,
movements of points not on the loci follow the vertical arrows. If F is

positive, a value for e above the = 0 locus will be consistent with
equilibriumn only if e is expected to rise, and vice versa below
With F negative, a value of e higher than

=

0.

0 would be a debt greater

than that consistent with the exchange rate expected to remain constant.

This higher debt could be consistent with equilibrium only if the
exchange rate is expected to fall, i.e. the debt to shrink, and vice

versa below = 0.

-20-

Changes in M, P, or p in equation (18) shift the
<

01

= 0 locus. Since

and 2 > 0, an increase in N/P will shift the positive

0

locus up or the negative one down. An increase in p (shift from foreign
to domestic assets) does the opposite.
Current Account Dynamics.

The current account dynamics are given by equation (16) fof F.

A

current account surplus increases F, and vice versa. The slope of the F
= 0 locus in Figure 4 is indeterminate. It can be obtained
by totally
differentiating equation (16) with respect to F and e, setting dF equal
to zero, and calculating de/dF. The reason for the uncertainty about the
slope is that an increase in F increases absorption and reduces net

exports via a wealth effect, but increases investment income. Thus the
effect on the current account is ambiguous, and so is the sign of the
change in the exchange rate that will hold the current account at zero in
the face of change in F. As in Branson (1984 a,b), we will assume that F
= 0 locus in Figure 4 is flat.
The horizontal arrows in Figure 4 show the direction of movement of
F above and below the F = 0 locus. Assuming the appropriate elasticities
condition holds, above F

0 the depreciation of the currency (rise in e)

generates a current-account surplus and F >

0.

Below the locus, F <

0.

An increase in a in equation (16), representing an improvement in
competitiveness, shifts the F
0 locus down. An increase in g which
raises the domestic price level and increases absorption, shifts the F =

0 locus up. The direction of the shift gives the movement of
the real
exchange rate e/P needed eventually to restore current account balance.
Exchange Rate Dynamics.
= 0
The
locus in the positive qudrant in Figure 4 gives the

adjustment of the exchange rate as F accumulates or decumulates with

static expectations. This is the stable adjustment pattern that was
discussed in section IV. When a country is a creditor, a "high" F
= 0. This means F < 0 and F shrinks, etc.
produces a "low" e along
From equation (18), we see that as F decreases, the value of e that is
consistent with
0 increases.
In the negative quadrant of Figure 4, the situation is reversed.

From equation (18), we see that if F is negative (a debtor country), to
hold eF constant as F decreases (increases in absolute value), e must

-21-

= 0 in the negative quadrant, the static-expectations

fall. So along

dynamics are unstable. In the positive qudrant, e and F move toward the
equilibrium along

0; in the negative quadrant they move away. This

instability in the debtor case with static expectations was noted in
Branson, Haittunen, and Masson (1979).
The instability with static expectations when F < 0 recalls the
stability problems with income effects of net suppliers in Hicks Value

and Capital (1946, ch.5). In the positive quadrant, with F > 0, an
increase in F leads one to sell and this reduces e. In the negative
quadrant, with F <

0, as F increases (decreases absolute value), net

worth increases, so one is led to buy and e rises. This seems to be an
asset-market analogy to the Hicksian income effect.
With rational expectations, both positive and negative equilibria

exhibit "saddle path" stability. This has been previously noted by
Henderson and Rogoff (1982), Buiter (1984), and Branson and Henderson

(1985). To the northwest and southeast of either equilibrium lies a
unique path into the equilibrium along which the exchange rate moves as

expected and the system converges to the equilibrium. These are the
saddle paths SS. Other dynamic paths such as those originating at A or B
in Figure 4 cross the F = 0 curve vertically or the

= 0 curve

horizontally and explode. These are speculative bubble paths. Along
them expectations are met, but they do not converge to an equilibrium.
The conventional assumption is that the market eventually eschews the

bubble paths and moves along in the neighborhood of the saddle path. For
any given non-equilibrium F, the market determines whether the
equilibrium is a creditor or debtor position, and moves the exchange rate

onto the appropriate saddle path (or to its neighborhood). The F and
dynamics then move the system toward the equilibrium.
Effects of Fiscal and Monetary Policy.

The effects of monetary policy in the model of Figure 4 have been

thoroughly discussed elsewhere. See, for example, Branson (1983),
(1983). Here we will focus on fiscal policy and shifts in portfolio
preverences.

An expansionary full-employment fiscal shift would shift F = 0 up a
bit in Figure 4, and by raising the price level P either shift a positive
= 0 locus down or a negative one up, depending on the location of the

-22-

initial equilibrium. The exchange rate will then ,jump onto the relevant

new saddle path, beginning the dynamics. This is shown in Figure 5,
where the initial alternative equilibria E0 of Figure 4 are reproduced as

the starting points. The exchange rate jumps to the relevant

E1 point,
and then the system proceeds along the saddle path to the relevant

equilibria. [Ignore E1 for now]. The jump appreciation throws the
current account into deficit as a source of finance for the budget

deficit. The exchange rate then depreciates as F falls toward the new
equilibrium where domestic saving finances both the budget deficit and
domestic investment.
A sufficiently large combination of shift to fiscal ease and
monetary tightness can shift the entire equilibrium from positive to

negative F. In Figure 5 this is illustrated by the sequence moving from
the positive E0 to E1, and then to the negative E2. A large enough cut
M/P in equation (18) could change equilibrium F from creditor to debtor.
= 0 locus from the original positive
This would move the equilibrium
position through E0 to the new negative locus through E2. The exchange
rate would then jump to E1, and the current account deficit would
persist long enough to move F into the negative quadrant at E2. This
could possibly describe the fiscal and monetary shift that came about
during the period 1979-82 in the United States, which is now an
international debtor.

Shift in Portfolio Preferences.

A shift in portfolio preferences from foreign to domestic assets,
the U.S. "safe haven" effect, would also shift the positive
0 locus
down or the negative one up, with no effect on F = 0.

The results would

be qualitatively the same as in Figure 4. One would observe a jump
appreciation that generates the deficit, and a gradual depreciation into

the new equilibrium. The run-down of F in the adjustment process would
effect the portfolio switch.
The difference between the monetary-fiscal scenario and the
safe-haven, effect is in the movement of the domestic interest rates for

Section IV. In the former case they rise, with the shift in portfolio
preferences they fall.

-23-

VI. Concluding Comments.
In this paper I have tried to integrate the elasticities and
absorption approaches to the analysis of devaluation into a popular
modern model of exchange-rate dynamics, and to provide an accessible

exposition of the model. In doing this, important simplifications have
been made, and potentially important channels of adjustment have been
omitted.

First, the general equilibrium model of dynamics assumes full

employment. We could go back and split all P changes into P and y
changes using the supply curve, but it hardly seems worth the effort. In
addition, we have seen significant shifts in full-employment fiscal
positions in recent years, and analysis of their results seem relevant.
Second, we have not integrated into the model cumulation of stocks

of domestic debt. This could be an important additional channel of
influence on interest rates and exchange rates. One can imagine the
market looking ahead to the integral of the new structural deficit in the
United States, calculating the effect on bond prices and interest rates,
and moving the latter as soon as the calculation is completed (say,

mid-1981). This would move the exchange rate at the same time. This
channel is explored in Branson, Fraga, and Johnson (1985).

Third, we have been fairly imprecise in specification of some

aspects of the model, aiming at analytical clarity. For example, the
price index P should include traded and non-traded goods with an exchange

rate effect in it. Output should include a terms-of-trade effect.
Perhaps the distinction between nominal and real interest rates should

have been introduced. These are all in Branson and Buiter (1983), which
simplifies in other directions.

Finally, we could more closely approximate recent events by
observing that the fiscal and monetary shifts of the 1980s have not been

clear-cut jumps as in Figure 4. Rather, they have been gradually
perceived, as if the jumps in Figure 5 occurred over several years. A
beginning on this kind of analysis is included in Branson, Fraga, Johnson

(1985). Perhaps the next step would be to integrate some of these papers
into a simple model. That would be a complicated task.

/
/ Stocks
ot assets
r
e

Exogenous
variables

y

current
account

national rate
E

of accumulation

balance

Figure 1: Accumulation and Exchange Rate Dynamics

1

-x-

—

Figure 2: National Income Equilibrium

eP

*

Units

of CDP

r

'I

I

IS Plane

I

LM Line

A

-

A

—/
P

1

e

Figure 3: Equilibrium Determination
of r, P, e.

/
___f =

-

=

F

--

0

÷+

Figure 4: Rational Expectations Solutions tor Exchange Rates
and the Current Account.

/ I
S

-4
=

E
h----.-,

'-S

B

'S.'S-S.

S

e—O
F

—+

Figure 4:

Rational Expectations Solutions for Exchange Rates
and the Current Account.

NE
/

E

2

F'

Figure 5: Eftects of Fiscal Policy

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.

Branson, William FL, 1986, Stabilization, Stagflatjon,
and investment incentives: the case of 1(enya,
1979—1980, in : Sebastian Edwards and Liaquat Ahamed,
eds, Structural adlustments and the real exchange rates
in developing countries (forthcoming)

2.

Branson, William H., 1984a, A model of exchange rate
determination with policy reaction: evidence from
monthly data, in: Pierre Naigranqe and Pierre—&jlajn
Muet eds, Contemporary macroeconomic modelling, (Basil
Blackwell, London) 128—155.

3.

Branson, William H., 1984b, Exchange rate policy after
a decade of "floating", in: John F. Bilson and Richard
C, Narston eds, Exchange rate theory and practice, (The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 79—117.

4.

Branson, William H., 1983, Macroeconomic determinants
of real exchange risk, in: Richard J, Herring ed,
Managing foreign exchange risk, (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge) 33—74.

5.

Branson, William H.,, 1977, Asset markets and relative
prices in exchange—rate determination,
SOzialwjssenschaftliche Annalen, 1, 69—89, also
Reprints in International Finance no. 20, 1980
(Princeton Press, Princeton)

6.

Branson, William H.,, 1975, Comment on N. v. N. Whitman:
Global monetarjsm and the monetary approach to the
balance of payments, Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity, 6, 537—542.
7.

Branson, William, 1972, The trade effects of the 1971
Srcokings Papers on Economic
Activity, realigumets,
1, 15—69.
currency

8.

Branson, William H. and

Eale W. Henderson, 1985, The
specification and influence of asset markets, in:
Ronald U. Jones and Peter B. Kenen eds, Handbook in
International !cofloIicS (North—Holland, Amsterdam)

749—805.

9.

Branson, William H. and Jorge de Macedo, 1985, Macro
policy in rigid economies, DISCUSSiOn Papers in
Economics (forthcoming), Woodro Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs, Princeton

University.

10. Branson, William H. and Willem H. Buiter, 193,
Monetary and fiscal policy with flexible exchange
rates,in: 3. Ehandari and E. Putnam eds, The
international transmission cf economic disturbances
under flexible exchange rates (MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.)

251—285.

11. Branson, William H. and .ouka !. Katseli—
Papaefstratiou, 1980, income stability, terms of trade,
and the choice of exchanqe—rate regime, Journal of
Development Economics, 7, 49—69.
12. Branson, William H., Haittunen, H., and Masson, P.
1979, Excbanqo rates in the short run: some further
results, European Economic Review, 12, 395—402.
13. Buiter, Willem H., 19814, Comment on William iE. Branson:
Exchange rate policy after a decade of "floating", in:
John F. Bilson and Richard C, Marston eds, Exchange
rate theory and practice, (The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago) 108—112.

14. Cooper, Richard N., 1971, currency devaluation in
developing countries, Princeton Essays in International
Finance. No. 86 (Princeton Press, Princeton)
15. Dornbusch, Rudiqer, 1976, Expectations and exchange
rate dynamics, Journal of Polical Economy, 84,
1161—1176.

16. Henderson. Dale W. and Kenneth Rogoff, 1982, Negative
net foreign asset positions and stability in a world
portfolio balance model, Journal of International
Economics, 13. 85—104.
17. Hicks, 3. F., 19146, Value and capital, (Oxford
University Press, London)
18. Katseli—Papaefstratiou,, Louka T. and N. P. Marion,
1982, Adlustment to variations in prices of imported
inputs: the role of economic structure,
Weltuirtschaftljches Archiv., vol. 118, 1, 131—1'47.

19. Kenen, Peter B., 1985, Macroeconomic theory and policy:
how the closed economy opened, in : Ronald W. Jones and
Peter B. Kenen, eds, Handbook in international
economics (North—Holland, Amsterdam) 625—677.

20. Kouri, Pentti 3. K., 1976, The exchange rate and the
balance of payments in the short run and in the long
run: A monetary approach, Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 78, 280—304.
21. Krugman, Paul and Lance Taylor, 1978, Contractionary
effects of devaluation, Journal of International
Economics, 8, 445—456.

3

22.

1ussa, Michael L., 198t4, The theory of xChariqe rate
determination, in: John F. Dilson and Richard c,
Marston eds, Exchange rate theory and
practice, (The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 13—78.

23. Mussa, Michael L., 1976, The exchange rate, the balance
of Payments and monetary and fiscal policy under a
regime of controlled floating, Scandinavian Jcurnaj. of
EconoTics, 78, 229—248.

