NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION AND THE PRODUCTIVITY OF AMERICAN
MATHEMATICIANS
George J. Borjas
Kirk B. Doran
Working Paper 17800
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17800

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We are grateful to Graeme Fairweather, Patrick Ion, Erol Ozil, and Norm Richert from the American
Mathematical Society for extensive collaboration and support in preparing the data. This project profited
from the excellent programming of Andrew Stellman of Stellman and Greene Consulting. We have
benefited from comments made by many economists and mathematicians, including Ran Abramitzky,
Orley Ashenfelter, Pierre Azoulay, Robert Barro, Witold Biedrzycki, Brent Doran, Charles Doran,
David Ellwood, William Evans, Henry Farber, Richard Freeman, John Friedman, Joshua Goodman,
Daniel Hamermesh, Arthur Jaffe, Lawrence Katz, Petra Moser, Michael Rothschild, Lawrence Shepp,
Fabian Waldinger, Bruce Weinberg, Heidi Williams, numerous seminar participants, and three referees.
The authors are grateful to the Upjohn Institute, the Kauffman Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation
for their financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity of American Mathematicians
George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran
NBER Working Paper No. 17800
February 2012
JEL No. J61,O31
ABSTRACT
It has been difficult to open up the black box of knowledge production. We use unique international
data on the publications, citations, and affiliations of mathematicians to examine the impact of a large
post-1992 influx of Soviet mathematicians on the productivity of their American counterparts. We
find a negative productivity effect on those mathematicians whose research overlapped with that of
the Soviets. We also document an increased mobility rate (to lower-quality institutions and out of active
publishing) and a reduced likelihood of producing “home run” papers. Although the total product of
the pre-existing American mathematicians shrank, the Soviet contribution to American mathematics
filled in the gap. However, there is no evidence that the Soviets greatly increased the size of the “mathematics
pie.” Finally, we find that there are significant international differences in the productivity effects
of the collapse of the Soviet Union, and that these international differences can be explained by both
differences in the size of the émigré flow into the various countries and in how connected each country
is to the global market for mathematical publications.

George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
Kirk B. Doran
438 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kdoran@nd.edu

2
The Collapse of the Soviet Union
and the Productivity of American Mathematicians*
George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran	  
	  
I. Introduction
Many	  economists	  believe	  that	  knowledge	  production	  is	  central	  to	  long-­‐term	  
economic	  growth.	  Nevertheless,	  it	  has	  been	  difficult	  to	  document	  the	  factors	  that	  enter	  the	  
production	  function	  of	  knowledge.	  The	  difficulty	  arises	  for	  many	  reasons.	  For	  example,	  
knowledge	  production	  is	  both	  social	  and	  reciprocal	  (Lucas	  2009),	  in	  that	  the	  ideas	  of	  one	  
researcher	  influence	  and	  are,	  in	  turn,	  influenced	  by	  the	  ideas	  of	  others. Similarly,	  basic	  
knowledge	  production	  can	  be	  difficult	  to	  observe	  and	  measure	  at	  the	  individual	  level,	  so	  
that	  we	  do	  not	  have	  a	  well-­‐developed	  set	  of	  facts	  that	  can	  help	  guide	  our	  thinking	  on	  a	  
theoretical	  framework.	  Finally,	  we	  do	  not	  understand	  why	  knowledge	  in	  some	  fields	  
progresses	  at	  a	  remarkable	  rate	  in	  a	  short-­‐lived	  burst,	  yet	  stagnates	  for	  decades	  in	  other	  
areas.1	  
Despite	  these	  difficulties,	  it	  is	  clear	  that	  there	  are	  countless	  possibilities	  for	  
spillovers	  when	  producing	  knowledge:	  the	  knowledge	  produced	  by	  one	  researcher	  is	  both	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
*	  We	  are	  grateful	  to	  Graeme	  Fairweather,	  Patrick	  Ion,	  Erol	  Ozil,	  and	  Norm	  Richert	  from	  the	  American	  

Mathematical	  Society	  for	  extensive	  collaboration	  and	  support	  in	  preparing	  the	  data.	  This	  project	  profited	  
from	  the	  excellent	  programming	  of	  Andrew	  Stellman	  of	  Stellman	  and	  Greene	  Consulting.	  We	  have	  benefited	  
from	  comments	  made	  by	  many	  economists	  and	  mathematicians,	  including	  Ran	  Abramitzky,	  Orley	  
Ashenfelter,	  Pierre	  Azoulay,	  Robert	  Barro,	  Witold	  Biedrzycki,	  Brent	  Doran,	  Charles	  Doran,	  David	  Ellwood,	  
William	  Evans,	  Henry	  Farber,	  Richard	  Freeman,	  John	  Friedman,	  Joshua	  Goodman,	  Daniel	  Hamermesh,	  Arthur	  
Jaffe,	  Lawrence	  Katz,	  Petra	  Moser,	  Michael	  Rothschild,	  Lawrence	  Shepp,	  Fabian	  Waldinger,	  Bruce	  Weinberg,	  
Heidi	  Williams,	  numerous	  seminar	  participants,	  and	  three	  referees.	  The	  authors	  are	  grateful	  to	  the	  Upjohn	  
Institute,	  the	  Kauffman	  Foundation,	  and	  the	  Sloan	  Foundation	  for	  their	  financial	  assistance.	  
1	  Jones	  (2005,	  p.	  1107)	  succinctly	  summarizes	  the	  difficulties:	  “While	  we	  have	  made	  much	  progress	  in	  

understanding	  economic	  growth	  in	  a	  world	  where	  ideas	  are	  important,	  there	  remain	  many	  open,	  interesting	  
research	  questions.	  The	  first	  is,	  ‘What	  is	  the	  shape	  of	  the	  idea	  production	  function?’	  How	  do	  ideas	  get	  
produced?...The	  current	  research	  practice	  of	  modeling	  the	  idea	  production	  function	  as	  a	  stable	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  
combination	  of	  research	  and	  the	  existing	  stock	  of	  ideas	  is	  elegant,	  but	  at	  this	  point	  we	  have	  little	  reason	  to	  
believe	  that	  it	  is	  correct.”	  See	  also	  Lucas	  (1988),	  Romer	  (1986),	  Romer	  (1990),	  and	  Jones	  and	  Romer	  (2010).	  

3
an	  output	  and	  an	  input	  into	  another	  researcher’s	  production	  function.	  As	  Newton	  said,	  “If	  I	  
have	  seen	  further	  it	  is	  by	  standing	  on	  the	  shoulders	  of	  giants.”	  
But	  even	  if	  the	  ideas	  of	  a	  highly	  qualified	  single	  worker	  spill	  over	  to	  other	  workers	  
with	  whom	  they	  interact,	  the	  overall	  effect	  of	  the	  interaction	  can	  still	  be	  deleterious	  to	  the	  
productivity	  of	  other	  workers.	  In	  particular,	  in	  a	  world	  with	  constraints	  on	  the	  funding	  and	  
dissemination	  of	  ideas	  (e.g.,	  a	  limit	  on	  the	  number	  of	  faculty	  slots,	  or,	  more	  abstractly,	  a	  
limit	  on	  the	  attention	  span	  of	  the	  potential	  audience),	  large	  and	  sudden	  increases	  in	  the	  
population	  of	  producers	  of	  knowledge	  can	  result	  in	  diminishing	  marginal	  productivity	  for	  a	  
pre-­‐existing	  worker.	  As	  an	  example,	  a	  young	  academic	  might	  appreciate	  the	  hiring	  of	  a	  new	  
illustrious	  colleague	  in,	  say,	  mathematics	  because	  it	  may	  improve	  his	  own	  ideas.	  At	  the	  
same	  time,	  the	  young	  academic	  realizes	  that	  in	  a	  world	  with	  limited	  funding	  and	  limited	  
research	  opportunities,	  his	  own	  services	  and	  research	  now	  become	  relatively	  less	  
important	  to	  his	  own	  department	  and	  to	  the	  field	  in	  general.	  
	  

A	  number	  of	  recent	  empirical	  studies	  have	  attempted	  to	  quantify	  the	  net	  impact	  of	  

the	  presence	  of	  a	  highly	  skilled	  worker	  on	  the	  ideas	  and	  output	  of	  other	  workers.	  For	  
example,	  Waldinger	  (2009)	  examines	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  doctoral	  students	  who	  were	  
left	  behind	  when	  superstar	  German	  scientists	  left	  Germany	  during	  the	  Nazi	  era.	  He	  finds	  
that	  these	  students	  suffered	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  their	  highly	  skilled	  mentors.	  In	  more	  recent	  
work,	  however,	  Waldinger	  (2011)	  finds	  that	  the	  coauthors	  left	  behind	  in	  Nazi	  Germany	  did	  
not	  experience	  a	  loss	  in	  productivity	  when	  the	  superstars	  left.	  Finally,	  Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  
Wang	  (2010)	  document	  the	  decreased	  output	  suffered	  by	  the	  co-­‐authors	  of	  superstar	  
scientists	  after	  the	  superstars	  die.	  They	  find	  that	  the	  coauthors	  become	  much	  less	  
productive	  when	  the	  superstar	  is	  no	  longer	  able	  to	  collaborate.	  In	  concluding,	  they	  note:	  

4
“Although	  we	  measure	  the	  impact	  of	  losing	  a	  star	  collaborator,	  a	  full	  accounting	  of	  
knowledge	  spillovers	  would	  require	  information	  on	  the	  benefits	  that	  accrued	  to	  the	  field	  
while	  the	  star	  was	  alive.	  We	  can	  think	  of	  no	  experiment,	  natural	  or	  otherwise,	  that	  would	  
encapsulate	  this	  counterfactual”	  (Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  Wang	  2010,	  p.	  580).2	  
	  

This	  paper	  attempts	  to	  measure	  the	  productivity	  effects	  of	  the	  entry	  of	  highly	  skilled	  

scientists	  in	  a	  context	  where	  we	  can	  observe	  the	  counterfactual	  of	  no	  entry.	  In	  particular,	  
we	  examine	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  influx	  of	  renowned	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  into	  the	  global	  
mathematics	  community.	  In	  the	  period	  between	  the	  establishment	  and	  fall	  of	  communism,	  
Soviet	  mathematics	  developed	  in	  an	  insular	  fashion	  and	  along	  very	  different	  specializations	  
than	  American	  mathematics.	  As	  a	  result,	  some	  mathematicians	  experienced	  few	  potential	  
insights	  from	  Soviet	  mathematics	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  while	  other	  fields	  
experienced	  a	  flood	  of	  new	  mathematicians,	  theorems,	  and	  ideas.	  
We	  have	  constructed	  a	  data	  set	  that	  contains	  information	  on	  the	  authorship	  of	  every	  
paper	  published	  in	  mathematics	  over	  the	  past	  70	  years.3	  These	  data	  allow	  us	  to	  document	  
the	  location,	  affiliation,	  and	  complete	  publication	  and	  citation	  records	  of	  mathematicians	  
who	  were	  active	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  around	  the	  world	  for	  the	  past	  few	  decades.	  
Prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  there	  was	  little	  collaboration	  and	  only	  
infrequent	  exchanges	  between	  Soviet	  and	  Western	  mathematicians.	  In	  fact,	  every	  written	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  Related	  research	  on	  knowledge	  production	  includes	  Furman,	  Kyle,	  Cockburn,	  and	  Henderson	  (2005)	  and	  

Hunt	  and	  Gauthier-­‐Loiselle	  (2010).	  

3	  Mathematical	  research	  plays	  a	  fundamental	  role	  in	  technological	  progress.	  In	  fact,	  recent	  applications	  of	  

modern	  academic	  research	  papers	  in	  mathematics	  and	  related	  fields	  (such	  as	  theoretical	  computer	  science	  
and	  mathematical	  physics)	  to	  our	  broader	  economy	  are	  so	  numerous	  and	  diverse	  that	  it	  is	  impossible	  to	  
characterize	  them	  briefly.	  For	  a	  few	  examples,	  consider	  the	  Rivest-­‐Shamir-­‐Adleman	  algorithm	  that	  forms	  the	  
backbone	  of	  Internet	  encryption;	  the	  Reed–Solomon	  error	  correction	  that	  makes	  possible	  compact	  disks,	  
deep-­‐space	  communication,	  error-­‐free	  bar	  codes,	  and	  DSL	  television;	  and	  Claude	  Shannon’s	  information	  
theory,	  which	  has	  been	  applied	  everywhere	  from	  gambling	  and	  investing,	  to	  bioinformatics	  and	  music,	  and	  
even	  to	  the	  discovery	  of	  new	  oil	  fields	  with	  seismic	  oil	  exploration.	  

5
communication	  with	  an	  American	  mathematician	  was	  opened	  and	  read	  by	  the	  authorities,	  
and	  special	  permission	  was	  required	  to	  publish	  outside	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  Depending	  on	  the	  
era	  in	  the	  Cold	  War,	  Soviet	  violators	  could	  be	  imprisoned	  (Polyak	  2002).	  After	  the	  collapse	  
of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  over	  1,000	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  migrated	  to	  other	  countries,	  with	  a	  
large	  fraction	  settling	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  In	  addition,	  the	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  
in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  became	  part	  of	  the	  globalized	  publications	  market	  in	  mathematics.4	  	  
Our	  empirical	  analysis	  demonstrates	  that	  the	  American	  mathematicians	  whose	  
research	  programs	  most	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  experienced	  a	  reduction	  in	  
productivity	  after	  the	  entry	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  into	  the	  U.S.	  mathematics	  market.	  This	  effect	  
is	  observed	  at	  both	  tails	  of	  the	  quality	  distribution	  of	  mathematicians.	  First,	  the	  likelihood	  
of	  a	  competing	  mathematician	  producing	  a	  “home	  run”	  paper	  fell	  significantly.	  Similarly,	  
marginal	  mathematicians	  became	  much	  more	  likely	  to	  move	  to	  lower-­‐quality	  institutions	  
and	  to	  exit	  knowledge	  production	  altogether.	  We	  also	  find	  evidence	  that	  the	  students	  of	  the	  
Soviet	  émigrés	  had	  higher	  lifetime	  productivity	  than	  other	  students	  from	  the	  same	  
institution	  who	  had	  non-­‐émigré	  advisors.	  However,	  this	  gain	  was	  more	  than	  offset	  by	  the	  
productivity	  loss	  suffered	  by	  students	  who	  had	  American	  advisors	  with	  Soviet-­‐like	  
research	  programs.	  	  
On	  aggregate,	  based	  on	  the	  pre-­‐1992	  age-­‐output	  profile	  of	  American	  
mathematicians,	  we	  find	  that	  the	  actual	  output	  of	  mathematicians	  with	  a	  Soviet-­‐like	  
research	  program	  is	  far	  below	  what	  one	  would	  have	  expected.	  Even	  though	  there	  was	  a	  net	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4	  Abramitzky	  and	  Sen	  (2011)	  provide	  a	  detailed	  analysis	  of	  how	  the	  collapse	  of	  Soviet	  communism	  led	  to	  a	  

diffusion	  of	  knowledge	  to	  and	  from	  the	  West	  and	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.	  

6
loss	  in	  total	  output	  for	  American	  mathematicians,	  this	  loss	  was	  approximately	  made	  up	  by	  
the	  published	  output	  of	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  
Our	  analysis	  also	  directly	  confronts	  a	  related	  issue	  in	  the	  knowledge	  production	  
literature.	  Knowledge	  producers	  interact	  in	  both	  a	  job	  market	  (i.e.,	  the	  market	  for	  selling	  
human	  capital),	  and	  in	  a	  publications	  market	  (i.e.,	  the	  market	  for	  selling	  codified	  
knowledge,	  such	  as	  journal	  articles).	  The	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  provides	  a	  unique	  
opportunity	  to	  empirically	  examine	  the	  relative	  importance	  of	  each	  market	  for	  determining	  
the	  net	  productivity	  effect	  on	  knowledge	  producers.	  
After	  all,	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  induced	  many	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  to	  
move	  to	  some	  countries,	  but	  not	  to	  others,	  creating	  competitive	  pressures	  in	  some	  job	  
markets,	  but	  not	  in	  others.	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  the	  market	  for	  journal	  space	  has	  some	  
segments	  that	  are	  country-­‐specific,	  but	  other	  segments	  that	  cross	  over	  geographic	  
boundaries.	  As	  a	  result,	  mathematicians	  in	  countries	  that	  did	  not	  physically	  receive	  many	  
Soviet	  émigrés	  may	  have	  experienced	  competition	  in	  the	  journal	  market,	  while	  
mathematicians	  in	  still	  other	  countries	  did	  not	  experience	  increased	  competition	  in	  either	  
market.	  The	  international	  differences	  in	  the	  post-­‐1992	  productivity	  of	  mathematicians	  
reveals	  that	  competitive	  pressures	  in	  both	  the	  job	  market	  and	  in	  the	  market	  for	  codified	  
knowledge	  are	  important	  determinants	  of	  productivity	  and	  of	  crowd-­‐out	  effects.	  
	  
II. Historical Context
After	  the	  establishment	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  in	  1922,	  Soviet	  mathematics	  entered	  a	  
long	  period	  of	  development	  independent	  from	  mathematics	  in	  the	  West.	  To	  varying	  
degrees	  between	  1922	  and	  1992,	  the	  Soviet	  Government	  instituted	  strict	  controls	  on	  which	  

7
scientists	  could	  communicate	  with	  Western	  peers,	  on	  the	  parameters	  of	  scientific	  travel,	  on	  
the	  acceptable	  outlets	  for	  publication,	  and	  on	  access	  to	  Western	  materials.5	  Just	  as	  speakers	  
of	  one	  language,	  when	  separated	  geographically	  for	  many	  generations,	  eventually	  develop	  
separate	  and	  different	  dialects	  through	  natural	  changes	  over	  time,	  so	  Western	  and	  Eastern	  
mathematicians,	  separated	  by	  Stalinist	  and	  Cold	  War	  political	  institutions,	  developed	  under	  
different	  influences	  to	  the	  point	  of	  achieving	  very	  different	  specializations	  across	  the	  fields	  
of	  mathematics.	  
An	  important	  event	  that	  cemented	  the	  isolation	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  was	  the	  
“Luzin	  affair.”	  In	  1936,	  Nikolai	  Luzin,	  a	  mathematician	  at	  Moscow	  State	  University	  and	  a	  
member	  of	  the	  USSR	  Academy	  of	  Sciences,	  became	  the	  target	  of	  a	  political	  campaign.	  The	  
allegations	  included	  not	  only	  the	  usual	  charge	  of	  promoting	  anti-­‐Soviet	  propaganda,	  but	  
also	  the	  specific	  accusation	  that	  Luzin	  saved	  his	  main	  academic	  results	  for	  publications	  in	  
foreign	  outlets.	  Although	  Stalin	  eventually	  spared	  Luzin’s	  life,	  the	  impact	  on	  Soviet	  
mathematics	  was	  swift	  and	  dramatic:	  “The	  main	  visible	  consequence	  of	  the	  Luzin	  affair	  was	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5	  Polyak	  (2002,	  p.	  2)	  gives	  a	  firsthand	  account	  of	  the	  life	  of	  mathematicians	  behind	  the	  Iron	  Curtain.	  Polyak	  

writes:	  “’The	  iron	  curtain’	  was	  not	  only	  a	  metaphor,	  it	  was	  a	  real	  obstacle	  to	  international	  contacts…When	  
Professor	  Ya.Z.	  Tsypkin	  received	  a	  letter	  in	  the	  late	  1940s	  from	  an	  American	  reader	  of	  his	  paper,	  he	  was	  
summoned	  by	  the	  KGB	  and	  underwent	  a	  long	  investigation	  there,	  tottering	  at	  the	  edge	  of	  arrest.	  .	  .	  Another	  
source	  of	  difficulties	  for	  researchers	  was	  the	  mania	  for	  secrecy.	  .	  .	  Nobody	  was	  allowed	  to	  publish	  any	  paper	  
without	  special	  permission	  confirming	  that	  the	  publication	  does	  not	  contradict	  numerous	  security	  
restrictions.	  All	  letters	  abroad	  (as	  well	  as	  letters	  from	  abroad)	  were	  opened	  and	  inspected.	  Everybody	  must	  
have	  special	  permission,	  and	  a	  full	  text	  of	  the	  talk	  had	  to	  be	  approved	  if	  you	  were	  going	  to	  an	  international	  
conference.	  And	  working	  in	  a	  classified	  institution	  (which	  was	  the	  case	  for	  many	  experts	  in	  mathematical	  
programming),	  complicated	  the	  situation	  drastically.	  .	  .	  The	  situation	  in	  the	  1940s	  to	  mid-­‐1950s	  was	  the	  
worst.	  Malevolent	  intent	  by	  the	  authorities	  could	  lead	  a	  researcher	  to	  the	  GULAG.	  The	  period	  1955–1970	  was	  
the	  least	  oppressive,	  it	  was	  a	  ‘golden	  age’	  of	  Soviet	  mathematics.	  .	  .	  The	  years	  1970	  to	  1985	  were	  a	  period	  of	  
stagnation	  in	  political,	  social,	  economic,	  and	  scientific	  life.	  All	  the	  troubles	  I	  have	  mentioned	  above	  played	  a	  
more	  and	  more	  significant	  role	  in	  the	  development	  of	  Soviet	  science	  and	  thus	  led	  to	  its	  degradation.”	  

8
that,	  from	  this	  precise	  moment,	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  began	  to	  publish	  almost	  exclusively	  
in	  Soviet	  journals	  and	  in	  Russian.”6	  
Figure	  I	  illustrates	  the	  dramatic	  differences	  in	  specializations	  between	  Soviet	  and	  
American	  mathematics.	  In	  particular,	  the	  figure	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  
before	  1990	  by	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  field	  relative	  to	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
published	  by	  American	  mathematicians	  in	  that	  field.	  Despite	  the	  fact	  that,	  on	  aggregate,	  
Americans	  published	  about	  three	  times	  as	  many	  papers	  as	  the	  Soviets,	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  published	  1.4	  papers	  per	  American	  paper	  in	  Integral	  Equations.	  In	  
contrast,	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  published	  only	  0.06	  papers	  per	  American	  paper	  in	  
Statistics.	  In	  fact,	  the	  two	  most	  popular	  Soviet	  fields	  were	  Partial	  Differential	  Equations	  and	  
Ordinary	  Differential	  Equations,	  and	  these	  two	  fields	  accounted	  for	  17.8	  percent	  of	  all	  
publications.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  two	  most	  popular	  American	  fields	  were	  Statistics	  and	  
Operations	  Research,	  Mathematical	  Programming,	  and	  these	  two	  fields	  accounted	  for	  15.6	  
percent	  of	  all	  American	  publications.7	  
The	  primary	  influences	  behind	  the	  development	  of	  both	  Soviet	  and	  Western	  
mathematics	  were	  history	  dependence	  and,	  to	  a	  lesser	  extent,	  state	  funding.	  In	  the	  Soviet	  
Union,	  for	  example,	  the	  mathematical	  genius	  Andrey	  Kolmogorov	  developed	  important	  
results	  in	  the	  area	  of	  Probability	  and	  Stochastic	  Processes	  beginning	  in	  the	  1930s.	  In	  a	  
scenario	  common	  throughout	  Soviet	  mathematical	  history,	  he	  then	  established	  a	  “school”	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6	  O’Connor	  and	  Robertson	  (1999).	  The	  charges	  against	  Luzin	  were	  published	  in	  Pravda	  in	  a	  series	  of	  articles	  

beginning	  on	  July	  3,	  1936.	  The	  Luzin	  affair	  involved	  intrigue,	  blackmail,	  and	  betrayal—even	  Andrey	  
Kolmogorov	  played	  a	  non-­‐trivial	  role	  in	  the	  play	  (Graham	  and	  Kantor	  2009);	  see	  also	  Smithies	  (2003).	  
7	  The	  third	  most	  popular	  field,	  Quantum	  Theory,	  was	  the	  same	  in	  both	  countries,	  accounting	  for	  6.8	  percent	  

and	  5.9	  percent	  of	  publications	  in	  the	  USSR	  and	  the	  United	  States,	  respectively.	  The	  fourth	  and	  fifth	  most	  
popular	  fields	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  were	  Probability	  Theory	  and	  Stochastic	  Processes	  (6.1	  percent)	  and	  Global	  
Analysis,	  Analysis	  on	  Manifolds	  (4.8	  percent).	  The	  respective	  fields	  in	  the	  United	  States	  were	  Computer	  
Science	  (4.5	  percent)	  and	  Numerical	  Analysis	  (4.3	  percent).	  

9
at	  Moscow	  State	  University,	  attracting	  some	  of	  the	  best	  young	  minds	  over	  the	  next	  four	  
decades,	  such	  as	  the	  teenage	  prodigy	  Vladimir	  Arnold	  in	  the	  1950s.	  Arnold	  himself	  quickly	  
solved	  Hilbert's	  famous	  “Thirteenth	  Problem,”	  and	  initiated	  the	  field	  of	  symplectic	  
topology.	  The	  large	  amount	  of	  Soviet	  work	  in	  these	  areas	  even	  in	  the	  1980s	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  
Figure	  I	  under	  the	  subject	  headings	  “Mechanics	  of	  Particles	  and	  Systems,”	  “Global	  Analysis,	  
Analysis	  on	  Manifolds,”	  and	  “Ordinary	  Differential	  Equations.”	  Since	  the	  United	  States	  did	  
not	  have	  the	  unique	  Kolmogorov-­‐Arnold	  combination,	  the	  amount	  of	  work	  done	  by	  
American	  mathematicians	  in	  these	  subfields	  was	  far	  less	  than	  would	  have	  been	  expected	  
given	  the	  size	  and	  breadth	  of	  the	  American	  mathematics	  community.	  
In	  the	  United	  States,	  however,	  researchers	  like	  John	  Milnor	  at	  Princeton	  University	  
and	  Raoul	  Bott	  at	  Harvard	  University	  developed	  key	  ideas	  in	  the	  topology	  of	  manifolds	  in	  
the	  1950s.	  Their	  students	  and	  collaborators	  produced	  an	  enviable	  body	  of	  research	  in	  
Manifolds	  and	  Cell	  Complexes,	  which,	  because	  of	  the	  lack	  of	  a	  similar	  chance	  originator	  in	  
their	  country,	  was	  never	  replicated	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union.8	  
Finally,	  Soviet	  funding	  was	  limited	  (in	  comparison	  to	  the	  U.S.)	  in	  fields	  requiring	  
experiments	  or	  equipment	  (Howe	  1990).	  Figure	  I	  also	  demonstrates	  that	  as	  late	  as	  the	  
1980s,	  this	  resulted	  in	  a	  large	  discrepancy	  between	  American	  and	  Soviet	  specialization	  in	  
computer	  science	  and	  related	  fields.9	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8	  Algebraic	  Geometry,	  a	  field	  of	  relative	  U.S.	  excellence,	  provides	  another	  example	  of	  the	  persistence	  of	  

history	  dependence.	  The	  Summary	  Report	  of	  the	  Panel	  on	  Soviet	  Mathematics	  (Lefschetz	  1961,	  p.	  IV-­‐2)	  
explains	  that:	  “in	  no	  part	  of	  mathematics	  is	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  weaker	  than	  in	  algebraic	  geometry.	  No	  
significant	  contributions	  have	  ever	  .	  .	  .	  come	  from	  there.”	  This	  was	  not	  only	  true	  in	  1961,	  but,	  as	  Figure	  I	  
demonstrates,	  it	  remained	  true	  in	  the	  1980s.	  
9	  Personal	  communication	  with	  Professor	  Lawrence	  Shepp,	  who	  during	  a	  long	  career	  at	  Bell	  Labs	  was	  in	  

contact	  with	  some	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  as	  early	  as	  1964,	  suggests	  that	  the	  fact	  that	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
avoided	  the	  most	  popular	  American	  field	  (Statistics)	  had	  little	  to	  do	  with	  funding.	  Specializing	  in	  statistics	  
was	  politically	  dangerous	  in	  the	  USSR,	  as	  it	  would	  require	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  massaging	  of	  sensitive	  data.	  

10
We	  exploit	  the	  fact	  that	  Soviet	  and	  American	  mathematicians	  did	  not	  choose	  their	  
specializations	  in	  the	  1970s	  and	  1980s	  in	  the	  belief	  that	  they	  would	  soon	  have	  an	  
opportunity	  to	  co-­‐author	  papers,	  compete	  for	  pages	  in	  the	  same	  journals,	  and	  apply	  for	  jobs	  
at	  the	  same	  universities.	  The	  consensus	  among	  both	  Soviet	  and	  American	  experts	  almost	  
immediately	  before	  the	  collapse	  of	  communism	  was	  that	  the	  political	  system	  of	  the	  existing	  
Soviet	  state	  was	  not	  ripe	  for	  a	  sudden	  change.	  Walter	  Laqueur	  (1996,	  p.	  65)	  describes	  how	  
in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  itself,	  “most	  believed	  the	  system	  was	  so	  strong	  that	  it	  would	  never	  
essentially	  change.	  Others,	  more	  optimistic,	  thought	  that	  change	  was	  perhaps	  possible	  over	  
a	  long	  period—decades,	  or	  more	  likely,	  generations.”	  In	  the	  West,	  Laqueur	  (1996,	  p.	  99)	  
reports	  that	  Sovietologists	  were	  taken	  by	  surprise:	  “The	  U.S.	  government	  (like	  most	  others)	  
had	  enormously	  overrated	  Soviet	  economic	  performance.	  .	  .According	  to	  a	  study	  published	  
as	  late	  as	  1988	  by	  a	  well-­‐known	  Western	  economist	  specializing	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  Soviet	  
citizens	  enjoyed	  ‘massive	  economic	  security’	  .	  .	  .	  the	  consensus	  was	  that	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  
was	  not	  on	  the	  verge	  of	  economic	  bankruptcy	  and	  political	  disintegration.”	  
Thus,	  the	  divergent	  interests	  and	  capabilities	  of	  Soviet	  and	  American	  mathematics	  
that	  had	  emerged	  in	  earlier	  decades	  were	  not	  likely	  to	  have	  been	  modified	  in	  the	  1980s	  by	  
any	  serious	  belief	  that	  the	  Soviet	  isolation	  would	  soon	  end.	  As	  Figure	  II	  shows,	  the	  
negligible	  pre-­‐1990	  rate	  of	  co-­‐authorship	  between	  mathematicians	  reporting	  Soviet	  
research	  addresses	  and	  mathematicians	  reporting	  U.S.	  addresses	  does	  not	  engender	  the	  
hope	  that	  the	  number	  of	  such	  collaborations	  would	  suddenly	  explode.	  
	  

Around	  1990,	  as	  the	  political	  situation	  changed	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  a	  large	  number	  

of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  began	  to	  come	  into	  regular	  contact	  with	  Western	  mathematicians	  
through	  visits	  and	  immigration.	  According	  to	  American	  mathematicians	  who	  witnessed	  this	  

11
sudden	  increase	  in	  contact	  opportunities,	  the	  effect	  on	  American	  mathematics	  was	  
immediate.	  In	  1990,	  the	  New	  York	  Times	  reported	  (Kolata	  1990):	  
“American	  scientists	  say	  they	  have	  benefited	  immensely	  from	  the	  [recent]	  
Soviet	  visitors.	  .	  .	  Persi	  Diaconis,	  a	  mathematician	  at	  Harvard,	  said:	  ‘It's	  been	  
fantastic.	  You	  just	  have	  a	  totally	  fresh	  set	  of	  insights	  and	  results.’	  Dr.	  Diaconis	  
said	  he	  recently	  asked	  [Soviet	  mathematician]	  Dr.	  Reshetikhin	  for	  help	  with	  a	  
problem	  that	  had	  stumped	  him	  for	  20	  years.	  ‘I	  had	  asked	  everyone	  in	  
America	  who	  had	  any	  chance	  of	  knowing’	  how	  to	  solve	  a	  problem	  .	  .	  .	  No	  one	  
could	  help.	  But	  .	  .	  .	  Soviet	  scientists	  had	  done	  a	  lot	  of	  work	  on	  such	  problems.	  
‘It	  was	  a	  whole	  new	  world	  I	  had	  access	  to,’	  Dr.	  Diaconis	  said.	  ‘Together,	  we'll	  
be	  able	  to	  solve	  the	  problem.’”	  
	  
	  

Inevitably,	  the	  American	  mathematical	  community	  also	  experienced	  increased	  

competition	  in	  hiring.10	  The	  American	  Mathematical	  Society’s	  1991-­‐1992	  Academic	  Hiring	  
Survey	  reports	  that:	  “Citizens	  of	  Eastern	  European	  countries	  and	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  
accounted	  for	  13%	  of	  all	  newly-­‐hired	  faculty	  and	  15%	  of	  the	  tenured	  and	  tenure-­‐eligible	  
new	  hires”	  (McClure	  1992,	  p.	  311).	  The	  report	  also	  identifies	  “increased	  numbers	  of	  highly	  
qualified	  recent	  U.S.	  immigrants	  seeking	  employment	  in	  academia”	  as	  a	  leading	  cause	  of	  the	  
unprecedented	  12	  percent	  unemployment	  rate	  of	  new	  American	  mathematics	  Ph.Ds.	  in	  
1991	  (McClure	  1992,	  p.	  312).11	  Figure	  III	  illustrates	  the	  employment	  trends	  of	  newly	  
minted	  doctorates	  from	  North	  American	  institutions.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  there	  was	  a	  dramatic	  
increase	  in	  the	  unemployment	  rate	  (as	  well	  as	  a	  dramatic	  decrease	  in	  the	  probability	  of	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10	  For	  example,	  Soviet	  mathematician	  Nicolai	  Reshetikhin	  not	  only	  helped	  Professor	  Diaconis	  with	  his	  puzzle,	  

but	  also	  accepted	  a	  job	  as	  a	  Visiting	  and	  Assistant	  Professor	  at	  Harvard	  from	  1989	  through	  1991.	  	  
11	  At	  the	  same	  time	  that	  the	  unemployment	  rate	  of	  newly	  minted	  mathematicians	  was	  rising	  rapidly	  in	  the	  

early	  1990s,	  the	  economy-­‐wide	  unemployment	  rate	  for	  college	  graduates	  was	  falling	  from	  3.2	  to	  2.2	  percent	  
between	  1992	  and	  1996.	  

12
obtaining	  a	  position	  in	  research	  universities)	  at	  the	  same	  time	  that	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  was	  
occurring.12	  
	  

It	  is	  clear	  that	  the	  ability	  to	  communicate	  and	  collaborate	  on	  a	  one-­‐to-­‐one	  basis	  (and	  

especially	  emigrate)	  increased	  greatly	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  As	  Diaconis	  
discovered,	  ideas	  and	  knowledge	  became	  much	  easier	  to	  share.	  The	  economics	  of	  
innovation	  literature	  distinguishes	  between	  two	  broad	  types	  of	  knowledge:	  codified	  
knowledge	  and	  tacit	  knowledge.	  Codified	  mathematical	  knowledge	  is	  recorded	  in	  journal	  
articles	  and	  books,	  while	  tacit	  knowledge	  is	  part	  of	  the	  un-­‐codified	  human	  capital	  of	  
mathematical	  practitioners.13	  
Both	  codified	  and	  tacit	  mathematical	  knowledge	  were	  costly	  to	  share	  during	  the	  
Soviet	  era,	  even	  though	  translations	  of	  Soviet	  papers	  in	  academic	  journals	  were	  often	  
available.14	  Moreover,	  some	  of	  the	  codified	  knowledge	  remained	  un-­‐translated.	  Soviet	  
scientists	  often	  published	  their	  best	  work	  in	  books:	  “The	  Russians	  are	  prolific	  producers	  of	  
books	  .	  .	  .	  and	  the	  consensus	  of	  experts	  is	  that	  the	  best	  Russian	  authors	  reserve	  some	  of	  
their	  best	  work	  for	  books	  which	  often	  constitute	  first	  publication	  of	  important	  research	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12	  The	  exodus	  of	  key	  scientific	  personnel	  from	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  to	  the	  West	  led	  George	  Soros	  to	  

establish	  a	  program	  that	  provided	  research	  funds	  to	  those	  scientists	  who	  chose	  to	  remain;	  see	  Ganguli	  (2010)	  
for	  an	  analysis	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  this	  program	  on	  career	  choices.	  
13	  “Typically,	  new	  knowledge	  and	  expertise	  have	  a	  broad	  tacit	  dimension,	  meaning	  that	  they	  are	  neither	  

articulated	  nor	  codified.	  Tacit	  knowledge	  resides	  in	  people,	  institutions,	  or	  routines”	  (Foray	  2004,	  pp.	  17-­‐18).	  
14	  The	  National	  Science	  Foundation,	  American	  scientific	  societies,	  and	  private	  businesses	  had	  begun	  

translating	  Soviet	  scientific	  journals	  from	  Russian	  into	  English	  as	  far	  back	  as	  1949	  (O’Dette	  1957).	  It	  would	  
seem,	  therefore,	  that	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  represents	  but	  a	  trivial	  change	  in	  the	  cost	  of	  obtaining	  
access	  to	  the	  specific	  type	  of	  codified	  knowledge	  contained	  in	  journal	  articles.	  But	  the	  citations	  results	  
described	  below	  suggest	  that	  Americans	  may	  not	  have	  read	  as	  much	  Soviet	  work	  as	  would	  be	  expected,	  and	  
history	  records	  famous	  examples	  of	  American	  unfamiliarity	  with	  important	  Soviet	  journal	  articles	  that	  were	  
available	  during	  the	  Cold	  War:	  “…Even	  when	  high-­‐quality	  translations	  are	  readily	  available,	  the	  information	  
can	  still	  be	  lost	  if	  they	  are	  not	  read.	  .	  .	  .	  In	  January	  1962,	  the	  National	  Aeronautics	  and	  Space	  Administration	  
announced	  that	  Explorer	  XII,	  a	  satellite	  launched	  in	  August	  1961,	  had	  discovered	  a	  new	  radiation	  belt	  with	  an	  
'unexpected	  boundary'	  at	  40,000	  miles	  from	  the	  earth.	  In	  fact,	  the	  same	  belt	  was	  discovered	  by	  Soviet	  rockets	  
in	  1959	  and	  this	  was	  reported	  in	  translations	  of	  Soviet	  Physics	  Dolkady	  in	  1960	  and	  Soviet	  Astronomy	  AJ	  in	  
1961”	  (Tybulewicz	  1970,	  pp.	  55-­‐56).	  

13
information”	  (O’Dette	  1957,	  p.	  581).	  But	  even	  though	  mathematics	  books	  contained	  some	  
of	  the	  most	  important	  Soviet	  results,	  Abramitzky	  and	  Sen	  (2011)	  report	  that	  the	  translation	  
rate	  of	  hard-­‐science	  Eastern	  Bloc	  books	  into	  English	  was	  extremely	  low.	  After	  the	  collapse	  
of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  tacit	  mathematical	  knowledge	  and	  an	  easy	  introduction	  to	  the	  codified	  
knowledge	  were	  as	  close	  as	  a	  phone	  call,	  an	  unobstructed	  correspondence,	  or	  even	  a	  knock	  
on	  the	  office	  next	  door.15	  
Evidence	  of	  this	  knowledge	  shock	  is	  apparent	  in	  the	  citation	  trends	  of	  American	  
mathematicians	  to	  Soviet	  and	  American	  articles.	  Figures	  IVa	  and	  IVb	  show	  the	  number	  of	  
citations	  that	  American	  mathematicians	  made	  to	  other	  American	  papers	  during	  the	  period,	  
as	  well	  as	  the	  citations	  Americans	  made	  to	  Soviet	  papers	  (defined	  as	  papers	  published	  by	  
an	  author	  using	  a	  Soviet	  affiliation).16	  Both	  before	  and	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  
Union,	  most	  American	  mathematicians	  exhibit	  “home	  bias,”	  preferring	  to	  cite	  results	  in	  
other	  American	  papers.	  Considering	  that	  the	  total	  number	  of	  American	  papers	  was	  only	  
three	  times	  that	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  this	  home	  bias	  is	  extreme.	  Nevertheless,	  there	  is	  a	  
substantial	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  to	  Soviet	  papers	  after	  1990.	  In	  fact,	  the	  
share	  of	  American	  citations	  to	  Soviet	  research	  approximately	  tripled.	  It	  is	  remarkable	  that	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15	  The	  inadequacy	  of	  the	  international	  phone	  infrastructure	  during	  the	  Soviet	  era	  is	  legendary,	  making	  

scientific	  collaboration	  harder,	  but	  undoubtedly	  making	  the	  KGB’s	  job	  of	  hampering	  such	  collaboration	  easier:	  	  
“The	  international	  telephone	  transit	  center	  in	  Moscow	  .	  .	  .	  has	  a	  capacity	  of	  1,500	  circuits	  .	  .	  .This	  exchange	  has	  
to	  handle	  all	  the	  international	  calls	  from	  the	  RSFSR	  [Russian	  Republic],	  as	  well	  as	  calls	  in	  transit	  from	  the	  
other	  republics	  and	  from	  a	  number	  of	  Eastern	  European	  and	  other	  socialist	  countries.	  Since	  it	  allows	  a	  
maximum	  of	  around	  800	  outgoing	  calls	  at	  any	  one	  time,	  it	  constitutes	  a	  major	  bottleneck	  in	  communications	  
between	  the	  USSR	  and	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  Moreover,	  most	  circuits	  are	  dedicated	  to	  links	  with	  Eastern	  
European	  and	  other	  socialist	  countries;	  there	  are,	  for	  example	  only	  40	  circuits	  for	  calls	  to	  the	  United	  
Kingdom,	  25	  to	  France	  and	  16	  to	  the	  United	  States”	  (IMF	  1991,	  p.	  128).	  
16	  Since	  an	  author’s	  geographic	  location	  is	  only	  rarely	  available	  before	  1978,	  we	  construct	  the	  statistic	  as	  

follows.	  The	  numerator	  is	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  to	  American	  (or	  Soviet)	  papers	  written	  between	  1978	  and	  
year	  t	  made	  by	  American	  papers	  written	  between	  1978	  and	  t.	  The	  denominator	  is	  the	  total	  number	  of	  
citations	  to	  papers	  with	  a	  valid	  research	  address	  written	  between	  1978	  and	  t	  made	  by	  American	  papers	  
written	  during	  that	  time.	  

14
Soviet	  papers	  should	  become	  much	  more	  cited	  since	  many	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union’s	  best	  
mathematicians	  had	  emigrated,	  and	  many	  of	  them	  were	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  It	  is	  equally	  
remarkable	  that	  there	  was	  also	  an	  increase	  in	  citations	  to	  “old”	  Soviet	  work	  (i.e.,	  papers	  
written	  before	  the	  fall	  of	  communism).	  Relative	  to	  its	  pre-­‐treatment	  trend,	  the	  citation	  
share	  of	  “old”	  Soviet	  papers	  out	  of	  the	  citations	  to	  all	  papers	  became	  40	  percent	  higher	  
after	  the	  fall.17	  	  
	  

In	  sum,	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  was	  associated	  with	  a	  decrease	  in	  the	  cost	  of	  

accessing	  both	  codified	  and	  tacit	  knowledge,	  and	  the	  resulting	  diaspora	  of	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  after	  1992	  led	  to	  both	  a	  mathematical	  labor	  supply	  shock	  and	  a	  
mathematical	  knowledge	  shock	  in	  many	  countries.	  
	  
III. Data and Summary Statistics
	  

Our	  data	  are	  drawn	  from	  three	  distinct,	  but	  related	  sources.	  The	  Supplementary	  

Data	  Appendix	  gives	  a	  more	  detailed	  description	  of	  the	  data	  sets	  and	  the	  construction	  of	  
the	  samples.	  
First,	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society	  (AMS)	  provided	  us	  with	  a	  database	  that	  
reports	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  every	  mathematician,	  by	  field	  and	  year.18	  In	  
addition	  to	  the	  information	  on	  the	  number	  of	  papers,	  the	  AMS	  data	  reports	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17	  To	  calculate	  the	  frequency	  of	  citations	  made	  by	  American	  papers	  to	  pre-­‐1990	  Soviet	  papers,	  we	  calculated	  

the	  following	  fraction:	  the	  denominator	  is	  citations	  made	  by	  American	  papers	  published	  each	  year	  to	  any	  
papers	  with	  identifiable	  research	  addresses	  written	  between	  1978	  and	  1989;	  the	  numerator	  is	  the	  number	  of	  
such	  citations	  to	  papers	  that	  had	  at	  least	  one	  author	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  We	  then	  estimated	  a	  simple	  
regression	  of	  the	  log	  citation	  share	  on:	  year,	  year	  squared,	  and	  a	  post-­‐1990	  indicator	  variable.	  The	  model’s	  fit	  
is	  improved	  substantially	  by	  the	  inclusion	  of	  the	  post-­‐1990	  dummy	  variable,	  and	  its	  coefficient	  implies	  a	  40	  
percent	  increase	  in	  American	  attention	  to	  pre-­‐1990	  Soviet	  work	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  
18	  The	  AMS	  file	  provided	  to	  us	  contains	  information	  for	  all	  mathematicians	  who	  have	  published	  at	  least	  one	  

paper	  since	  1939.	  

15
mathematician’s	  institutional	  affiliation	  at	  the	  time	  the	  paper	  was	  published,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  
location	  of	  the	  affiliation.	  The	  AMS,	  however,	  only	  began	  to	  collect	  the	  affiliation	  
information	  on	  a	  systematic	  basis	  around	  1984,	  so	  that	  affiliation	  and	  location	  are	  not	  
typically	  available	  for	  earlier	  papers.	  The	  AMS	  database	  also	  contains	  information	  on	  the	  
number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  papers,	  but	  the	  AMS	  citation	  data	  is	  incomplete.	  In	  
particular,	  it	  only	  counts	  citations	  in	  a	  limited	  number	  of	  journals	  (which	  include	  the	  most	  
important	  journals	  in	  mathematics),	  and	  only	  reports	  the	  post-­‐2000	  citations	  received	  by	  a	  
paper	  (regardless	  of	  when	  the	  paper	  was	  published).	  
The	  AMS	  database	  has	  two	  features	  that	  make	  it	  invaluable	  for	  the	  type	  of	  empirical	  
analysis	  that	  we	  conduct	  in	  this	  paper.	  First,	  the	  AMS	  devotes	  significant	  resources	  to	  
ensure	  that	  every	  person	  who	  has	  ever	  published	  in	  mathematics	  is	  assigned	  a	  unique	  
numerical	  ID	  that	  allows	  him	  to	  be	  distinctly	  identified	  even	  from	  other	  mathematicians	  
who	  share	  the	  same	  name.19	  Second,	  the	  editors	  of	  Mathematical	  Reviews	  assign	  each	  
publication	  in	  mathematics	  to	  one	  of	  the	  many	  fields	  that	  make	  up	  the	  study	  of	  
mathematics.	  The	  AMS	  provided	  us	  with	  the	  author-­‐year-­‐field	  information	  at	  the	  two-­‐digit	  
field	  level,	  identifying	  publications	  by	  each	  mathematician	  in	  each	  of	  63	  different	  fields.	  In	  
short,	  the	  AMS	  data	  gives	  us	  a	  complete	  history	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  publications,	  
affiliations	  (since	  around	  1984),	  and	  fields.	  
Our	  second	  data	  source	  is	  the	  Thomson	  Reuters’	  Institute	  for	  Scientific	  Information	  
(ISI)	  Web	  of	  Science	  archive.	  This	  archive	  records	  the	  titles,	  publication	  source,	  author	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19	  As	  an	  example	  of	  this	  precision,	  we	  learned	  from	  personal	  communication	  with	  Professor	  Victor	  Kac	  of	  MIT	  

that	  after	  he	  defected	  from	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  in	  1977,	  he	  had	  to	  publish	  his	  work	  with	  his	  Soviet	  advisor	  (who	  
remained	  in	  the	  USSR)	  under	  the	  Italian	  pseudonyms	  Gatti	  and	  Viniberghi,	  since	  otherwise	  the	  paper	  would	  
need	  special	  permission	  from	  the	  authorities	  to	  be	  published	  abroad.	  Despite	  the	  difference	  in	  names	  
between	  Gatti	  and	  Kac,	  the	  AMS	  database	  correctly	  lists	  the	  article	  under	  the	  unique	  author	  identifier	  for	  
Victor	  Kac.	  

16
names,	  references,	  and	  citations	  of	  millions	  of	  articles	  from	  thousands	  of	  journals	  
worldwide.	  For	  many	  articles,	  the	  database	  reports	  research	  and	  reprint	  addresses	  for	  each	  
author	  (and	  the	  location	  information	  is	  systematically	  available	  since	  around	  1978).	  Most	  
important,	  the	  ISI	  database	  contains	  complete	  citation	  information	  for	  each	  article	  in	  a	  
primary	  set	  of	  over	  7,000	  journals,	  selected	  to	  include	  all	  of	  the	  most	  important	  journals	  in	  
each	  field.	  Articles	  in	  marginal	  journals	  also	  appear	  in	  the	  database	  if	  they	  either	  cite	  an	  
article	  in	  the	  primary	  database	  or	  are	  cited	  by	  such	  an	  article.	  
We	  purchased	  the	  records	  of	  all	  1.2	  million	  articles	  in	  the	  primary	  ISI	  Web	  of	  
Science	  database	  between	  1970	  and	  2009	  for	  the	  following	  categories:	  Mathematics,	  
Applied	  Mathematics,	  Interdisciplinary	  Applications	  of	  Mathematics,	  Mathematical	  Physics,	  
and	  Statistics	  and	  Probability.	  We	  also	  purchased	  the	  records	  of	  the	  additional	  4.4	  million	  
articles	  that	  are	  either	  referenced	  by	  these	  main	  articles	  or	  that	  cite	  these	  main	  articles.	  
The	  American	  Mathematical	  Society	  then	  gave	  us	  permission	  to	  conduct	  a	  paper-­‐by-­‐paper	  
match	  of	  our	  ISI	  database	  with	  the	  AMS	  internal	  archives.	  We	  obtained	  882,088	  matches	  
out	  of	  the	  1,753,148	  journal	  articles	  in	  the	  AMS	  database	  for	  the	  relevant	  period,	  or	  just	  
slightly	  over	  a	  50	  percent	  match	  rate.	  
The	  AMS/ISI	  databases	  provide	  two	  alternative	  measures	  of	  citation	  counts	  for	  
mathematicians.	  Neither	  measure	  is	  perfect.	  The	  AMS	  citation	  data	  is	  limited	  in	  scope;	  it	  
canvasses	  only	  a	  select	  number	  of	  journals	  and	  only	  includes	  the	  post-­‐2000	  citations	  made	  
to	  mathematical	  papers.	  The	  ISI	  citation	  data	  has	  a	  much	  broader	  scope	  (many	  more	  
journals)	  and	  counts	  all	  citations	  to	  a	  paper	  (not	  just	  those	  made	  after	  2000).	  However,	  ISI	  
citation	  counts	  are	  the	  result	  of	  an	  imperfect	  matching	  process	  that	  may	  be	  missing	  a	  

17
sizable	  number	  of	  mathematicians	  and	  papers.20	  In	  fact,	  the	  matching	  process	  is	  
particularly	  problematic	  for	  foreign	  countries	  where	  the	  spelling	  of	  authors’	  names	  creates	  
matching	  difficulties	  (in	  particular,	  the	  Soviet	  Union).	  Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  match	  rate	  for	  
papers	  written	  between	  1984	  and	  1989	  by	  an	  author	  using	  an	  American	  affiliation	  is	  59	  
percent,	  while	  the	  respective	  match	  rate	  for	  papers	  written	  for	  authors	  using	  a	  Soviet	  
affiliation	  is	  16	  percent.	  Our	  empirical	  evidence	  is	  robust	  to	  the	  citation	  measure	  we	  use.	  
Nevertheless,	  we	  will	  generally	  use	  the	  ISI	  citations	  data	  when	  we	  examine	  the	  productivity	  
of	  American	  mathematicians,	  and	  use	  the	  AMS	  data	  when	  we	  make	  international	  
comparisons.	  
Finally,	  the	  Mathematics	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP)	  gave	  us	  access	  to	  their	  entire	  
archives.	  The	  MGP	  provides	  detailed	  information	  on	  doctoral	  degrees	  awarded	  in	  
mathematics	  since	  the	  14th	  century.	  The	  record	  for	  each	  degree	  contains	  the	  name	  of	  the	  
mathematician,	  the	  name	  of	  the	  advisor,	  the	  title	  of	  the	  dissertation,	  and	  the	  name	  and	  
location	  of	  the	  institution	  granting	  the	  doctoral	  degree.	  
The	  MGP	  data,	  of	  course,	  allow	  a	  detailed	  construction	  of	  the	  genealogical	  tree	  in	  the	  
development	  of	  mathematics	  since	  it	  can	  completely	  link	  any	  given	  mathematician	  to	  all	  his	  
intellectual	  ancestors	  and	  descendants.	  Equally	  important,	  the	  AMS	  and	  MGP	  have	  worked	  
jointly	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  unique	  author	  ID	  developed	  by	  the	  AMS	  can	  identify	  
mathematicians	  in	  the	  MGP	  database.	  By	  using	  this	  unique	  identifier,	  we	  then	  matched	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20	  There	  is	  a	  steady	  increase	  in	  the	  match	  rate	  over	  time,	  from	  about	  40	  percent	  for	  journal	  articles	  published	  

in	  the	  late	  1970s	  to	  around	  75	  percent	  for	  articles	  published	  after	  2002.	  We	  are	  able	  to	  match	  over	  90	  percent	  
of	  the	  papers	  for	  the	  most	  prolific	  mathematicians	  during	  the	  period,	  suggesting	  that	  some	  of	  the	  missing	  
articles	  are	  in	  marginal	  journals	  not	  covered	  by	  the	  ISI	  database.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  citation-­‐weighted	  count	  of	  
the	  number	  of	  missing	  articles	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  low.	  

18
every	  single	  advisor	  and	  student	  in	  the	  MGP	  data	  to	  their	  publication	  histories	  in	  the	  AMS	  
data	  (and	  to	  their	  citations	  history	  in	  the	  ISI).	  
We	  use	  these	  data	  to	  construct	  samples	  of	  “active”	  American	  mathematicians	  and	  
Soviet	  émigrés.	  The	  population	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  were	  active	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  Union	  is	  given	  by	  the	  sample	  of	  persons	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  
between	  1970	  and	  1989.21	  We	  use	  the	  AMS	  or	  ISI	  data	  to	  establish	  the	  location	  of	  the	  
affiliations	  associated	  with	  the	  various	  publications	  in	  the	  mathematician’s	  history.	  A	  
“predominantly”	  American	  mathematician	  is	  someone	  who	  used	  an	  American	  affiliation	  
more	  than	  half	  the	  time	  in	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  period.22	  If	  the	  AMS/ISI	  data	  do	  not	  contain	  any	  
usable	  information	  on	  the	  mathematician’s	  affiliations,	  we	  then	  use	  the	  MGP	  data	  to	  
determine	  the	  country	  where	  the	  mathematician	  received	  his	  or	  her	  doctoral	  degree.	  Prior	  
to	  1978,	  over	  85	  percent	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  received	  their	  doctoral	  degrees	  from	  an	  
American	  institution	  were	  either	  American	  citizens	  or	  permanent	  residents.	  Moreover,	  
65.3	  percent	  of	  the	  small	  group	  of	  doctoral	  recipients	  who	  were	  temporary	  residents	  stated	  
that	  they	  intended	  to	  stay	  in	  the	  United	  States.23	  Hence	  we	  supplement	  the	  sample	  of	  
predominantly	  American	  mathematicians	  by	  also	  including	  persons	  who,	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  
any	  specific	  affiliation	  information	  between	  1978	  and	  1989,	  received	  their	  doctoral	  degree	  
from	  an	  American	  institution	  between	  1960	  and	  1978.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21	  In	  addition,	  we	  restrict	  the	  sample	  to	  mathematicians	  whose	  first	  publication	  appeared	  in	  print	  in	  or	  after	  

1940.	  
22	  More	  precisely,	  the	  mathematician	  used	  an	  American	  affiliation	  in	  more	  than	  half	  of	  the	  papers	  published	  

prior	  to	  1990.	  
23	  These	  statistics	  are	  calculated	  using	  the	  NSF	  Survey	  of	  Earned	  Doctorates,	  an	  annual	  survey	  that	  contains	  

demographic	  information	  for	  the	  recipient	  of	  every	  doctoral	  degree	  awarded	  in	  the	  United	  States	  since	  1957.	  

19
The	  definition	  of	  the	  universe	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  follows	  analogously.	  We	  
first	  use	  the	  AMS	  or	  ISI	  data	  to	  determine	  if	  the	  mathematician	  reports	  a	  Soviet	  affiliation.	  
We	  classify	  anyone	  who	  used	  a	  Soviet	  affiliation	  more	  than	  half	  the	  time	  prior	  to	  1989	  as	  a	  
“Soviet	  mathematician.”	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  any	  affiliation	  data,	  we	  again	  supplement	  the	  
sample	  by	  including	  all	  the	  mathematicians	  who	  received	  their	  doctoral	  degree	  from	  a	  
Soviet	  institution	  between	  1960	  and	  1989.	  From	  this	  universe,	  we	  then	  define	  the	  
subsample	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  as	  the	  group	  whose	  modal	  affiliation	  after	  1992	  was	  in	  a	  
country	  outside	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.24	  
These	  definitions	  yield	  a	  pre-­‐existing	  population	  of	  29,392	  predominantly	  American	  
mathematicians	  and	  12,224	  Soviet	  mathematicians.	  We	  also	  estimate	  that	  1,051	  of	  these	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  emigrated	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  with	  336	  of	  the	  
émigrés	  moving	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  
Figure	  Va	  illustrates	  the	  frequency	  distribution	  of	  publications	  for	  the	  sample	  of	  
predominantly	  American	  mathematicians,	  conditional	  on	  the	  mathematician	  having	  
published	  at	  least	  one	  article	  between	  1978	  and	  2008.	  Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  modal	  number	  
of	  publications	  is	  only	  one	  paper	  for	  the	  entire	  period.	  Similarly,	  Figure	  Vb	  shows	  that	  the	  
modal	  number	  of	  citations	  for	  mathematicians	  who	  have	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  is	  
zero.	  The	  modal	  outcome	  for	  active	  mathematicians,	  therefore,	  is	  to	  publish	  one	  paper	  over	  
a	  long	  career	  span,	  and	  for	  that	  paper	  to	  go	  unread	  or,	  at	  least,	  un-­‐cited.	  
Table	  I	  reports	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  samples	  of	  predominantly	  American	  
mathematicians,	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  emigrated	  to	  the	  United	  States,	  Soviet	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24	  By	  construction,	  an	  émigré	  must	  have	  published	  after	  1992	  (otherwise,	  we	  would	  never	  observe	  his	  post-­‐

1992	  affiliation).	  

20
mathematicians	  who	  emigrated	  to	  other	  countries,	  and	  the	  residual	  group	  of	  Soviets	  who	  
remained	  within	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.	  The	  data	  reported	  
in	  Table	  1	  can	  be	  used	  to	  contrast	  the	  productivity	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  the	  United	  States	  to	  
that	  of	  other	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  and	  to	  that	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians.	  
The	  most	  striking	  finding	  is	  the	  very	  large	  degree	  of	  positive	  selection	  that	  characterizes	  
the	  group	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  
Prior	  to	  their	  migration	  to	  the	  United	  States,	  the	  future	  émigrés	  were	  significantly	  
more	  productive	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  and	  citations	  received.	  For	  
example,	  before	  1992	  the	  average	  (future)	  émigré	  had	  published	  10	  more	  papers	  and	  
received	  66	  more	  citations	  (in	  the	  AMS	  data)	  than	  the	  typical	  Soviet	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  
Soviet	  Union.	  He	  had	  also	  published	  3	  more	  papers	  than	  the	  Soviets	  who	  emigrated	  
elsewhere,	  and	  had	  received	  over	  40	  more	  citations.	  After	  1992,	  the	  émigrés’	  productivity	  
in	  the	  United	  States	  far	  surpassed	  that	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians.	  
Between	  1992	  and	  2008,	  the	  average	  Soviet	  émigré	  published	  20	  more	  papers	  than	  the	  
average	  American,	  and	  those	  papers	  received	  143	  more	  citations.	  In	  short,	  the	  Soviet	  
émigrés	  originated	  in	  the	  upper	  tail	  of	  the	  skill	  distribution	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  Soviet	  
Union	  and	  quickly	  moved	  into	  the	  upper	  tail	  of	  the	  skill	  distribution	  in	  the	  American	  
mathematics	  community.	  
	  

Table	  I	  also	  documents	  that	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  differ	  in	  other	  dimensions.	  Consider,	  

for	  example,	  the	  breadth	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  interests,	  as	  defined	  by	  the	  number	  of	  fields	  
in	  which	  the	  mathematician	  has	  published	  over	  his	  or	  her	  career.	  The	  median	  number	  of	  
fields	  of	  publication	  for	  both	  the	  American	  mathematicians	  and	  the	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
who	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  is	  2.0.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  median	  number	  of	  fields	  for	  Soviet	  

21
émigrés	  in	  the	  United	  States	  is	  5.5.	  It	  is	  very	  unusual	  for	  a	  mathematician	  to	  publish	  in	  
more	  than	  5	  distinct	  fields,	  and	  only	  a	  small	  (and	  select)	  group	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  
do	  it.25	  	  
The	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  the	  United	  States	  are	  also	  somewhat	  older.	  Nearly	  40	  percent	  
of	  the	  émigrés	  received	  their	  degree	  after	  1980.	  In	  contrast,	  45	  to	  50	  percent	  of	  American	  
and	  other	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  received	  their	  degree	  after	  1980.	  	  
Finally,	  Figure	  VI	  illustrates	  how	  the	  entry	  of	  the	  émigrés	  into	  the	  American	  
mathematics	  community	  affected	  the	  supply	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians	  in	  different	  
fields	  differently.	  The	  “supply	  shock”	  is	  calculated	  separately	  for	  two	  different	  types	  of	  
fields:	  Soviet-­‐style	  and	  American-­‐style	  fields.	  Soviet-­‐style	  fields	  are	  the	  10	  most	  relatively	  
popular	  fields	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  (i.e.,	  the	  10	  fields	  at	  the	  top	  of	  Figure	  1),	  while	  American-­‐
style	  fields	  are	  the	  10	  most	  relatively	  popular	  fields	  in	  the	  United	  States	  (i.e.,	  the	  10	  fields	  at	  
the	  bottom	  of	  Figure	  1).	  We	  then	  estimated	  the	  output	  share	  of	  Soviet	  papers	  in	  each	  of	  
these	  categories	  by	  year.26	  
Figure	  VI	  shows	  that	  the	  supply	  shock,	  as	  defined	  by	  the	  fraction	  of	  total	  papers	  
published	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés,	  was	  very	  large	  for	  the	  fields	  emphasized	  by	  pre-­‐shock	  Soviet	  
mathematicians,	  and	  was	  very	  small	  for	  the	  fields	  that	  were	  dominated	  by	  American	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25	  American	  mathematicians	  who	  publish	  in	  many	  fields	  are	  far	  more	  prolific	  than	  those	  who	  specialize	  in	  a	  

small	  number	  of	  fields.	  On	  average,	  mathematicians	  who	  published	  in	  only	  one	  or	  two	  fields	  published	  a	  total	  
of	  6.1	  papers	  between	  1978	  and	  2008.	  The	  average	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  for	  mathematicians	  who	  
published	  in	  at	  least	  10	  fields	  is	  92.2.	  
26	  Specifically,	  the	  denominator	  of	  each	  fraction	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  in	  the	  given	  subfields	  published	  in	  

the	  United	  States	  by	  authors	  who	  were	  active	  before	  1990,	  but	  never	  had	  a	  Soviet	  affiliation.	  The	  numerator	  
of	  each	  fraction	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  in	  the	  given	  subfield	  published	  in	  the	  United	  States	  by	  authors	  who	  
were	  active	  before	  1990	  and	  had	  a	  former	  Soviet	  affiliation.	  A	  small	  group	  of	  “defector”	  Soviets	  arrived	  before	  
1990,	  mostly	  in	  the	  late	  1970s	  to	  early	  1980s.	  This	  group	  was	  only	  about	  one-­‐tenth	  the	  size	  of	  the	  group	  of	  
émigrés	  who	  arrived	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  Figure	  6	  includes	  the	  paper-­‐weighted	  impact	  of	  
these	  defectors	  during	  their	  time	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  confirming	  that	  the	  paper-­‐weighted	  size	  of	  the	  influx	  of	  
Soviet	  émigrés	  after	  the	  fall	  of	  communism	  was	  far	  greater	  than	  that	  of	  the	  prior	  arrivals	  of	  defectors.	  

22
mathematicians.	  The	  fraction	  of	  papers	  published	  in	  the	  United	  States	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  
“Soviet-­‐style”	  fields	  rose	  from	  a	  negligible	  fraction	  before	  1992	  to	  about	  12	  percent.	  In	  
contrast,	  the	  fraction	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  “American-­‐style”	  fields	  
was	  below	  4.0	  percent	  throughout	  the	  post-­‐1992	  period.	  In	  sum,	  not	  all	  American	  
mathematicians	  were	  equally	  affected	  by	  the	  Soviet	  influx,	  and	  it	  is	  this	  differential	  shock	  
that	  provides	  the	  strategy	  for	  identifying	  the	  productivity	  impact	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  
Soviet	  Union	  on	  American	  mathematics.	  
	  
IV. Measuring the Productivity Impact
	  

We	  now	  examine	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  “field	  overlap”	  between	  Soviet	  and	  American	  

mathematicians	  altered	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  latter	  after	  the	  émigrés	  arrived.	  	  
There	  are	  many	  channels	  through	  which	  such	  productivity	  effects	  can	  arise.	  The	  
flood	  of	  new	  ideas	  and	  theorems	  could	  perhaps	  have	  spawned	  a	  new	  “Golden	  Age”	  as	  the	  
pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians	  digested	  and	  incorporated	  the	  new	  knowledge	  into	  
their	  research	  agendas.	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  however,	  the	  total	  number	  of	  mathematics	  faculty	  
jobs,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  fraction	  of	  resources	  that	  deans	  and	  administrators	  allocate	  among	  the	  
various	  subfields	  of	  mathematics,	  is	  likely	  constrained	  and	  relatively	  inelastic.	  The	  sudden	  
presence	  of	  experienced	  and	  highly	  productive	  Soviet	  émigrés	  who	  may	  compete	  for	  jobs	  
with	  newly	  minted	  doctorates	  would	  then	  almost	  certainly	  have	  a	  “crowd-­‐out”	  effect	  on	  the	  
paid	  research	  jobs	  that	  American	  mathematicians	  would	  have	  otherwise	  filled.27	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27	  There	  are	  other	  sources	  of	  scarcity	  that	  can	  create	  crowd-­‐out	  effects,	  such	  as	  the	  limited	  attention	  span	  of	  

field	  leaders.	  There	  are	  insurmountable	  constraints	  on	  how	  much	  new	  knowledge	  a	  scientist	  can	  absorb,	  so	  
that	  the	  location	  of	  the	  “marginal”	  article	  that	  gets	  ignored	  moves	  upwards	  in	  the	  distribution	  of	  publications	  
after	  the	  influx	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians.	  Reasonably	  good	  articles	  that	  would	  otherwise	  have	  generated	  
some	  attention	  will	  then	  remain	  unread	  and	  un-­‐cited.	  

23
The	  identification	  strategy	  is	  built	  on	  comparing	  different	  groups	  of	  American	  
mathematicians	  with	  each	  other	  over	  time:	  those	  who	  had	  worked	  on	  problems	  where	  the	  
Soviets	  could	  offer	  assistance	  and/or	  competition,	  versus	  those	  who	  had	  worked	  on	  
problems	  that	  the	  Soviets	  knew	  little	  about.	  To	  quantify	  the	  degree	  of	  exposure,	  we	  
calculate	  an	  index	  reflecting	  the	  field	  “overlap”	  between	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  publication	  record	  of	  
each	  American	  mathematician	  and	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets.	  
	  

We	  use	  3	  alternative	  indices	  to	  demonstrate	  the	  robustness	  of	  our	  empirical	  

findings.	  The	  first	  index	  is	  simply	  a	  correlation	  coefficient	  calculated	  for	  each	  American	  
mathematician	  in	  our	  data.	  Let	  aij	  be	  the	  share	  of	  papers	  that	  mathematician	  i	  published	  in	  
field	  j,	  and	  let	  sj	  be	  the	  share	  of	  all	  Soviet	  papers	  published	  in	  field	  j	  before	  the	  collapse	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  Union.28	  Our	  first	  index	  is	  simply	  the	  correlation	  coefficient	  ρi	  between	  these	  two	  
vectors.	  
	  	  

A	  second	  index	  measures	  the	  “intensity”	  of	  the	  overlapping	  research	  interests.	  In	  

particular,	  let	  Sj	  be	  the	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  in	  field	  j	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  If	  we	  
calculate	  the	  dot	  product	  between	  the	  vector	  S	  and	  the	  vector	  of	  shares	  aij	  for	  each	  
American	  mathematician,	  the	  resulting	  number	  gives	  the	  “effective”	  number	  of	  Soviet	  
papers	  that	  the	  typical	  American	  mathematician	  would	  have	  written,	  weighted	  by	  Soviet	  
preference.	  To	  construct	  an	  index	  that	  lies	  between	  zero	  and	  one,	  we	  divide	  the	  dot	  product	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28	  The	  share	  a 	  is	  calculated	  using	  all	  papers	  published	  by	  a	  particular	  mathematician	  between	  1960	  and	  
ij

1989;	  this	  calculation	  uses	  the	  database	  the	  AMS	  provided	  to	  us.	  The	  Soviet	  share	  sj	  is	  obtained	  directly	  from	  
MathSciNet	  (an	  online	  database	  maintained	  by	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society)	  and	  contains	  papers	  
published	  mainly	  between	  1984	  and	  1989.	  As	  noted	  above,	  the	  AMS	  began	  to	  collect	  systematic	  information	  
on	  the	  country	  of	  publication	  only	  around	  1984	  (although	  a	  few	  pre-­‐1984	  papers	  report	  the	  affiliation	  of	  the	  
author).	  

24
by	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  in	  the	  most	  populated	  Soviet	  field.	  Hence	  the	  “index	  of	  
intensity”	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  

∑a S
ij

(1)	  

	  

Ii =

j

j

max(S j )

. 	  

	  
Note	  that	  this	  index	  will	  be	  equal	  to	  zero	  when	  the	  American	  mathematician	  publishes	  in	  
fields	  where	  Soviets	  have	  never	  published	  and	  is	  equal	  to	  one	  when	  the	  American	  
mathematician	  publishes	  exclusively	  in	  the	  field	  where	  the	  Soviets	  have	  done	  the	  most	  
work.	  
	  

Finally,	  we	  employ	  the	  commonly-­‐used	  “index	  of	  similarity”	  (Cutler	  and	  Glaeser	  

2007)	  defined	  by:	  
	  
(2)	  

	  

Di =1−

1
∑ aij − sij . 	  
2 j

	  
The	  index	  of	  similarity	  equals	  one	  when	  there	  is	  a	  perfect	  overlap	  in	  the	  relative	  field	  
distributions	  between	  American	  mathematician	  i	  and	  the	  Soviet	  research	  program,	  and	  
zero	  when	  there	  is	  total	  dissimilarity.29	  
	  

Table	  II	  reports	  the	  value	  of	  the	  overlap	  indices	  for	  the	  most	  productive	  American	  

mathematicians,	  with	  the	  ranking	  determined	  by	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  between	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
29	  If	  the	  complement	  of	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  (or	  1	  –	  D)	  were	  calculated	  for	  the	  pooled	  group	  of	  American	  

mathematicians,	  its	  value	  would	  give	  the	  fraction	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  who	  must	  move	  across	  fields	  
in	  order	  to	  ensure	  that	  American	  mathematicians	  have	  the	  same	  field	  distribution	  as	  the	  Soviets.	  

25
1960	  and	  1989.	  There	  is	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  dispersion	  in	  the	  various	  indices	  even	  among	  these	  
superstars.	  The	  correlation	  coefficient,	  for	  instance,	  ranges	  from	  zero	  to	  .6,	  while	  the	  index	  
of	  similarity	  ranges	  from	  .07	  to	  .41.	  
	  

To	  estimate	  the	  net	  impact	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  on	  the	  marginal	  product,	  yi(t),	  of	  

American	  mathematician	  i	  in	  year	  t,	  consider	  the	  regression	  model:	  
	  
(3)	  

	  

yit	  =	  φi	  +	  φt	  +	  Xi(t)	  γ	  	  +	  θ	  (T	  ×	  Indexi)	  +	  εi(t),	  

	  
where	  φi	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects;	  φt	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects;	  X	  is	  a	  
vector	  of	  standardizing	  variables	  that	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  work	  
experience	  introduced	  as	  a	  quartic	  polynomial;	  T	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  year	  
for	  the	  particular	  observation	  is	  1992	  or	  beyond;	  and	  Index	  is	  one	  of	  the	  three	  alternative	  
overlap	  indices	  defined	  earlier.30	  The	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  
We	  use	  two	  alternative	  dependent	  variables	  in	  the	  analysis:	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
mathematician	  i	  published	  in	  a	  particular	  year,	  and	  the	  total	  number	  of	  ISI	  citations	  
received	  by	  the	  papers	  published	  in	  that	  year.31	  It	  is	  worth	  noting	  that	  the	  citations	  data	  is	  
truncated	  because	  a	  paper	  may	  continue	  to	  be	  cited	  into	  the	  future	  (and	  some	  important	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30	  Of	  course,	  the	  regression	  does	  not	  include	  either	  the	  value	  of	  the	  overlap	  index	  or	  the	  post-­‐1992	  indicator	  

variable.	  The	  individual	  fixed	  effects	  subsume	  the	  person-­‐specific	  overlap	  index,	  and	  the	  period	  fixed	  effects	  
subsume	  the	  post-­‐1992	  indicator.	  The	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience	  is	  defined	  as	  years	  elapsed	  
since	  the	  mathematician’s	  first	  publication.	  The	  regressions	  only	  include	  those	  observations	  where	  a	  
mathematician	  has	  at	  most	  60	  years	  of	  potential	  work	  experience.	  
31	  Our	  treatment	  of	  coauthored	  papers	  is	  as	  follows:	  Regardless	  of	  how	  many	  authors	  are	  responsible	  for	  a	  

single	  paper,	  each	  author	  is	  given	  full	  credit	  when	  we	  count	  a	  mathematician’s	  number	  of	  papers	  and	  
citations.	  This	  approach	  is	  required	  by	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  AMS	  data.	  In	  particular,	  we	  have	  counts	  of	  papers	  by	  
year,	  field,	  and	  author,	  and	  these	  counts	  do	  not	  allow	  us	  to	  identify	  all	  the	  authors	  of	  any	  specific	  paper.	  The	  
only	  exception	  to	  this	  method	  of	  treating	  coauthorships	  is	  the	  construction	  of	  Figure	  I	  (and	  the	  baseline	  field	  
distribution	  of	  Soviet	  mathematical	  research	  used	  in	  the	  calculation	  of	  the	  overlap	  indices),	  where	  we	  
obtained	  the	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  by	  field	  directly	  from	  MathSciNet.	  

26
papers	  may	  not	  have	  been	  recognized	  by	  the	  end	  of	  our	  sample	  period).32	  Note,	  however,	  
that	  the	  inclusion	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects	  in	  equation	  (3)	  helps	  to	  control	  for	  this	  problem.	  
The	  identification	  strategy	  used	  by	  the	  regression	  model	  in	  (3)	  can	  be	  easily	  
described.	  We	  are	  examining	  how	  the	  research	  output	  of	  mathematician	  i	  changed	  after	  
1992,	  when	  Soviet	  and	  American	  mathematicians	  began	  to	  interact	  both	  physically	  and	  
intellectually.	  The	  coefficient	  θ	  measures	  whether	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  mathematicians	  
who	  had	  pursued	  a	  Soviet-­‐style	  research	  agenda	  changed	  after	  1992,	  when	  the	  Soviet	  ideas	  
began	  to	  be	  disseminated	  to	  a	  wider	  audience	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  and	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  began	  to	  publish	  their	  ideas	  in	  the	  same	  journals	  and	  compete	  for	  jobs	  in	  
the	  same	  institutions	  as	  American	  mathematicians.	  If	  the	  externalities	  arising	  from	  the	  
entry	  of	  the	  highly	  skilled	  Soviets	  specializing	  in	  a	  relatively	  small	  set	  of	  mathematical	  
fields	  are	  weak	  or	  non-­‐existent,	  we	  would	  expect	  that	  the	  American	  “intellectual	  
competitors”	  of	  the	  Soviets	  would	  become	  less	  productive	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  influx	  and	  the	  
coefficient	  θ	  would	  be	  negative.	  
	  

The	  control	  group	  in	  our	  empirical	  exercise	  consists	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  

who	  prior	  to	  1990	  did	  not	  specialize	  in	  the	  fields	  dominated	  by	  the	  Soviets.	  This	  control	  
group	  not	  only	  experienced	  a	  smaller	  Soviet	  influx	  post-­‐1992	  (see	  Figure	  VI),	  but	  it	  also	  did	  
not	  gain	  directly	  from	  the	  influx	  of	  new	  ideas.	  Specifically,	  the	  exposure	  to	  Soviet	  ideas	  was	  
unlikely	  to	  be	  useful	  to	  American	  mathematicians	  working	  in	  U.S.	  dominated	  fields:	  out	  of	  
all	  the	  references	  cited	  by	  articles	  in	  the	  top	  10	  U.S.	  dominated	  fields,	  only	  5	  percent	  of	  
these	  references	  are	  to	  articles	  in	  Soviet-­‐dominated	  fields.	  Therefore,	  there	  is	  little	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
32	  The	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  a	  paper	  published	  in	  year	  t	  is	  measured	  as	  of	  calendar	  year	  2009.	  

27
evidence	  of	  complementarities	  across	  the	  intellectually	  distant	  fields	  pursued	  by	  Soviet	  and	  
American	  mathematicians.	  
	  

Table	  III	  reports	  the	  estimates	  of	  the	  coefficient	  θ	  obtained	  from	  a	  variety	  of	  

different	  regression	  specifications.	  In	  addition	  to	  the	  two	  dependent	  variables	  and	  three	  
measures	  of	  the	  overlap	  index,	  we	  estimated	  the	  regression	  on	  two	  alternative	  samples	  of	  
American	  mathematicians:	  the	  sample	  of	  predominantly	  American	  mathematicians	  defined	  
earlier,	  as	  well	  as	  a	  sample	  of	  “exclusively”	  American	  mathematicians.	  The	  sample	  of	  
exclusively	  American	  mathematicians	  is	  the	  subset	  of	  predominantly	  American	  
mathematicians	  who	  were	  always	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  institution	  before	  1990.33	  It	  
is	  important	  to	  note	  (and	  is	  obvious	  from	  biographies	  of	  the	  superstars	  listed	  in	  Table	  II)	  
that	  either	  definition	  of	  an	  “American”	  mathematician	  includes	  large	  numbers	  of	  foreign-­‐
born	  persons.	  These	  foreign-­‐born	  mathematicians	  may	  have	  either	  migrated	  to	  the	  United	  
States	  after	  publishing	  some	  initial	  work	  abroad,	  or	  first	  arrived	  in	  the	  United	  States	  as	  
foreign	  students	  and	  stayed	  in	  the	  country	  after	  receiving	  the	  doctorate.	  
	  

Regardless	  of	  the	  various	  specification	  changes,	  the	  results	  reported	  in	  panel	  A	  of	  

Table	  III	  are	  robust.	  In	  particular,	  all	  of	  the	  overlap	  indices	  have	  a	  strong	  negative	  impact	  
on	  the	  post-­‐1992	  productivity	  of	  American	  mathematicians.	  It	  is	  instructive	  to	  give	  a	  
numerical	  example	  to	  emphasize	  that	  the	  quantitative	  impact	  on	  the	  number	  of	  
publications	  is	  numerically	  important.	  In	  terms	  of	  the	  correlation	  coefficient,	  for	  instance,	  
an	  increase	  from	  ρ	  =	  0	  to	  ρ	  =	  1	  (so	  that	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  field	  distribution	  shifts	  from	  one	  
where	  the	  American	  mathematician’s	  work	  is	  uncorrelated	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  to	  one	  
where	  the	  mathematician’s	  research	  interests	  perfectly	  overlap)	  reduces	  the	  number	  of	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
33	  There	  are	  27,663	  persons	  in	  the	  sample	  of	  exclusively	  American	  mathematicians.	  

28
publications	  in	  any	  particular	  year	  by	  0.13.	  The	  regression,	  therefore,	  predicts	  that	  the	  
average	  American’s	  productivity	  fell	  by	  2.2	  papers	  (or	  0.13	  ×	  17)	  over	  the	  1992-­‐2008	  
period.	  As	  Table	  I	  shows,	  the	  average	  American	  mathematician	  published	  6.8	  papers	  during	  
the	  period,	  so	  that	  the	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  reduced	  productivity	  by	  around	  a	  third.	  	  
	  

It	  is	  easy	  to	  demonstrate	  graphically	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  

productivity	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  with	  overlapping	  research	  agendas.	  Suppose	  we	  
classify	  mathematicians	  whose	  index	  of	  similarity	  is	  in	  the	  upper	  quartile	  of	  the	  
distribution	  as	  “highly	  exposed,”	  while	  the	  group	  in	  the	  bottom	  quartile	  has	  low	  exposure.	  
As	  shown	  in	  Figure	  VIIa,	  the	  raw	  trends	  in	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  
average	  mathematician	  in	  each	  of	  these	  two	  groups	  are	  revealing.	  Prior	  to	  1990,	  the	  highly	  
exposed	  group	  had	  a	  slight	  upward	  trend,	  while	  the	  least	  exposed	  group	  had	  a	  slight	  
downward	  trend.	  After	  1990,	  however,	  there	  is	  a	  precipitous	  (absolute	  and	  relative)	  
decline	  in	  the	  publication	  rate	  of	  the	  group	  whose	  research	  agenda	  overlaps	  most	  with	  the	  
Soviets.	  The	  trends	  in	  the	  adjusted	  number	  of	  papers	  (after	  removing	  individual	  fixed	  
effects)	  shown	  in	  Figure	  VIIb	  reveal	  a	  continuation	  of	  previous	  trends	  for	  the	  least	  exposed	  
mathematicians,	  and	  a	  striking	  reversal	  of	  trends	  for	  the	  highly	  exposed	  mathematicians.	  
Table	  III	  also	  reports	  the	  estimates	  of	  the	  coefficient	  θ	  when	  the	  dependent	  variable	  
is	  the	  ISI	  number	  of	  citations	  (or	  roughly	  the	  number	  of	  publications	  weighted	  by	  
quality).34	  The	  evidence	  documents	  a	  large	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  written	  by	  
American	  mathematicians	  whose	  research	  interests	  greatly	  overlap	  with	  those	  of	  the	  
Soviets.	  In	  other	  words,	  not	  only	  are	  the	  competing	  mathematicians	  producing	  fewer	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
34	  We	  also	  estimated	  the	  regressions	  using	  the	  AMS	  count	  of	  citations	  as	  the	  dependent	  variable.	  As	  with	  the	  

ISI	  data,	  all	  of	  the	  interaction	  coefficients	  are	  negative	  and	  significant	  regardless	  of	  the	  measure	  of	  overlap	  
used.	  

29
papers,	  but	  also	  the	  work	  they	  produce	  is	  of	  “lower	  quality”	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  it	  generates	  
many	  fewer	  citations.	  A	  one-­‐unit	  shift	  in	  the	  correlation	  coefficient	  would	  reduce	  the	  
number	  by	  about	  20	  citations	  per	  year.	  
The	  next	  two	  panels	  of	  Table	  III	  address	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  these	  effects	  
persist	  in	  the	  long	  run.	  In	  panel	  B,	  we	  restrict	  the	  analysis	  to	  the	  years	  1978-­‐1999,	  so	  that	  
the	  regressions	  measure	  the	  short-­‐run	  productivity	  effect,	  while	  panel	  C	  only	  includes	  the	  
years	  1978-­‐1989	  and	  2000-­‐2008,	  so	  that	  the	  productivity	  impact	  is	  measured	  roughly	  10	  
to	  15	  years	  after	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  occurred.	  The	  perhaps	  surprising	  finding	  in	  the	  table	  is	  
that,	  if	  anything,	  the	  long	  run	  effects	  are	  larger	  than	  the	  short-­‐run	  effects	  (although	  the	  
difference	  is	  sometimes	  not	  statistically	  significant).	  It	  is	  typically	  very	  difficult	  for	  
academics	  to	  reenter	  the	  publications	  market	  once	  they	  have	  taken	  some	  years	  off	  from	  
successful	  active	  research.	  In	  academia,	  the	  short	  run	  is	  the	  long	  run.35	  
A	  potential	  problem	  with	  these	  regression	  results	  is	  that	  although	  they	  include	  year	  
fixed	  effects	  to	  net	  out	  any	  trends	  in	  total	  output	  in	  the	  mathematics	  discipline,	  there	  may	  
be	  field-­‐specific	  time	  trends	  that	  may	  be	  spuriously	  correlated	  with	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  For	  
instance,	  Soviet-­‐style	  fields	  may	  have	  experienced	  a	  differential	  response	  in	  funding	  or	  
intellectual	  attention	  after	  the	  cold	  war	  (though	  we	  have	  found	  no	  evidence	  for	  this	  in	  our	  
historical	  research).	  To	  determine	  if	  the	  results	  are	  sensitive	  to	  the	  inclusion	  of	  arbitrary	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
35	  In	  the	  long	  run,	  we	  would	  have	  expected	  resources	  to	  be	  moved	  to	  the	  affected	  fields.	  It	  is	  unclear,	  

however,	  that	  such	  adjustments	  took	  place.	  In	  fact,	  federal	  obligations	  to	  universities	  and	  colleges	  for	  
research	  in	  mathematics	  declined	  slightly	  (in	  real	  dollars)	  during	  the	  1990s;	  see	  U.S.	  National	  Science	  
Foundation	  (2004,	  Table	  1a).	  Anecdotal	  evidence	  also	  suggests	  that	  it	  was	  difficult	  to	  obtain	  additional	  
resources	  for	  hiring	  Soviet	  mathematicians.	  Personal	  communication	  with	  Professor	  Arthur	  Jaffe	  provides	  
two	  such	  examples.	  Professor	  Jaffe	  was	  Chair	  of	  the	  Harvard	  mathematics	  department	  at	  the	  time	  and	  
requested	  resources	  to	  hire	  two	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  classified	  as	  “Targets	  of	  Opportunity.”	  The	  Dean	  of	  the	  
College	  denied	  the	  request,	  although	  Harvard	  President	  Derek	  Bok	  belatedly	  reversed	  that	  decision.	  Similarly,	  
Jaffe	  and	  Bok	  contacted	  54	  foundations	  requesting	  financial	  assistance	  to	  fund	  the	  transition	  of	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  into	  the	  American	  mathematics	  community.	  All	  of	  the	  funding	  requests	  were	  denied.	  

30
field-­‐specific	  trends,	  we	  re-­‐estimated	  the	  model	  with	  a	  full	  set	  of	  field-­‐year	  fixed	  effects	  in	  a	  
sample	  constructed	  so	  that	  a	  particular	  observation	  represents	  an	  author-­‐field-­‐year	  cell.	  In	  
other	  words,	  our	  data	  now	  consists	  of	  the	  publication	  history	  of	  each	  American	  
mathematician	  in	  each	  of	  the	  63	  fields	  in	  mathematics	  for	  each	  year	  in	  our	  sample	  period.	  
Of	  course,	  many	  of	  the	  values	  in	  the	  dependent	  variable	  in	  this	  regression	  will	  be	  zero	  
simply	  because	  few	  mathematicians	  publish	  anything	  at	  all	  in	  a	  particular	  year,	  and	  fewer	  
still	  publish	  a	  paper	  in	  more	  than	  one	  field.	  
The	  generalized	  regression	  model	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(4)	  

	  

yij(t)	  =	  φi	  +	  φj	  +	  φt	  +	  (φj	  ×	  φt)	  +	  Xi(t)	  γ	  	  +	  θ	  (T	  ×	  Indexi)	  +	  εij(t),	  

	  
where	  yij(t)	  is	  a	  measure	  of	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  mathematician	  i	  in	  field	  j	  at	  time	  t;	  φj	  is	  
a	  vector	  of	  field	  fixed	  effects;	  and	  (φj	  ×	  φt)	  represents	  all	  possible	  interactions	  between	  the	  
field	  and	  year	  fixed	  effects.	  
The	  bottom	  panel	  of	  Table	  III	  summarizes	  the	  regression	  results.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  
the	  coefficient	  θ	  remains	  negative	  and	  significant	  even	  after	  controlling	  for	  the	  field-­‐year	  
fixed	  effects,	  regardless	  of	  the	  overlap	  index	  used.	  The	  numerical	  magnitude	  of	  the	  
coefficient	  is	  smaller	  than	  that	  of	  the	  analogous	  coefficient	  reported	  in	  Panel	  A,	  but	  this	  is	  
simply	  a	  mechanical	  effect	  because	  the	  total	  impact	  on	  publications	  is	  divided	  among	  the	  
63	  fields	  that	  make	  up	  the	  mathematics	  discipline.	  Once	  we	  scale	  the	  coefficient	  properly	  
(by	  multiplying	  by	  63),	  the	  regression	  coefficients	  reported	  in	  Panel	  D	  are,	  in	  fact,	  
remarkably	  similar	  to	  those	  in	  Panel	  A.	  The	  regression	  results,	  therefore,	  indicate	  that	  
arbitrarily	  complicated	  field-­‐specific	  trends	  do	  not	  account	  for	  the	  post-­‐1992	  break	  in	  the	  

31
evolution	  of	  publications	  for	  mathematicians	  whose	  research	  interests	  greatly	  overlapped	  
with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés.	  
	  

Although	  Table	  III	  describes	  how	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  affected	  the	  mean	  

productivity	  of	  American	  mathematicians,	  it	  is	  of	  interest	  to	  measure	  the	  impact	  at	  extreme	  
points	  in	  the	  quality	  distribution	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce.	  Consider	  initially	  the	  impact	  
of	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  at	  the	  top	  of	  the	  quality	  distribution.	  Although	  the	  mean	  American	  
mathematician	  was	  negatively	  affected,	  those	  losses	  could	  perhaps	  be	  more	  than	  offset	  by	  
an	  increase	  in	  the	  likelihood	  that	  top	  American	  mathematicians	  produced	  more	  “home	  
runs.”	  We	  define	  a	  home	  run	  as	  a	  paper	  that	  is	  in	  the	  top	  tail	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  citations	  
among	  all	  papers	  published	  in	  a	  particular	  year.36	  To	  assess	  the	  sensitivity	  of	  the	  results,	  
we	  use	  three	  alternative	  definitions	  of	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs:	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  that	  
the	  mathematician	  has	  published	  in	  any	  given	  year	  that	  lie	  above	  the	  90th,	  the	  95th,	  or	  the	  
99th	  lifetime	  citation	  percentile	  for	  papers	  published	  that	  year.	  Since	  the	  signal	  value	  of	  
citations	  received	  by	  recent	  publications	  is	  very	  weak	  (i.e.,	  the	  papers	  have	  not	  been	  out	  
long	  enough	  to	  be	  cited),	  we	  restrict	  the	  analysis	  to	  papers	  published	  between	  1978	  and	  
2005,	  a	  period	  where	  we	  can	  reasonably	  distinguish	  between	  home	  runs	  and	  run-­‐of-­‐the-­‐
mill	  papers.	  
By	  construction,	  a	  home	  run	  is	  a	  very	  rare	  event.	  After	  all,	  the	  modal	  number	  of	  
publications	  for	  an	  active	  mathematician	  in	  any	  given	  year	  is	  zero.	  As	  is	  common	  in	  the	  
literature	  that	  examines	  these	  types	  of	  rare	  publication	  events,	  we	  use	  a	  Poisson	  regression	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
36	  To	  estimate	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  published	  by	  mathematician	  i	  in	  year	  t,	  we	  first	  calculated	  the	  total	  

number	  of	  (worldwide)	  lifetime	  citations	  received	  by	  each	  article	  in	  the	  ISI	  database	  that	  had	  been	  
successfully	  matched	  to	  the	  AMS	  database.	  We	  used	  these	  lifetime	  citation	  totals	  to	  calculate	  the	  90th	  
percentile,	  95th	  percentile,	  and	  99th	  percentile	  thresholds	  of	  the	  citations	  distribution	  for	  papers	  published	  in	  
each	  year.	  We	  then	  used	  the	  matched	  AMS/ISI	  database	  to	  count	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  that	  a	  particular	  
mathematician	  published	  each	  year	  that	  exceed	  these	  threshold	  percentiles.	  

32
model	  to	  examine	  how	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  affected	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  
published	  by	  American	  mathematicians.	  The	  Poisson	  model	  can	  be	  interpreted	  as	  a	  
regression	  where	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  expected	  value	  of	  the	  number	  of	  rare	  
events	  attained	  by	  a	  particular	  observation.	  In	  particular,	  let:	  
	  
(5)	  

	  

E[log	  Hit]	  =	  φi	  +	  Xit	  β	  +	  δ	  T	  +	  εit,	  

	  
where	  Hit	  is	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  achieved	  by	  mathematician	  i	  in	  year	  t;	  φi	  is	  an	  
individual-­‐specific	  fixed	  effect;	  and	  Xit	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  covariates,	  again	  including	  the	  
mathematician’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  quartic	  polynomial).	  To	  clearly	  
illustrate	  the	  source	  of	  the	  additional	  (or	  fewer)	  home	  runs	  hit	  by	  American	  
mathematicians	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  we	  estimated	  the	  Poisson	  regression	  
separately	  for	  three	  different	  groups:	  the	  group	  of	  least	  exposed	  mathematicians	  (below	  
the	  25th	  percentile	  in	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  respective	  measure	  of	  the	  index	  of	  overlap);	  
the	  group	  of	  most	  exposed	  mathematicians	  (above	  the	  75th	  percentile),	  and	  the	  residual	  
“middle”	  group.	  The	  coefficient	  of	  interest	  is	  the	  parameter	  δ,	  which	  measures	  the	  post-­‐
1992	  break	  in	  the	  home	  runs	  trend	  for	  the	  various	  groups	  of	  American	  mathematicians.	  
	  

The	  first	  three	  columns	  of	  Table	  IV	  report	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  post-­‐1992	  indicator	  

variable	  for	  the	  various	  specifications.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  the	  expected	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  
written	  by	  mathematicians	  who	  most	  overlapped	  with	  the	  Soviets	  declined	  dramatically	  
after	  1992.	  For	  example,	  consider	  the	  coefficients	  estimated	  when	  the	  mathematicians	  are	  
classified	  according	  to	  their	  placement	  in	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  correlation	  coefficient.	  If	  
we	  define	  a	  home	  run	  as	  a	  paper	  above	  the	  95th	  percentile	  of	  citations,	  the	  coefficient	  for	  

33
the	  most	  exposed	  group	  is	  -­‐0.204	  (0.032),	  indicating	  that	  a	  mathematician	  in	  this	  group	  
experienced	  a	  20.4	  percent	  decline	  in	  the	  expected	  number	  of	  annual	  home	  runs	  hit	  after	  
1992.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  coefficient	  for	  the	  least	  exposed	  group	  is	  0.058	  (0.066),	  suggesting	  
that	  the	  least	  exposed	  mathematicians	  had	  just	  about	  as	  many	  home	  runs	  before	  and	  after	  
the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  In	  fact,	  all	  the	  regression	  models	  predict	  an	  absolute	  (and	  
numerically	  large)	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  published	  by	  the	  most	  exposed	  
mathematicians.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  least	  exposed	  mathematicians	  usually	  did	  not	  experience	  a	  
change	  in	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  (although	  the	  positive	  coefficient	  is	  significant	  when	  
using	  the	  index	  of	  similarity).	  
	  

Of	  course,	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  the	  “average”	  adverse	  impact	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  on	  the	  

number	  of	  home	  runs	  masks	  a	  potentially	  important	  gain	  within	  a	  small	  subgroup	  of	  
American	  mathematicians.	  Elite	  institutions	  hired	  many	  of	  the	  émigrés.	  These	  émigrés	  
began	  to	  coauthor	  with	  their	  American	  colleagues	  (as	  suggested	  by	  Figure	  II).	  In	  fact,	  666	  
pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians	  (or	  2.8	  percent)	  coauthored	  with	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  at	  
some	  point	  after	  1992.37	  However,	  the	  coauthorship	  rate	  was	  5.7	  percent	  among	  highly	  
exposed	  American	  mathematicians,	  and	  rose	  further	  to	  8.0	  percent	  among	  the	  highly	  
exposed	  mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  the	  top	  25	  institutions.	  
	  

To	  determine	  if	  the	  high	  rate	  of	  coauthorship	  among	  highly	  exposed	  American	  

mathematicians	  led	  to	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  hit	  by	  these	  Americans,	  we	  
re-­‐estimated	  the	  regression	  in	  equation	  (5)	  separately	  by	  coauthorship	  status.	  The	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
37	  The	  incidence	  of	  coauthorship	  can	  only	  be	  estimated	  in	  the	  matched	  AMS/ISI	  database.	  A	  highly	  exposed	  

mathematician	  is	  someone	  who	  is	  in	  the	  top	  quartile	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  index	  of	  similarity.	  The	  
institutions	  were	  ranked	  according	  to	  the	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  during	  between	  1984	  and	  2008	  
by	  all	  mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  the	  institution.	  

34
estimated	  coefficients	  are	  reported	  in	  the	  last	  two	  columns	  of	  Table	  IV.38	  There	  is	  an	  
important	  difference	  in	  the	  impact	  between	  the	  Americans	  who	  coauthored	  with	  the	  
émigrés	  and	  those	  who	  did	  not.	  In	  particular,	  the	  evidence	  clearly	  shows	  that	  coauthoring	  
with	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  entirely	  attenuates	  the	  negative	  impact	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  on	  the	  
number	  of	  home	  runs	  written	  by	  highly	  exposed	  American	  mathematicians.	  Nevertheless,	  
there	  is	  no	  evidence	  of	  any	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  hit	  by	  American	  
mathematicians	  even	  within	  the	  small	  subset	  of	  highly	  exposed	  coauthors.	  
	  

It	  is	  equally	  important	  to	  measure	  the	  productivity	  impact	  at	  the	  other	  end	  of	  the	  

quality	  distribution,	  and	  examine	  what	  happened	  to	  the	  “marginally	  active”	  American	  
mathematician.	  In	  particular,	  we	  examine	  the	  probability	  that	  an	  American	  mathematician	  
remains	  active	  (i.e.,	  publishing)	  in	  the	  profession	  after	  1992.	  We	  constructed	  a	  variable	  
indicating	  if	  the	  mathematician	  has	  “retired”	  by	  setting	  it	  equal	  to	  zero	  in	  every	  year	  prior	  
to	  the	  last	  year	  in	  which	  we	  observe	  a	  publication	  for	  mathematician	  i.	  We	  then	  omit	  all	  
post-­‐retirement	  observations	  for	  the	  particular	  mathematician	  (in	  other	  words,	  we	  exclude	  
the	  years	  after	  the	  publication	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  last	  article).	  We	  used	  this	  form	  of	  
survival	  data	  to	  estimate	  Cox	  proportional	  models	  where	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  
instantaneous	  probability	  of	  retirement:	  
	  
(6)	  

	  

log	  λi(Zi,	  τ)	  =	  log	  λ0(τ)	  +	  Zi	  β	  +	  ε,	  

	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
38	  Although	  the	  coauthorship	  evidence	  reported	  in	  Table	  IV	  uses	  the	  95th	  percentile	  threshold	  to	  define	  a	  

home	  run,	  the	  qualitative	  results	  are	  similar	  for	  the	  other	  thresholds.	  Note	  that	  coauthorship	  status	  is	  not	  
randomly	  assigned	  across	  mathematicians,	  so	  that	  the	  coefficients,	  though	  suggestive,	  do	  not	  necessarily	  
prove	  a	  causal	  relationship.	  

35
where	  λi(Zi,	  τ)	  is	  the	  hazard	  for	  individual	  i	  with	  covariates	  Zi	  at	  experience	  τ;	  and	  λ0(τ)	  is	  
the	  baseline	  hazard	  for	  workers	  at	  that	  level	  of	  experience.	  The	  covariates	  in	  the	  vector	  Z	  
include	  the	  mathematician’s	  overlap	  index,	  the	  post-­‐1992	  indicator	  variable,	  and	  the	  
interaction	  between	  these	  two	  variables.	  The	  top	  row	  of	  Table	  V	  reports	  the	  coefficient	  of	  
this	  interaction	  variable	  estimated	  separately	  for	  the	  three	  alternative	  measures	  of	  the	  
overlap	  index.	  
The	  overlap	  index	  has	  a	  positive	  and	  significant	  impact	  on	  the	  instantaneous	  
retirement	  probability	  after	  1992,	  and	  the	  implied	  numerical	  effect	  is	  large.	  Consider,	  for	  
example,	  the	  coefficient	  estimated	  when	  we	  use	  the	  correlation	  coefficient.	  The	  regressions	  
imply	  that	  a	  mathematician	  whose	  prior	  research	  was	  perfectly	  correlated	  with	  that	  of	  the	  
Soviets	  had	  roughly	  a	  50	  percent	  (given	  by	  e+0.41)	  increase	  in	  the	  instantaneous	  probability	  
of	  retirement	  relative	  to	  the	  probability	  of	  a	  mathematician	  whose	  work	  was	  uncorrelated	  
with	  the	  Soviet	  research	  program.	  It	  is	  easier	  to	  get	  a	  sense	  of	  the	  quantitative	  effect	  by	  
examining	  the	  survival	  functions	  implied	  by	  the	  estimated	  Cox	  proportional	  hazards.	  
Figures	  VIIIa	  and	  VIIIb	  illustrate	  the	  survival	  functions	  for	  high-­‐	  and	  low-­‐exposure	  
mathematicians,	  both	  before	  and	  after	  1992.39	  The	  probability	  of	  survival	  declined	  
precipitously	  for	  high-­‐exposure	  mathematicians	  after	  1992	  (both	  relatively	  and	  
absolutely).	  
The	  shape	  of	  the	  survival	  functions,	  in	  fact,	  suggests	  that	  the	  effect	  seems	  largest	  for	  
mathematicians	  at	  early	  points	  in	  their	  career.	  We	  re-­‐estimated	  the	  hazard	  regressions	  
separately	  on	  mathematicians	  classified	  by	  years	  of	  experience.	  The	  remaining	  rows	  of	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
39	  The	  low-­‐	  and	  high-­‐exposure	  groups	  are	  defined	  by	  the	  bottom	  and	  top	  quartiles	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  

index	  of	  similarity.	  

36
Table	  V	  show	  that	  the	  adverse	  impact	  of	  an	  overlapping	  research	  agenda	  with	  the	  Soviets	  is	  
far	  larger	  in	  the	  sample	  of	  younger	  (and	  likely	  untenured)	  mathematicians.	  In	  other	  words,	  
the	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  had	  a	  particularly	  detrimental	  effect	  on	  the	  long-­‐run	  career	  
prospects	  of	  young	  (and	  untenured)	  mathematicians,	  greatly	  increasing	  their	  probability	  of	  
retiring	  from	  the	  production	  of	  mathematical	  output.40	  
Although	  some	  American	  mathematicians	  stopped	  publishing	  altogether	  after	  the	  
collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  other	  mathematicians	  remained	  active	  but	  were	  “encouraged”	  
to	  move	  to	  different	  institutions.	  We	  create	  a	  variable	  for	  each	  mathematician	  indicating	  if	  
the	  modal	  institution	  in	  the	  post-­‐1992	  period	  (after	  the	  Soviet	  influx)	  was	  different	  from	  
the	  last	  institutional	  affiliation	  observed	  prior	  to	  1990.41	  By	  construction,	  our	  sample	  
consists	  of	  mathematicians	  whose	  last	  reported	  affiliation	  prior	  to	  1990	  and	  whose	  modal	  
affiliation	  post-­‐1992	  were	  located	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  We	  then	  estimated	  linear	  
probability	  models	  that	  examine	  the	  separation	  probability	  of	  a	  mathematician,	  including	  
controls	  for	  differences	  in	  individual	  and	  institutional	  quality.	  In	  particular,	  we	  hold	  
constant	  the	  log	  number	  of	  papers	  the	  mathematician	  published	  prior	  to	  1990,	  the	  log	  
number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  institution,	  
and	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience.	  
The	  regression	  model	  uses	  two	  variables	  to	  capture	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  
The	  first	  is	  the	  overlap	  index	  that	  describes	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  overlap	  in	  research	  interests	  
between	  the	  particular	  American	  mathematician	  and	  the	  Soviet	  research	  program.	  The	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
40	  The	  regression	  obviously	  cannot	  distinguish	  between	  the	  possibility	  that	  the	  mathematician	  stopped	  

writing	  publishable	  articles	  or	  was	  simply	  unable	  to	  find	  an	  outlet	  for	  his	  research	  in	  the	  face	  of	  increasing	  
competition	  by	  the	  highly	  productive	  Soviet	  mathematicians.	  
41	  The	  construction	  of	  the	  sample	  requires	  that	  the	  mathematician	  published	  both	  before	  and	  after	  1992,	  and	  

that	  there	  is	  a	  valid	  affiliation	  code	  in	  both	  periods.	  

37
second	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  institution	  employing	  the	  mathematician	  just	  
before	  the	  shock	  was,	  in	  fact,	  subsequently	  “exposed”	  to	  Soviet	  émigrés	  (i.e.,	  if	  the	  
institution	  hired	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  at	  some	  point	  after	  1992).	  
	  

The	  top	  panel	  of	  Table	  VI	  reports	  the	  regression	  coefficients.42	  The	  separation	  rate	  is	  

strongly	  related	  to	  both	  geographic	  and	  intellectual	  proximity.	  In	  particular,	  the	  separation	  
rate	  rises	  by	  about	  5	  percentage	  points	  if	  the	  mathematician’s	  last	  affiliation	  before	  1990	  
ended	  up	  hiring	  a	  Soviet	  émigré.43	  Similarly,	  regardless	  of	  how	  the	  overlap	  index	  is	  
measured,	  there	  is	  a	  strong	  positive	  correlation	  between	  the	  index	  and	  the	  separation	  rate.	  
An	  increase	  in	  the	  correlation	  coefficient	  from	  zero	  to	  one	  increases	  the	  separation	  rate	  by	  
17	  percentage	  points.44	  Put	  differently,	  holding	  geographic	  exposure	  constant,	  the	  
American	  mathematicians	  with	  the	  most	  Soviet-­‐like	  research	  agendas	  suddenly	  found	  
themselves	  in	  volatile	  jobs	  and	  ended	  up	  moving	  to	  other	  institutions	  at	  dramatically	  
higher	  rates.	  
The	  bottom	  two	  panels	  of	  the	  table	  replicate	  the	  mobility	  analysis	  for	  the	  samples	  of	  
“untenured”	  and	  “tenured”	  mathematicians.	  Notably,	  the	  separation	  rate	  of	  younger	  faculty	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
42	  Although	  we	  do	  not	  report	  the	  coefficients	  of	  the	  other	  variables	  in	  the	  regression,	  they	  mirror	  findings	  in	  

the	  labor	  economics	  literature.	  The	  higher	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  mathematician	  (as	  measured	  by	  the	  number	  of	  
pre-­‐1990	  publications),	  the	  lower	  the	  separation	  rate.	  This	  finding	  is	  analogous	  to	  the	  negative	  correlation	  
between	  the	  probability	  of	  job	  separation	  and	  a	  worker’s	  wage.	  In	  addition,	  the	  separation	  rate	  is	  lower	  for	  
older	  mathematicians	  and	  higher	  for	  mathematicians	  initially	  employed	  by	  high-­‐quality	  institutions.	  

43	  There	  may	  be	  reverse	  causality	  in	  the	  correlation	  between	  the	  separation	  rate	  and	  whether	  the	  institution	  

eventually	  hired	  a	  Soviet	  émigré.	  Perhaps	  the	  institution	  only	  hired	  émigrés	  after	  an	  American	  mathematician	  
failed	  to	  make	  tenure.	  Although	  this	  interpretation	  can	  explain	  the	  correlation,	  it	  is	  important	  to	  note	  that	  the	  
failed	  assistant	  professors	  were	  young	  and	  inexperienced,	  while	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  were	  more	  senior	  and	  
many	  had	  already	  had	  distinguished	  careers.	  
44	  We	  also	  estimated	  separation	  regressions	  that	  included	  a	  vector	  of	  fixed	  effects	  for	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  

institution.	  Although	  the	  impact	  of	  geographic	  exposure	  can	  no	  longer	  be	  identified,	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  
overlap	  index	  remains	  negative	  and	  significant.	  In	  the	  regression	  that	  uses	  the	  correlation	  coefficient,	  for	  
instance,	  the	  coefficient	  is	  0.123	  (0.025),	  so	  that	  the	  degree	  of	  research	  overlap	  with	  the	  incoming	  Soviets	  
determined	  which	  mathematician	  within	  a	  particular	  institution	  was	  most	  likely	  to	  leave.	  	  

38
is	  much	  more	  sensitive	  to	  direct	  exposure	  to	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  In	  particular,	  the	  probability	  
of	  moving	  increases	  by	  about	  10	  percent	  for	  a	  young	  mathematician	  who	  was	  employed	  in	  
an	  institution	  that	  eventually	  hired	  a	  Soviet	  émigré,	  but	  is	  unaffected	  for	  an	  older	  
mathematician.	  Similarly,	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  overlap	  index	  is	  at	  least	  twice	  as	  large	  in	  the	  
untenured	  sample,	  regardless	  of	  how	  the	  index	  is	  measured.	  
	  

The	  mobility	  regressions	  raise	  a	  number	  of	  interesting	  questions.	  Most	  important:	  

Where	  did	  the	  displaced	  mathematicians	  go?	  We	  calculated	  a	  measure	  of	  change	  in	  
institutional	  quality	  by	  adding	  the	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  all	  mathematicians	  
affiliated	  with	  a	  particular	  institution	  throughout	  the	  entire	  1984-­‐2008	  period.	  Since	  we	  
can	  identify	  the	  last	  institution	  employing	  the	  mathematician	  prior	  to	  the	  supply	  shock	  as	  
well	  as	  the	  modal	  institution	  employing	  him	  after	  the	  influx,	  we	  can	  construct	  a	  measure	  of	  
the	  change	  in	  institutional	  quality	  for	  movers.	  Let	  N0	  be	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  
the	  institution	  employing	  the	  mathematician	  before	  1990,	  and	  N1	  be	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
published	  by	  the	  institution	  employing	  him	  after	  the	  influx.	  Our	  measure	  of	  the	  change	  in	  
institutional	  quality	  is	  defined	  by	  log(N1/N0).	  
	  

Table	  6	  shows	  that	  this	  change	  in	  institutional	  quality	  is	  related	  to	  both	  geographic	  

and	  intellectual	  proximity,	  with	  both	  variables	  having	  strong	  negative	  effects.	  The	  impact	  of	  
geographic	  proximity	  is	  particularly	  large.	  Conditional	  on	  moving,	  an	  American	  
mathematician	  initially	  employed	  by	  one	  of	  the	  institutions	  that	  ended	  up	  hiring	  Soviet	  
émigrés	  moved	  to	  an	  institution	  that	  had	  published	  91	  percent	  fewer	  papers	  during	  the	  
period.45	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
45	  Although	  the	  numerical	  magnitude	  of	  this	  effect	  seems	  implausible,	  it	  is	  consistent	  with	  the	  raw	  data.	  The	  

total	  mathematical	  output	  produced	  by	  institutions	  falls	  precipitously	  once	  we	  move	  from	  the	  top-­‐ranked	  

39
Finally,	  up	  to	  this	  point	  our	  analysis	  has	  used	  papers	  and	  citations	  to	  measure	  a	  
mathematician’s	  marginal	  product.	  Academic	  mathematicians	  also	  produce	  students,	  and	  
the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  may	  have	  had	  beneficial	  or	  harmful	  effects	  on	  the	  quality	  of	  
the	  students	  produced	  by	  American	  institutions.	  Most	  obviously,	  the	  hiring	  of	  highly	  skilled	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  should	  presumably	  lead	  to	  higher	  quality	  students.	  At	  the	  same	  
time,	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  had	  an	  adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  had	  
previously	  done	  Soviet-­‐style	  research,	  and	  this	  adverse	  impact	  could	  be	  transmitted	  
“intergenerationally”	  to	  their	  students.46	  	  
	  

Despite	  the	  endogenous	  sorting	  of	  advisors	  and	  students,	  it	  is	  of	  interest	  to	  examine	  

how	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  students	  was	  affected	  by	  the	  “Soviet-­‐ness”	  of	  the	  advisor:	  either	  
because	  the	  advisor	  was	  himself	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  or	  because	  the	  advisor	  was	  an	  American	  
doing	  Soviet-­‐style	  research.47	  As	  noted	  above,	  the	  MGP	  data	  links	  each	  new	  mathematician	  
to	  his	  or	  her	  advisor.	  The	  AMS/ISI	  data	  further	  allows	  us	  to	  calculate	  the	  average	  annual	  
number	  of	  papers	  and	  citations	  produced	  by	  each	  student	  between	  the	  year	  the	  degree	  was	  
awarded	  and	  2011.	  
	  

The	  data	  consists	  of	  a	  single	  observation	  for	  each	  student	  obtaining	  the	  doctoral	  

degree	  from	  an	  American	  institution	  between	  1978	  and	  2008,	  and	  who	  had	  either	  a	  Soviet	  
or	  a	  predominantly	  American	  advisor.	  We	  estimated	  a	  regression	  model	  linking	  the	  
student’s	  (future)	  annual	  productivity	  to	  variables	  characterizing	  the	  Soviet-­‐ness	  of	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
institutions	  to	  even	  those	  ranked	  200th	  in	  our	  index	  of	  quality.	  Mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  the	  top	  
institutions	  (e.g.,	  MIT	  or	  the	  University	  of	  California,	  Berkeley)	  published	  over	  8,000	  papers	  during	  the	  
period.	  Mathematicians	  associated	  with	  institutions	  around	  the	  200th	  rank	  published	  only	  around	  350	  papers.	  
46	  One	  could	  also	  argue	  that	  the	  most	  affected	  American	  mathematicians	  (whose	  publishable	  product	  

declined	  after	  1992)	  had	  more	  time	  for	  student	  advising	  and	  could	  perhaps	  produce	  higher	  quality	  students.	  
47	  The	  sorting	  of	  advisors	  and	  students	  is	  not	  random.	  Great	  mathematicians	  will	  likely	  attract	  great	  students,	  

and/or	  great	  mathematicians	  can	  be	  more	  selective	  in	  choosing	  students	  from	  the	  pool	  of	  potential	  advisees.	  

40
advisor:	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  advisor	  is	  a	  Soviet	  émigré,	  the	  value	  of	  the	  
overlap	  index	  if	  the	  advisor	  is	  a	  predominantly	  American	  mathematician,	  and	  an	  
interaction	  between	  the	  advisor’s	  overlap	  index	  and	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  
student	  received	  the	  doctoral	  degree	  after	  1992.48	  This	  interaction	  variable	  captures	  the	  
differential	  impact	  on	  student	  productivity	  of	  having	  an	  American	  advisor	  who	  was	  most	  
affected	  by	  the	  post-­‐1992	  Soviet	  influx.	  
Column	  1	  of	  Table	  VII	  reports	  the	  coefficients	  of	  the	  Soviet	  émigré	  indicator	  and	  the	  
overlap	  interaction	  when	  we	  use	  the	  student’s	  annual	  number	  of	  papers	  and	  ISI	  citations	  as	  
the	  dependent	  variables.	  The	  results	  are	  striking.	  The	  presence	  of	  a	  Soviet	  advisor	  has	  a	  
strong	  positive	  effect	  on	  both	  papers	  and	  citations,	  leading	  to	  about	  0.2	  to	  0.3	  more	  papers	  
and	  0.5	  to	  1.0	  more	  citations	  per	  year	  (depending	  on	  the	  measure	  of	  the	  overlap	  index).	  
	  

At	  the	  same	  time,	  however,	  the	  Soviet-­‐ness	  of	  the	  student’s	  American	  advisor	  has	  a	  

mirror-­‐image	  negative	  impact	  on	  the	  student’s	  productivity.	  To	  easily	  interpret	  the	  
numerical	  magnitude	  of	  this	  effect,	  suppose	  again	  the	  overlap	  index	  is	  measured	  by	  the	  
correlation	  coefficient.	  The	  student	  of	  an	  American	  advisor	  with	  a	  correlation	  coefficient	  
equal	  to	  1	  publishes	  0.4	  fewer	  papers	  and	  produces	  7.0	  fewer	  citations	  per	  year	  than	  the	  
student	  of	  an	  American	  advisor	  with	  a	  correlation	  coefficient	  of	  zero.	  
The	  construction	  of	  the	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  introduce	  both	  institution	  and	  advisor	  
fixed	  effects,	  so	  that	  we	  can	  measure	  productivity	  effects	  that	  net	  out	  the	  influence	  of	  
institution	  and	  advisor	  quality.	  The	  remaining	  columns	  of	  the	  table	  introduce	  these	  fixed	  
effects.	  The	  impact	  of	  having	  a	  Soviet	  advisor	  remains	  strong	  even	  after	  we	  include	  
institution	  fixed	  effects	  in	  the	  regression.	  Of	  course,	  we	  cannot	  estimate	  the	  Soviet	  advisor	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
48	  The	  regression	  also	  includes	  a	  set	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects.	  

41
coefficient	  if	  the	  regression	  also	  includes	  advisor	  fixed	  effects.	  Nevertheless,	  it	  is	  worth	  
noting	  that	  the	  American	  advisor’s	  overlap	  index	  often	  plays	  a	  differential	  role	  before	  and	  
after	  1992	  even	  after	  we	  include	  advisor	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  inclusion	  of	  the	  advisor	  fixed	  
effect	  allows	  us	  to	  measure	  how	  the	  Soviet-­‐ness	  of	  an	  American	  advisor	  affected	  the	  
productivity	  of	  this	  particular	  advisor’s	  students	  over	  time.	  The	  interaction	  coefficient	  is	  
negative	  (and	  significant	  using	  two	  of	  the	  measures	  of	  the	  overlap	  index).	  In	  short,	  the	  
evidence	  suggests	  that	  the	  students	  of	  a	  specific	  Soviet-­‐like	  advisor	  were	  directly	  and	  
adversely	  affected	  by	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  
It	  is	  easy	  to	  manipulate	  the	  estimated	  coefficients	  to	  get	  a	  back-­‐of-­‐the-­‐envelope	  
measure	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  on	  the	  average	  productivity	  of	  students	  produced	  
by	  American	  institutions.	  For	  example,	  about	  3.0	  percent	  of	  students	  had	  a	  Soviet	  advisor	  
after	  1992.	  Those	  select	  students	  were	  able	  to	  generate	  around	  +0.007	  more	  papers	  per	  
year	  (or	  0.03	  ×	  +0.23)	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  The	  other	  97	  percent	  of	  students,	  
however,	  had	  a	  non-­‐Soviet	  advisor,	  and	  the	  average	  advisor’s	  correlation	  coefficient	  was	  
.09.	  The	  predicted	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  produced	  due	  to	  the	  intergenerational	  
transmission	  of	  less	  marketable	  skills	  is	  around	  -­‐0.038	  papers	  (or	  0.97	  ×	  0.09	  ×	  -­‐0.43).	  The	  
net	  effect,	  therefore,	  seems	  to	  be	  negative.	  
	  
V. Aggregate Effects
We	  now	  shift	  the	  focus	  from	  estimating	  individual-­‐level	  productivity	  effects	  to	  
calculating	  aggregate	  effects.	  In	  particular,	  we	  wish	  to	  determine	  if	  the	  total	  number	  of	  
papers	  published	  by	  the	  cohort	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians	  increased	  or	  
decreased	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  Equally	  important,	  did	  the	  size	  of	  the	  American	  

42
“mathematics	  pie”	  expand	  or	  contract	  after	  we	  take	  account	  of	  the	  contribution	  of	  Soviet	  
émigrés?	  
Suppose	  we	  divide	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematicians	  into	  three	  categories:	  
those	  with	  a	  pre-­‐1990	  research	  agenda	  that	  was	  highly	  correlated	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets,	  
those	  with	  an	  agenda	  that	  was	  almost	  uncorrelated,	  and	  everyone	  else.	  As	  before,	  we	  use	  
the	  25th	  and	  75th	  percentile	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  to	  calculate	  the	  
thresholds	  that	  define	  the	  groups.	  
For	  our	  first	  prediction	  exercise,	  we	  estimated	  separate	  regression	  models	  that	  
trace	  out	  the	  mathematician’s	  age-­‐product	  profile	  for	  each	  group.	  Specifically,	  we	  estimated	  
a	  regression	  of	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  a	  particular	  mathematician	  in	  a	  given	  
calendar	  year	  on	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  quartic	  polynomial)	  and	  on	  a	  vector	  
of	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  Notably,	  we	  only	  used	  data	  from	  1970	  through	  1991	  to	  estimate	  
this	  regression	  model.	  We	  then	  used	  the	  regressions	  to	  predict	  the	  post-­‐1992	  output	  of	  
each	  mathematician.	  To	  ensure	  that	  our	  predictions	  are	  not	  extrapolating	  into	  the	  far-­‐off	  
future,	  we	  conduct	  this	  “short-­‐run”	  prediction	  exercise	  for	  the	  years	  1992-­‐1999.49	  We	  then	  
added	  the	  total	  number	  of	  predicted	  publications	  across	  years	  and	  across	  all	  
mathematicians	  in	  each	  group.	  The	  top	  panel	  of	  Table	  VIII	  reports	  the	  predicted	  total	  
number	  of	  papers	  (per	  year)	  and	  contrasts	  these	  predictions	  with	  the	  actual	  output	  of	  the	  
pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
49	  Since	  the	  regression	  will	  be	  used	  to	  predict	  outcomes	  about	  a	  decade	  out	  of	  sample,	  we	  use	  a	  longer	  span	  of	  

the	  pre-­‐1992	  data	  to	  get	  a	  more	  precisely	  estimated	  age-­‐productivity	  profile	  for	  mathematicians	  in	  each	  
group.	  The	  regressions	  are	  then	  used	  to	  predict	  annual	  papers	  published	  in	  1992-­‐1999	  for	  mathematicians	  
who	  either	  did	  not	  publish	  at	  all	  after	  1992	  (so	  that	  we	  do	  not	  know	  their	  location),	  or	  whose	  publication	  
record	  reveals	  that	  they	  were	  affiliated	  with	  American	  institutions	  during	  the	  period.	  

43
	  

Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  exercise	  reveals	  dramatic	  differences	  in	  how	  well	  the	  pre-­‐1992	  

productivity	  history	  predicts	  the	  post-­‐1992	  output.	  Consider,	  for	  instance,	  the	  group	  of	  
mathematicians	  in	  the	  bottom	  quartile	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  correlation	  coefficient	  (i.e.,	  
those	  mathematicians	  whose	  work	  least	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets).	  Based	  solely	  
on	  the	  path	  of	  the	  pre-­‐1992	  age-­‐product	  profile,	  we	  would	  expect	  these	  mathematicians	  to	  
publish	  901	  papers	  between	  1992	  and	  1999.	  In	  fact,	  this	  group	  published	  1,253	  papers.	  
Therefore,	  the	  regression	  model	  under-­‐predicts	  the	  number	  of	  publications	  for	  
mathematicians	  whose	  work	  was	  uncorrelated	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  (and	  the	  gap	  
between	  the	  prediction	  and	  the	  actual	  output	  is	  statistically	  significant).	  However,	  our	  
prediction	  is	  much	  further	  off	  the	  mark	  for	  mathematicians	  who	  are	  in	  the	  top	  quartile	  of	  
the	  distribution	  of	  the	  index	  of	  similarity.	  Their	  pre-­‐1992	  publications	  history	  predicts	  that	  
they	  would	  publish	  5,062	  papers	  annually	  between	  1992	  and	  1999.	  In	  fact,	  they	  only	  
published	  4,015	  papers,	  a	  “loss”	  of	  over	  1,000	  papers.	  This	  difference	  is	  highly	  significant.	  
	  

If	  we	  add	  up	  the	  total	  number	  of	  predicted	  and	  actual	  papers	  across	  the	  three	  

groups,	  our	  exercise	  over-­‐predicts	  the	  actual	  output	  by	  about	  600	  papers	  (or	  6.8	  percent),	  a	  
statistically	  significant	  difference.	  However,	  Table	  8	  also	  reports	  that	  Soviet	  émigrés	  
published	  371	  papers	  in	  the	  United	  States	  annually	  between	  1992	  and	  1999.	  Once	  we	  take	  
into	  account	  the	  Soviet	  contribution,	  our	  prediction	  exercise	  closely	  tracks	  what	  actually	  
happened:	  The	  pre-­‐1990	  publication	  history	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  workforce	  would	  
suggest	  a	  total	  of	  9,482	  papers	  published	  annually	  between	  1992	  and	  1999.	  There	  were,	  in	  
fact,	  9,245	  publications,	  and	  this	  small	  difference	  is	  not	  statistically	  significant.	  
An	  alternative	  prediction	  exercise	  would	  use	  the	  data	  available	  over	  the	  entire	  
1978-­‐2008	  period	  to	  re-­‐estimate	  the	  basic	  regression	  model	  in	  equation	  (3).	  We	  can	  then	  

44
use	  this	  regression	  to	  conduct	  a	  counterfactual	  exercise	  that	  predicts	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
for	  each	  mathematician	  in	  each	  year	  between	  1992	  and	  2008	  if	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  had	  never	  
occurred.	  We	  model	  this	  counterfactual	  world	  as	  one	  in	  which	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  would	  
not	  play	  a	  differential	  role	  in	  determining	  the	  mathematician’s	  product	  before	  and	  after	  
1992.50	  
We	  again	  aggregated	  the	  predicted	  and	  actual	  number	  of	  papers	  for	  the	  three	  
groups	  of	  mathematicians,	  and	  these	  aggregate	  predictions	  are	  reported	  in	  the	  middle	  
panel	  of	  Table	  VIII.	  As	  with	  the	  short-­‐run	  exercise,	  we	  tend	  to	  slightly	  under-­‐predict	  the	  
performance	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  who	  did	  not	  overlap	  with	  the	  Soviet	  research	  
agenda.	  In	  contrast,	  we	  tend	  to	  over-­‐predict	  by	  a	  larger	  amount	  (529	  papers),	  the	  output	  of	  
mathematicians	  who	  were	  most	  Soviet-­‐like	  in	  their	  research.	  This	  prediction	  exercise	  
suggests	  that	  there	  should	  have	  been	  a	  total	  of	  7,548	  papers	  published	  annually	  in	  the	  post-­‐
1992	  period.	  In	  fact,	  there	  were	  7,831	  annual	  papers	  after	  we	  include	  the	  Soviet	  
contribution.	  The	  Soviets,	  therefore,	  slightly	  increased	  the	  size	  of	  the	  “mathematics	  pie”	  (by	  
284	  papers	  annually),	  but	  the	  increase	  is	  not	  statistically	  significant.	  
The	  crucial	  lesson	  from	  these	  prediction	  exercises	  is	  that	  the	  total	  product	  of	  the	  
pre-­‐existing	  American	  mathematics	  community	  contracted	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx,	  
and	  that	  the	  Soviet	  contribution	  to	  American	  mathematics	  “filled	  in”	  the	  gap.	  Notably,	  there	  
is	  no	  evidence	  that	  the	  Soviets	  greatly	  increased	  the	  size	  of	  the	  pie.51	  The	  papers	  that	  are	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
50	  Specifically,	  the	  prediction	  uses	  the	  model	  estimated	  in	  equation	  (3)	  and	  sets	  the	  interaction	  of	  the	  post-­‐

1992	  dummy	  variable	  with	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  equal	  to	  zero.	  
51	  We	  also	  checked	  this	  prediction	  by	  considering	  whether	  the	  predicted	  decline	  in	  the	  publication	  of	  “home	  

runs”	  suggested	  by	  Table	  IV	  is	  made	  up	  by	  the	  home	  runs	  produced	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  America.	  That	  
exercise	  also	  suggests	  that	  some,	  and	  possibly	  all,	  of	  the	  lost	  American	  home	  runs	  were	  made	  up	  by	  the	  
Soviets.	  

45
missing	  from	  the	  American	  portfolio	  are	  papers	  that	  would	  have	  been	  written	  by	  the	  most	  
Soviet-­‐like	  Americans,	  but	  never	  were.	  
The	  nature	  of	  the	  academic	  market	  can	  help	  us	  understand	  how	  this	  situation	  may	  
arise.	  First	  of	  all,	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society’s	  Annual	  Surveys	  report	  surprisingly	  
small	  changes	  from	  year	  to	  year	  in	  the	  total	  number	  of	  mathematicians	  working	  in	  U.S.	  
research	  institutions	  during	  our	  sample	  period.52	  With	  the	  total	  number	  of	  research	  jobs	  
unresponsive	  to	  the	  opportunities	  created	  by	  the	  Soviet	  influx,	  the	  entry	  of	  experienced	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  had	  particularly	  adverse	  effects	  on	  untenured	  and/or	  marginal	  
mathematics	  faculty.	  As	  we	  have	  shown,	  some	  of	  those	  faculty	  moved	  to	  lower-­‐ranked	  
institutions	  and	  some	  of	  them	  moved	  out	  of	  the	  academic	  market	  altogether.	  Regardless	  of	  
their	  final	  placement,	  many	  of	  these	  mathematicians	  found	  it	  increasingly	  difficult	  to	  do	  the	  
type	  of	  research	  that	  leads	  to	  publishable	  output,	  either	  because	  of	  an	  increased	  teaching	  
load,	  fewer	  networking	  possibilities,	  or	  because	  the	  responsibilities	  of	  a	  job	  as	  a	  “quant”	  in	  
Wall	  Street	  limits	  the	  kind	  of	  effort	  required	  to	  develop	  publishable	  material.	  
Although	  we	  do	  not	  find	  any	  convincing	  evidence	  that	  there	  was	  a	  substantial	  
increase	  in	  the	  aggregate	  output	  of	  either	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  workforce	  or	  of	  that	  
community	  combined	  with	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés,	  it	  is	  still	  possible	  that	  the	  “quality”	  of	  
American	  mathematics	  improved	  in	  a	  broader	  sense.	  Put	  simply,	  if	  journal	  editors	  
maximize	  the	  visibility	  of	  their	  journals,	  then	  the	  quality	  of	  papers	  published	  in	  the	  United	  
States	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés	  must	  have	  been	  at	  least	  as	  high	  as	  that	  of	  papers	  they	  replaced.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
52	  For	  instance,	  between	  the	  1990-­‐91	  and	  1994-­‐95	  academic	  years,	  the	  total	  employment	  of	  doctoral	  full-­‐time	  

faculty	  in	  mathematics	  departments	  of	  Ph.D.-­‐granting	  institutions	  increased	  from	  6,008	  to	  6,147.	  The	  number	  
of	  such	  faculty	  at	  the	  82	  institutions	  with	  a	  Conference	  Board	  of	  Associated	  Research	  Councils	  Rank	  of	  I	  or	  II	  
(i.e.,	  those	  institutions	  that	  produce	  the	  bulk	  of	  the	  best	  research)	  actually	  decreased	  from	  3,740	  to	  3,613.	  It	  is	  
also	  interesting	  that	  during	  this	  time	  period	  total	  employment	  in	  statistics	  departments	  also	  declined	  slightly,	  
from	  1,123	  to	  1,099.	  	  

46
We	  examine	  this	  implication	  by	  predicting	  the	  aggregate	  number	  of	  citations	  that	  
American	  mathematicians	  should	  have	  produced	  after	  1992,	  and	  determining	  if	  any	  drop	  in	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  is	  more	  than	  made	  up	  by	  citations	  to	  papers	  written	  by	  Soviet	  
émigrés	  after	  their	  arrival	  in	  the	  United	  States.53	  As	  the	  bottom	  panel	  in	  Table	  VIII	  
demonstrates,	  there	  was	  a	  sizable	  drop	  in	  the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  produced	  by	  
American	  mathematicians,	  but	  the	  increased	  number	  of	  citations	  produced	  by	  the	  Soviet	  
émigrés	  more	  than	  compensated	  for	  the	  drop—although	  the	  net	  increase	  is	  not	  
significant.54	  In	  sum,	  the	  evidence	  allows	  for	  a	  plausible	  (though	  weak)	  case	  that	  the	  
American	  mathematics	  market	  succeeded	  in	  replacing	  some	  proofs	  that	  would	  otherwise	  
have	  been	  proven	  with	  a	  somewhat	  larger	  number	  of	  slightly	  more	  interesting	  theorems.	  
But	  it	  is	  problematic	  to	  conclude	  that	  there	  was	  a	  (small)	  net	  benefit	  to	  American	  
mathematics	  because	  the	  counterfactual	  is	  difficult	  to	  observe.	  In	  mathematics	  (unlike	  in	  
much	  of,	  say,	  economics),	  a	  result—i.e.,	  a	  proof—that	  is	  true	  is	  true	  for	  all	  time.	  This	  
suggests	  that	  there	  is	  an	  opportunity	  cost	  to	  slightly	  less	  interesting	  proofs	  never	  being	  
published	  in	  order	  to	  make	  way	  for	  slightly	  more	  interesting	  ones;	  the	  less	  interesting	  
proof	  could	  have	  been	  a	  foundation	  for	  a	  more	  important	  proof	  in	  the	  future.	  A	  complete	  
evaluation	  of	  costs	  and	  benefits,	  therefore,	  would	  need	  to	  compare	  the	  long-­‐run	  value	  of	  
the	  proofs	  that	  were,	  in	  fact,	  proven	  by	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  with	  the	  proofs	  that	  would	  have	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
53	  The	  prediction	  exercise	  uses	  the	  AMS	  counts	  of	  citations	  since	  the	  ISI	  severely	  undercounts	  citations	  by	  

Soviet	  mathematicians.	  

54	  It	  may	  also	  be	  the	  case	  that	  mathematical	  work	  is	  now	  more	  often	  cited	  outside	  mathematics.	  For	  example,	  

experimental	  physicists	  may	  be	  citing	  and	  using	  newly	  available	  Soviet	  work	  on	  quantum	  theory	  in	  their	  own	  
research.	  It	  is	  certainly	  the	  case	  that	  American	  papers	  outside	  mathematics	  cite	  mathematical	  papers.	  There	  
were	  256	  thousand	  such	  citations	  in	  1978,	  and	  this	  number	  rose	  to	  1.8	  million	  by	  2007.	  However,	  citations	  to	  
Soviet	  mathematical	  research	  are	  quite	  rare	  throughout	  the	  entire	  period.	  These	  citations	  accounted	  for	  
three-­‐hundredths	  of	  one	  percent	  of	  the	  total	  in	  1978	  and	  seven-­‐hundredths	  of	  one	  percent	  in	  2007.	  It	  seems	  
implausible;	  therefore,	  that	  Soviet	  mathematical	  research	  could	  have	  formed	  the	  basis	  for	  large	  
improvements	  in	  American	  non-­‐mathematical	  fields.	  

47
been	  proven	  by	  the	  displaced	  American	  mathematicians,	  many	  of	  whom	  were	  relatively	  
young	  and	  perhaps	  at	  their	  peak	  mathematical	  efficiency.	  
	  
VI. International Differences
	  

The	  evidence	  reported	  in	  the	  previous	  sections	  documents	  that	  American	  

mathematicians	  whose	  research	  agenda	  most	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  suffered	  a	  
loss	  in	  productivity	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  The	  regressions,	  however,	  do	  not	  
directly	  link	  the	  decline	  in	  productivity	  to	  the	  physical	  presence	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  the	  
United	  States.	  
As	  in	  studies	  of	  the	  labor	  market	  impact	  of	  immigration,	  it	  can	  plausibly	  be	  argued	  
that	  some,	  if	  not	  all,	  of	  the	  impact	  would	  have	  been	  observed	  because	  of	  the	  increased	  
“globalization”	  of	  the	  mathematics	  marketplace	  after	  1992,	  regardless	  of	  how	  many	  
émigrés	  the	  United	  States	  actually	  admitted.	  After	  all,	  the	  most	  highly	  substitutable	  
American	  mathematicians	  could	  have	  become	  less	  productive	  simply	  because	  the	  Soviets	  
(regardless	  of	  where	  they	  are	  located)	  were	  now	  free	  to	  compete	  for	  journal	  space,	  
financial	  grants,	  and	  other	  types	  of	  academic	  recognition.	  
In	  an	  important	  sense,	  a	  mathematician	  in	  any	  country	  outside	  the	  former	  Soviet	  
Union	  is	  competing	  with	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  in	  two	  distinct	  markets:	  The	  first	  is	  a	  market	  
defined	  along	  geographic	  lines,	  such	  as	  the	  national	  job	  market,	  where	  the	  presence	  of	  the	  
émigrés	  may	  reduce	  labor	  market	  opportunities	  (Borjas	  2003).	  The	  second	  is	  a	  market	  
defined	  in	  the	  realm	  of	  ideas,	  where	  the	  mathematician	  is	  now	  competing	  with	  Soviets	  
(both	  the	  émigrés	  and	  the	  ones	  left	  behind)	  who	  are	  doing	  the	  same	  type	  of	  research	  and	  

48
who	  will	  be	  competing	  for	  journal	  space	  and	  for	  the	  rewards	  that	  come	  with	  increased	  
academic	  recognition.55	  
Our	  data	  can	  shed	  light	  on	  the	  relative	  importance	  of	  competition	  in	  “bodies”	  versus	  
“ideas”.	  In	  particular,	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  led	  to	  a	  moderately	  sized	  diaspora	  of	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  to	  many	  countries,	  not	  just	  the	  United	  States.	  To	  provide	  a	  precise	  
definition	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematics	  workforce	  in	  each	  country,	  we	  restrict	  the	  
analysis	  to	  the	  years	  between	  1984	  and	  2008.	  	  A	  mathematician	  is	  allocated	  to	  a	  specific	  
country	  if	  at	  least	  half	  the	  papers	  published	  between	  1984	  and	  1989	  used	  an	  affiliation	  in	  
that	  country.	  Table	  IX	  lists	  the	  26	  countries	  that	  had	  a	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematical	  
community	  of	  at	  least	  500	  active	  mathematicians	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  
The	  top	  10	  countries	  in	  this	  list	  have	  at	  least	  2,000	  active	  mathematicians,	  and	  account	  for	  
72.2	  percent	  of	  all	  papers	  written	  (outside	  the	  Soviet	  Union)	  between	  1984	  and	  1989,	  and	  
these	  papers	  received	  79.8	  percent	  of	  all	  citations.	  The	  26	  countries	  in	  Table	  IX	  account	  for	  
89.3	  percent	  of	  all	  papers	  written,	  and	  those	  papers	  received	  93.2	  percent	  of	  all	  citations.	  
We	  estimate	  that	  there	  are	  1,051	  mathematicians	  who	  published	  predominantly	  in	  
the	  Soviet	  Union	  between	  1978	  and	  1989	  or	  who	  received	  their	  doctoral	  degree	  from	  a	  
Soviet	  institution	  between	  1960	  and	  1989,	  yet	  whose	  modal	  affiliation	  in	  the	  post-­‐1992	  
period	  was	  outside	  the	  bloc	  of	  countries	  formerly	  known	  as	  the	  USSR.	  Of	  these	  Soviet	  
mathematicians,	  336	  (or	  32.0	  percent)	  ended	  up	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  Other	  countries,	  such	  
as	  Israel	  or	  Germany,	  also	  received	  large	  numbers	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  (122	  in	  Israel	  and	  66	  in	  
Germany).	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  however,	  other	  countries	  with	  a	  thriving	  mathematical	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
55	  Kaiser	  (2012)	  presents	  a	  fascinating	  analysis	  of	  how	  journals	  respond	  to	  changes	  in	  the	  number	  of	  

knowledge	  producers	  in	  the	  market	  for	  ideas.	  

49
community	  were	  barely	  affected	  by	  the	  migration:	  China	  did	  not	  receive	  any	  Soviet	  
émigrés,	  Japan	  received	  7,	  and	  India	  8.	  
Table	  IX	  also	  reports	  the	  “immigrant	  share,”	  defined	  as	  the	  ratio	  (in	  percent)	  of	  the	  
number	  of	  émigrés	  to	  the	  number	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians.	  Not	  surprisingly,	  there	  is	  
a	  great	  deal	  of	  variation	  in	  the	  relative	  size	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  across	  the	  26	  countries,	  
ranging	  from	  a	  maximum	  of	  12.0	  percent	  in	  Israel,	  to	  5.1	  percent	  in	  Sweden,	  1.9	  percent	  in	  
Australia,	  and	  a	  minimum	  of	  0.0	  percent	  in	  China.	  
There	  are,	  of	  course,	  quality	  differences	  across	  both	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians	  
in	  different	  countries	  and	  across	  the	  émigrés	  who	  chose	  to	  settle	  in	  different	  countries.	  A	  
conceptually	  better	  measure	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  would	  adjust	  for	  these	  quality	  differences.	  
We	  calculated	  the	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  due	  to	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  in	  
each	  country.	  We	  define	  the	  quality-­‐adjusted	  immigrant	  share	  as	  the	  ratio	  (in	  percent)	  of	  
the	  1984-­‐1989	  (AMS)	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  émigrés	  who	  eventually	  moved	  to	  country	  i	  
to	  the	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  that	  country	  over	  the	  same	  period.	  It	  is	  
notable	  that	  although	  the	  quality-­‐adjusted	  measure	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  differs	  
substantially	  from	  the	  traditional	  immigrant	  share,	  it	  is	  below	  3	  percent	  for	  almost	  all	  the	  
countries.	  The	  two	  outliers	  are	  Israel	  and	  Sweden,	  where	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  increased	  the	  
effective	  supply	  of	  mathematicians	  by	  10.3	  and	  16.6	  percent,	  respectively.	  
	  

We	  estimated	  the	  basic	  regression	  model	  first	  presented	  in	  equation	  (3)	  separately	  

for	  each	  of	  the	  26	  different	  countries.	  The	  generic	  regression	  model	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(7)	  
	  

	  

yit(c)	  =	  φi	  +	  φt	  +	  Xi(t)	  γc	  	  +	  θc	  (T	  ×	  Indexi)	  +	  εi(t),	  

50
where	  yij(c)	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  by	  mathematician	  i,	  in	  year	  t,	  in	  country	  c.	  We	  
estimated	  equation	  (7)	  using	  each	  of	  the	  three	  alternative	  overlap	  indices.	  
	  

The	  first	  column	  of	  Table	  IX	  reports	  the	  estimate	  of	  the	  coefficient	  θc	  (from	  the	  

specification	  that	  uses	  the	  index	  of	  similarity).	  There	  is	  a	  lot	  of	  dispersion	  in	  the	  estimated	  
coefficient:	  -­‐1.45	  (0.13)	  in	  the	  United	  States;	  -­‐0.53	  (0.34)	  in	  Poland;	  0.85	  (0.53)	  in	  China;	  
and	  -­‐0.80	  (0.66)	  in	  Israel.	  To	  illustrate	  the	  cross-­‐country	  variation	  in	  the	  measured	  impact	  
of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  Figure	  IXa	  shows	  the	  scatter	  diagram	  relating	  the	  
estimate	  of	  θc	  to	  the	  quality-­‐adjusted	  immigrant	  share	  for	  the	  10	  countries	  with	  the	  largest	  
mathematical	  communities.56	  Interestingly,	  the	  figure	  reveals	  a	  strong	  negative	  correlation	  
between	  the	  coefficient	  θc	  for	  a	  particular	  country	  and	  the	  quality-­‐adjusted	  immigrant	  
share	  in	  that	  country,	  at	  least	  within	  the	  group	  of	  the	  10	  largest	  countries.	  
	  

Of	  course,	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  

mathematicians	  in	  any	  given	  country	  depends	  not	  only	  on	  how	  many	  émigrés	  the	  country	  
received,	  but	  also	  on	  how	  closely	  “connected”	  that	  country	  is	  to	  the	  global	  mathematics	  
community.	  Presumably,	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  country	  will	  be	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  
affected	  by	  the	  post-­‐1992	  globalization	  of	  the	  mathematics	  market	  if	  the	  country’s	  
mathematicians	  are	  routinely	  competing	  in	  the	  global	  market	  for	  mathematical	  ideas.	  	  
	  

We	  construct	  an	  index	  to	  measure	  the	  extent	  of	  connectivity	  between	  

mathematicians	  in	  country	  c	  and	  mathematicians	  in	  other	  countries	  (outside	  the	  Soviet	  
Union).	  Mathematicians	  in	  country	  c	  published	  in	  a	  specific	  set	  of	  journals	  in	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  
period.	  If	  all	  of	  the	  journals	  in	  that	  set	  only	  published	  articles	  written	  by	  mathematicians	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
56	  The	  scatter	  for	  all	  26	  countries	  is	  less	  informative	  since	  the	  scaling	  is	  skewed	  by	  the	  fact	  that	  Israel	  and,	  

particularly,	  Sweden	  have	  very	  large	  quality-­‐adjusted	  supply	  shocks.	  

51
from	  country	  c,	  then	  country	  c	  would	  have	  a	  connectivity	  of	  1.0	  with	  itself	  and	  0.0	  with	  all	  
other	  countries.	  But	  if	  these	  journals	  used	  half	  of	  their	  slots	  to	  publish	  articles	  written	  by	  
mathematicians	  from	  country	  c	  and	  the	  other	  half	  to	  publish	  articles	  by	  mathematicians	  
from	  country	  d,	  then	  country	  c	  would	  have	  connectivity	  of	  0.5	  with	  itself	  and	  0.5	  with	  
country	  d.	  
To	  generalize,	  let	   γ c 	  be	  the	  share	  of	  country	  c’s	  papers	  that	  are	  published	  by	  journal	  
	  (	  =	  1,…,L)	  and	  let Ld 	  be	  the	  share	  of	  journal	  ’s	  papers	  that	  are	  from	  country	  d.	  Country	  
c’s	  index	  of	  connectivity	  with	  country	  d	  is	  then	  given	  by	  the	  dot	  product:	  
	  
(8)	  

	  

L

Y = ∑ γ c Ld . 	  
c
d

=1

	  
The	  mathematical	  world	  is	  made	  up	  by	  mathematicians	  living	  in	  C	  different	  countries	  (κ	  =	  
1,...,C).	  We	  can	  then	  define	  country	  c’s	  index	  of	  connectivity	  with	  the	  mathematical	  world	  
as:	  
	  
(9)	  

	  

C

Vc = ∑ π κ Yκc 	  	  
κ=1

	  
where	  πκ	  is	  the	  share	  of	  the	  world’s	  population	  of	  mathematicians	  residing	  in	  country	  κ.

52
We	  calculated	  the	  index	  defined	  in	  equation	  (9)	  for	  each	  country.57	  The	  estimated	  
indices	  are	  reported	  in	  the	  last	  column	  of	  Table	  IX.	  Note	  that	  there	  is	  substantial	  dispersion	  
in	  the	  index	  of	  connectivity:	  It	  is	  relatively	  large	  for	  the	  United	  States	  and	  Canada,	  but	  small	  
for	  such	  countries	  as	  Belgium,	  Poland,	  and	  Romania.	  Figure	  IXb	  illustrates	  the	  relation	  
between	  the	  country-­‐specific	  coefficient	  θc	  and	  the	  index	  of	  connectivity.	  There	  seems	  to	  be	  
a	  negative	  relation	  between	  these	  variables,	  at	  least	  among	  the	  countries	  with	  the	  largest	  
mathematical	  communities.	  	  
	  

We	  wish	  to	  examine	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  the	  productivity	  impact	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  

the	  Soviet	  Union	  on	  competing	  Western	  mathematicians	  (as	  measured	  by	  θc)	  is	  related	  to	  
both	  the	  physical	  shock	  of	  émigrés	  and	  the	  increased	  competition	  in	  the	  global	  market	  for	  
ideas.	  We	  estimated	  a	  second-­‐stage	  regression	  model	  of	  the	  form:	  
	  
(10)	   	  

θc	  =	  α0	  +	  α1	  pc	  +	  α2	  Vc	  +	  uc	  ,	  

	  
where	  pc	  is	  the	  quality-­‐adjusted	  immigrant	  share,	  and	  Vc	  is	  the	  index	  of	  connectivity.	  The	  
regression	  is	  weighted	  by	  the	  inverse	  of	  the	  sampling	  variance	  of	  the	  dependent	  variable.	  	  
	  

We	  estimated	  two	  alternative	  specifications	  of	  equation	  (10)	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  

results	  are	  not	  driven	  by	  outlying	  observations.	  In	  particular,	  we	  estimated	  the	  regression	  
using	  both	  the	  group	  of	  the	  10	  largest	  countries,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  entire	  group	  of	  26	  countries	  
listed	  in	  Table	  IX.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  specification	  used,	  Table	  X	  shows	  that	  international	  
differences	  in	  the	  productivity	  impact	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  are	  strongly	  and	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
57	  The	  data	  used	  to	  calculate	  the	  index	  of	  connectivity	  is	  the	  full	  ISI	  listing	  of	  all	  publications	  in	  mathematics	  

and	  related	  fields	  between	  1978	  and	  1989.	  Note	  that	  these	  ISI	  data	  have	  not	  yet	  been	  matched	  with	  the	  AMS	  
database,	  so	  that	  missing	  papers	  due	  to	  matching	  difficulties	  are	  not	  a	  problem.	  

53
negatively	  related	  to	  both	  geographic	  and	  idea	  competition.	  In	  other	  words,	  the	  adverse	  
effect	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  on	  competing	  mathematicians	  in	  other	  countries	  
was	  larger	  in	  countries	  that	  had	  a	  large	  influx	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  and	  in	  countries	  where	  the	  
mathematicians	  traditionally	  compete	  in	  the	  worldwide	  market	  for	  journal	  space.	  
It	  is	  also	  interesting	  to	  note	  that	  the	  explanatory	  power	  of	  the	  second-­‐stage	  
regressions	  is	  quite	  high;	  the	  R2	  is	  around	  0.8	  in	  the	  regression	  that	  uses	  the	  10	  countries	  
with	  the	  largest	  mathematics	  communities,	  and	  between	  0.2	  to	  0.4	  in	  the	  full	  set	  of	  
countries.	  It	  seems	  that	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  the	  international	  variation	  in	  the	  productivity	  impact	  
of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  can	  be	  explained	  by	  a	  simple	  model	  that	  stresses	  the	  
competition	  introduced	  by	  both	  additional	  bodies	  and	  additional	  theorems.	  
	  
VII. Summary
Knowledge	  production	  is	  a	  central	  ingredient	  in	  any	  discussion	  of	  long-­‐term	  
economic	  growth.	  It	  is	  widely	  recognized	  that	  human	  capital	  spillovers	  play	  a	  fundamental	  
role	  in	  the	  knowledge	  production	  function:	  the	  knowledge	  produced	  by	  one	  researcher	  is	  
both	  an	  output	  and	  an	  input	  into	  another	  researcher’s	  production	  function.	  Not	  
surprisingly,	  there	  is	  a	  consensus	  among	  policy	  makers	  that	  increases	  in	  the	  supply	  of	  a	  
highly	  skilled	  workforce	  will	  increase	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce,	  and	  
lead	  to	  a	  substantial	  increase	  in	  national	  wealth.	  
This	  paper	  examines	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  influx	  of	  renowned	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
into	  the	  American	  (and	  global)	  mathematics	  community	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  
Union.	  In	  the	  period	  between	  the	  establishment	  and	  fall	  of	  communism,	  Soviet	  mathematics	  
developed	  in	  an	  insular	  fashion	  and	  along	  different	  specializations	  than	  American	  

54
mathematics.	  After	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  over	  1,000	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
(nearly	  a	  tenth	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce)	  migrated	  to	  other	  countries,	  with	  about	  30	  
percent	  settling	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  As	  a	  result,	  some	  fields	  in	  the	  American	  mathematics	  
community	  experienced	  a	  flood	  of	  new	  mathematicians,	  theorems,	  and	  ideas,	  while	  other	  
fields	  received	  few	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  and	  gained	  few	  potential	  insights.	  	  
We	  constructed	  a	  data	  set	  that	  contains	  information	  on	  the	  authorship,	  subject,	  and	  
affiliation	  of	  all	  papers	  published	  in	  mathematics	  over	  the	  past	  70	  years.	  These	  data	  allow	  
us	  to	  document	  the	  location,	  affiliation,	  and	  complete	  publication	  and	  citation	  records	  of	  
mathematicians	  who	  were	  active	  in	  either	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  or	  the	  United	  States	  for	  the	  past	  
few	  decades.	  
Our	  empirical	  analysis	  unambiguously	  documents	  that	  the	  typical	  American	  
mathematician	  whose	  research	  agenda	  most	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  suffered	  a	  
reduction	  in	  productivity	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  Based	  solely	  on	  the	  pre-­‐
1992	  age-­‐output	  profile	  of	  American	  mathematicians,	  we	  find	  that	  the	  actual	  post-­‐1992	  
output	  of	  mathematicians	  whose	  work	  most	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  and	  hence	  
could	  have	  benefited	  more	  from	  the	  influx	  of	  Soviet	  ideas	  is	  far	  below	  what	  would	  have	  
been	  expected.	  The	  data	  also	  reveal	  that	  these	  American	  mathematicians	  became	  much	  
more	  likely	  to	  switch	  institutions;	  that	  the	  switch	  entailed	  a	  move	  to	  a	  lower	  quality	  
institution;	  that	  many	  of	  these	  American	  mathematicians	  ceased	  publishing	  relatively	  early	  
in	  their	  career;	  and	  that	  they	  became	  much	  less	  likely	  to	  publish	  a	  “home	  run”	  after	  the	  
arrival	  of	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés.	  Although	  total	  output	  declined	  for	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  group	  of	  
American	  mathematicians,	  the	  gap	  was	  “filled	  in”	  by	  the	  contribution	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés.	  

55
There	  is	  no	  evidence,	  however,	  that	  there	  was	  a	  substantial	  increase	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
American	  mathematics	  pie	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  	  
We	  also	  examined	  how	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union—and	  the	  subsequent	  
diaspora	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  across	  many	  countries—differentially	  affected	  the	  
productivity	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians	  in	  different	  countries.	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  both	  
competition	  in	  the	  local	  job	  market	  (generated	  by	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
mathematicians	  competing	  for	  a	  relatively	  fixed	  number	  of	  research	  jobs)	  and	  competition	  
in	  the	  international	  journals	  market	  (generated	  by	  the	  fact	  that	  many	  mathematicians	  
compete	  for	  space	  in	  the	  same	  limited	  set	  of	  journals	  regardless	  of	  where	  they	  reside)	  help	  
to	  determine	  the	  productivity	  impact	  of	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  The	  productivity	  
of	  the	  mathematicians	  whose	  pre-­‐1990	  work	  most	  overlapped	  with	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  
declined	  most	  when	  the	  country	  received	  a	  relatively	  large	  number	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  and	  
when	  that	  country	  was	  strongly	  interconnected	  in	  the	  journals	  market	  with	  other	  
countries.	  
Our	  empirical	  evidence	  does	  not	  support	  the	  conjecture	  that	  the	  Soviet	  influx	  
generated	  substantial	  positive	  externalities	  for	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematics	  workforce.	  
We	  do	  not	  believe	  this	  finding	  arises	  because	  American	  mathematicians	  did	  not	  gain	  new	  
ideas	  from	  the	  Soviet	  influx.	  Rather,	  we	  interpret	  the	  evidence	  as	  suggesting	  that	  there	  may	  
be	  surprisingly	  resilient	  constraints	  that	  can	  counteract	  these	  gains.	  We	  have	  shown	  that	  
some	  of	  these	  constraints	  exist	  in	  the	  job	  market	  and	  some	  of	  the	  constraints	  exist	  in	  the	  
market	  for	  theorems.	  
There	  may	  even	  be	  additional	  constraints	  that	  are	  more	  fundamental	  in	  knowledge	  
production.	  New	  research	  can	  only	  be	  assimilated	  into	  the	  existing	  body	  of	  knowledge	  if	  

56
prominent	  researchers	  at	  the	  frontier	  of	  a	  field	  allocate	  their	  limited	  time	  and	  effort	  to	  do	  
so.	  As	  a	  result,	  even	  in	  a	  world	  with	  nonrival	  ideas,	  scarcity	  of	  resources	  and	  diminishing	  
marginal	  productivity	  may	  come	  into	  play.	  
	  
HARVARD	  UNIVERSITY	  AND	  NATIONAL	  BUREAU	  OF	  ECONOMIC	  RESEARCH	  
UNIVERSITY	  OF	  NOTRE	  DAME	  
	  
	  

57
Supplementary Data Appendix

	  
	  
Our	  analysis	  uses	  data	  drawn	  from	  three	  distinct	  databases:	  the	  universe	  of	  
publications	  in	  mathematics	  as	  archived	  by	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society	  (AMS)	  
Mathematical	  Reviews,	  the	  Thomson	  Reuters’	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  archive,	  and	  the	  
Mathematical	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP)	  data	  that	  links	  new	  doctoral	  degrees	  granted	  in	  
mathematics	  to	  their	  doctoral	  advisors.	  
	  
1.	  AMS	  Mathematical	  Reviews	  
AMS	  Mathematical	  Reviews	  records	  the	  titles,	  publication	  sources,	  author	  names,	  
references,	  and	  citations	  of	  over	  2	  million	  articles	  from	  2,764	  different	  journals	  and	  
publication	  sources	  worldwide.	  The	  AMS	  team	  (located	  in	  Ann	  Arbor,	  MI)	  painstakingly	  
assigns	  the	  correct	  set	  of	  articles	  to	  each	  person	  (even	  in	  difficult	  cases	  such	  as	  identical	  
names),	  tagging	  each	  author	  with	  a	  unique	  author	  identifier.	  The	  editors	  of	  Mathematical	  
Reviews	  also	  record	  subject	  classification	  codes	  for	  each	  paper	  in	  its	  database:	  64	  subfields	  
defined	  according	  to	  the	  2-­‐digit	  2010	  Mathematics	  Subject	  Classification	  (MSC2010),	  104	  
subfields	  (3-­‐digit	  MSC),	  or	  610	  subfields	  (5-­‐digit	  MSC).	  We	  use	  the	  2-­‐digit	  coding	  
throughout.	  Beginning	  in	  the	  early	  1980s,	  the	  archival	  record	  of	  each	  published	  paper	  
provides	  information	  not	  only	  on	  the	  author	  and	  the	  field	  of	  the	  paper,	  but	  also	  on	  the	  
author’s	  affiliation	  at	  the	  time	  the	  paper	  was	  published.	  This	  institutional	  information,	  
however,	  is	  relatively	  complete	  only	  for	  papers	  published	  since	  1984.	  
The	  AMS	  provided	  us	  with	  a	  spreadsheet	  containing	  the	  publication	  history	  of	  all	  
mathematicians	  since	  1939.	  A	  row	  in	  this	  spreadsheet	  defines	  a	  particular	  permutation	  of	  
author	  (i),	  field	  (j),	  and	  year	  (t).	  For	  each	  (i,	  j,	  t)	  row	  we	  have	  information	  on:	  the	  number	  of	  
papers	  published,	  the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  those	  papers	  as	  of	  2011;	  the	  
institutional	  affiliation(s)	  associated	  with	  the	  papers	  in	  that	  row;	  and	  the	  (country)	  location	  
of	  the	  affiliation(s).	  
Although	  the	  count	  of	  published	  papers	  in	  these	  data	  is	  complete,	  the	  citation	  
information	  is	  not.	  In	  particular,	  the	  AMS	  database	  only	  reports	  the	  citations	  that	  a	  paper	  
has	  received	  after	  2000	  (regardless	  of	  when	  the	  paper	  was	  published).	  In	  addition,	  the	  
citation	  count	  is	  based	  on	  references	  made	  to	  a	  paper	  in	  a	  limited	  list	  of	  journals	  (chosen	  by	  
the	  AMS).	  
	  
2.	  Thomson	  Reuters’	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  	  
The	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  records	  the	  titles,	  publication	  source,	  author	  names,	  
references,	  and	  citations	  of	  millions	  of	  articles	  from	  thousands	  of	  journals	  worldwide.	  For	  
many	  articles	  (especially	  after	  1978),	  the	  database	  records	  research	  addresses	  and	  reprint	  
addresses	  for	  each	  author,	  as	  well	  as	  abstracts,	  keywords,	  and	  funding	  information.	  
Most	  important,	  the	  database	  contains	  complete	  citation	  information	  for	  each	  article	  
in	  a	  primary	  set	  of	  7,621	  journals,	  selected	  to	  include	  all	  of	  the	  most	  important	  journals	  in	  
each	  field.	  Articles	  in	  marginal	  journals	  also	  appear	  in	  the	  database	  if	  they	  either	  cite	  an	  
article	  in	  the	  primary	  database	  or	  are	  cited	  by	  such	  an	  article.	  Thus,	  the	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  
citation	  database	  only	  misses	  articles	  that	  are	  not	  in	  important	  journals,	  are	  not	  cited	  by	  
any	  articles	  in	  important	  journals,	  and	  do	  not	  themselves	  even	  cite	  any	  articles	  in	  
important	  journals.	  This	  means	  the	  citation-­‐adjusted	  weight	  of	  any	  missed	  articles	  must	  be	  

58
very	  small,	  especially	  since	  ISI	  adds	  important	  journals	  to	  its	  main	  database	  by	  subfields,	  so	  
even	  marginal	  subfields	  likely	  have	  the	  main	  field	  journals	  represented.	  
We	  purchased	  the	  records	  of	  all	  1,179,787	  articles	  in	  the	  primary	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  
database	  between	  1970	  and	  2009	  for	  the	  following	  categories:	  Mathematics,	  Applied	  
Mathematics,	  Interdisciplinary	  Applications	  of	  Mathematics,	  Mathematical	  Physics,	  and	  
Statistics	  &	  Probability.	  We	  also	  purchased	  the	  records	  of	  all	  1,921,587	  articles	  referenced	  
by	  these	  main	  articles,	  and	  the	  2,368,123	  papers	  that	  cite	  these	  main	  articles.	  Not	  counting	  
overlaps	  in	  these	  three	  categories,	  this	  amounted	  to	  3,586,834	  articles	  in	  Mathematics	  and	  
related	  fields.	  For	  the	  reasons	  mentioned	  earlier,	  our	  ISI	  database	  is	  a	  relatively	  complete	  
record	  of	  all	  citations	  in	  mathematics	  and	  related	  fields	  from	  1970	  until	  2009.	  
We	  obtained	  special	  permission	  from	  the	  AMS	  to	  merge	  our	  ISI	  papers	  by	  title,	  
source,	  and	  author	  with	  the	  AMS	  database.	  The	  AMS	  set	  up	  their	  own	  merging	  site	  on	  a	  
mirror	  in	  Germany,	  and	  we	  developed	  software	  to	  repeatedly	  query	  this	  mirror	  with	  
papers	  from	  the	  ISI	  Web	  of	  Science	  database.	  We	  obtained	  882,088	  matches	  out	  of	  the	  
1,753,148	  journal	  articles	  in	  the	  AMS	  database,	  or	  just	  slightly	  over	  a	  50	  percent	  match	  
rate.	  The	  merging	  allows	  us	  to	  allocate	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  to	  a	  paper	  in	  the	  ISI	  
database	  to	  the	  matched	  paper	  in	  the	  AMS	  database.	  In	  addition,	  the	  match	  also	  allows	  us	  to	  
obtain	  the	  location	  and	  institutional	  information	  for	  additional	  papers.	  In	  particular,	  the	  
AMS	  database	  reports	  location	  information	  on	  a	  systematic	  basis	  beginning	  in	  1984,	  while	  
the	  ISI	  database	  provides	  the	  same	  information	  roughly	  since	  1978.	  
	  
3.	  Mathematics	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP)	  
For	  doctoral	  degrees	  awarded	  in	  mathematics	  (since	  the	  14th	  century),	  the	  MGP	  
database	  reports	  the	  name	  of	  the	  degree	  recipient,	  the	  name	  of	  the	  doctoral	  advisor,	  the	  
year	  in	  which	  the	  degree	  was	  completed,	  and	  the	  name	  of	  the	  institution	  granting	  the	  
degree.	  In	  addition	  to	  these	  data,	  the	  MGP	  also	  provided	  us	  with	  each	  advisor’s	  and	  
student’s	  AMS	  unique	  author	  identifier.	  The	  identifier	  allows	  us	  to	  merge	  MGP	  database	  
with	  the	  AMS/ISI	  databases,	  and	  obtain	  all	  the	  available	  information	  on	  the	  publication	  and	  
citation	  records	  of	  both	  students	  and	  advisors.	  The	  unique	  AMS	  identifiers	  are	  available	  for	  
about	  65	  percent	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  since	  1960.	  
	  
4.	  Construction	  of	  the	  sample	  of	  predominantly	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
We	  focus	  on	  a	  sample	  of	  mathematicians	  whose	  first	  published	  paper	  occurred	  on	  or	  
after	  1940,	  who	  have	  fewer	  than	  60	  years	  of	  “experience”	  (defined	  as	  current	  year	  minus	  
the	  year	  of	  first	  publication),	  and	  who	  were	  mathematically	  active	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  Union	  (defined	  as	  having	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1970	  and	  1989).	  
The	  database	  provided	  to	  us	  by	  the	  AMS	  reports	  the	  mathematician’s	  institutional	  
affiliation	  and	  location	  for	  any	  year	  that	  the	  mathematician	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper.	  
We	  used	  the	  AMS	  data	  to	  identify	  the	  number	  of	  times	  that	  the	  reported	  institutional	  
affiliation	  prior	  to	  1989	  was	  located	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  The	  AMS	  database,	  however,	  only	  
began	  to	  systematically	  collect	  the	  information	  on	  the	  affiliation	  associated	  with	  any	  given	  
publication	  around	  1984.	  We	  supplement	  the	  AMS	  data	  by	  using	  both	  the	  ISI	  and	  the	  MGP	  
data	  to	  define	  the	  sample	  of	  predominantly	  American	  mathematicians.	  As	  noted	  above,	  the	  
ISI	  data	  contains	  affiliation	  and	  location	  information	  for	  many	  other	  published	  papers	  
between	  1978	  and	  1983.	  We	  include	  this	  location	  information	  in	  the	  time	  series	  data	  for	  
any	  given	  mathematician	  if	  the	  equivalent	  data	  are	  not	  available	  in	  the	  AMS.	  

59
The	  affiliation/location	  information	  are	  sometimes	  missing	  in	  both	  the	  AMS	  and	  ISI	  
databases	  (even	  though	  the	  author	  has	  published	  a	  paper	  in	  a	  particular	  year).	  In	  defining	  
the	  relative	  number	  of	  times	  that	  an	  author	  uses	  an	  American	  affiliation,	  we	  only	  include	  
years	  in	  which	  the	  location	  information	  is	  available.	  
Finally,	  the	  MGP	  database	  reports	  the	  institution	  where	  the	  mathematician	  received	  
the	  doctoral	  degree.	  A	  mathematician	  is	  then	  classified	  as	  “predominantly	  American”	  if	  the	  
AMS/ISI	  location	  data	  indicate	  that	  more	  than	  half	  of	  the	  affiliations	  of	  publication	  prior	  to	  
1989	  were	  located	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  If	  the	  pooled	  AMS/ISI	  data	  do	  not	  provide	  any	  
information	  on	  the	  location	  of	  the	  mathematician	  prior	  to	  1989,	  we	  assume	  that	  a	  
mathematician	  who	  received	  a	  doctoral	  degree	  in	  the	  United	  States	  between	  1950	  and	  
1977	  is	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  institution	  and	  he,	  too,	  is	  classified	  as	  predominantly	  
American.	  
	  
5.	  Construction	  of	  other	  samples	  of	  mathematicians	  
	  
The	  construction	  of	  the	  sample	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  and	  Soviet	  émigrés	  is	  
analogous	  to	  that	  of	  predominantly	  American	  mathematicians.	  To	  the	  extent	  possible,	  we	  
use	  the	  AMS	  data	  to	  determine	  the	  location	  of	  a	  mathematician	  prior	  to	  1989,	  supplement	  
these	  data	  with	  location	  information	  from	  the	  ISI	  database	  for	  the	  1978-­‐1983	  period,	  and	  
further	  supplement	  the	  data	  with	  information	  on	  the	  institution	  from	  which	  the	  
mathematician	  received	  the	  doctoral	  degree.	  The	  universe	  of	  active	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
as	  of	  1989	  is	  defined	  as	  the	  sample	  of	  persons	  who:	  (a)	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  
between	  1970	  and	  1989;	  and	  (b)	  published	  at	  least	  half	  of	  the	  pre-­‐1989	  papers	  using	  a	  
Soviet	  affiliation,	  or,	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  any	  location	  information	  from	  the	  AMS/ISI	  data,	  
received	  his	  or	  her	  doctoral	  degree	  from	  a	  Soviet	  institution	  after	  1950.	  	  
To	  determine	  the	  “émigré”	  status	  of	  a	  Soviet	  mathematician,	  we	  must	  observe	  the	  
mathematician	  publishing	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1992	  and	  2008.	  A	  Soviet	  
mathematician	  is	  an	  émigré	  if	  the	  modal	  affiliation	  of	  publication	  between	  1992	  and	  2008	  
is	  located	  outside	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  is	  a	  valid	  
country	  code	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  it	  provides	  an	  actual	  location	  for	  an	  institution.	  The	  country	  
of	  destination	  for	  the	  Soviet	  émigré	  is	  defined	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  modal	  affiliation	  used	  by	  the	  
mathematician	  between	  1992	  and	  2008.	  
	  
Finally,	  the	  study	  of	  international	  differences	  defines	  a	  sample	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  
mathematicians	  for	  each	  of	  26	  countries.	  We	  use	  the	  affiliation	  data	  available	  in	  the	  AMS	  
beginning	  in	  1984	  to	  classify	  the	  mathematicians	  into	  the	  various	  countries.	  An	  active	  pre-­‐
existing	  mathematician	  in	  country	  c	  is	  someone	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  
1984	  and	  1989,	  and	  whose	  modal	  affiliation	  in	  that	  period	  was	  located	  in	  that	  country.	  
	  
6.	  Construction	  of	  the	  number	  of	  “home	  runs”	  
	  
To	  estimate	  the	  number	  of	  home	  runs	  published	  by	  each	  American	  mathematician	  
in	  each	  year,	  we	  first	  calculate	  the	  total	  number	  of	  worldwide	  lifetime	  citations	  received	  by	  
each	  article	  in	  the	  ISI	  database	  that	  has	  been	  successfully	  matched	  to	  the	  AMS	  database.	  
Note	  that	  these	  lifetime	  citations	  are	  complete	  for	  those	  articles	  that	  were	  published	  in	  the	  
base	  set	  of	  journals	  fully	  covered	  by	  ISI;	  for	  articles	  that	  cite	  these	  journals	  and	  are	  cited	  by	  
these	  journals,	  the	  lifetime	  citations	  only	  include	  citations	  made	  by	  articles	  in	  the	  base	  set	  
of	  journals.	  We	  then	  used	  these	  data	  to	  calculate	  the	  90th	  percentile,	  95th	  percentile,	  and	  
99th	  percentile	  thresholds	  of	  the	  lifetime	  citations	  distribution	  for	  papers	  published	  in	  each	  

60
year.	  We	  use	  the	  matched	  AMS/ISI	  database	  to	  count	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  that	  a	  
particular	  mathematician	  published	  each	  year	  that	  exceed	  these	  threshold	  percentiles.	  	  

61
References	  

	  
Abramitzky,	  Ran,	  and	  Isabelle	  Sin.	  “Book	  Translations	  as	  Idea	  Flows:	  The	  Effects	  of	  the	  
Collapse	  of	  Communism	  on	  the	  Diffusion	  of	  Knowledge,”	  Stanford	  University	  Working	  
Paper,	  2011.	  
American	  Mathematical	  Society,	  “Academic	  Recruitment	  and	  Hiring	  Report,”	  AMS	  Notices,	  
various	  issues.	  
Azoulay,	  Pierre,	  Joshua	  S.	  Graff	  Zivin,	  and	  Jialan	  Wang.	  “Superstar	  Extinction,”	  Quarterly	  
Journal	  of	  Economics,	  125	  (2010),	  549-­‐589.	  
Borjas,	  George	  J.	  “The	  Labor	  Demand	  Curve	  Is	  Downward	  Sloping:	  Reexamining	  the	  Impact	  of	  
Immigration	  on	  the	  Labor	  Market,”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  118	  (2003),	  1335-­‐
1374.	  
Foray,	  Dominique.	  Economics	  of	  Knowledge	  (Cambridge:	  MIT	  Press,	  2004).	  
Furman,	  Jeff,	  Margaret	  Kyle,	  Iain	  Cockburn,	  and	  Rebecca	  Henderson.	  “Knowledge	  Spillovers,	  
Geographic	  Location	  and	  the	  Productivity	  of	  Pharmaceutical	  Research,”	  Annales	  
d'Economie	  et	  de	  Statistique,	  79/80	  (2005),	  167-­‐190.	  
Ganley,	  Gladys	  D.	  “Unglued	  Empire:	  The	  Soviet	  Experience	  with	  Communications	  
Technologies,”	  (New	  York:	  Praeger,	  1996).	  
Ganguli,	  Ina.	  “Saving	  Soviet	  Science:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Grants	  When	  Government	  R&D	  Funding	  
Disappears,”	  unpublished	  manuscript,	  Harvard	  University,	  2010.	  
Graham,	  Loren,	  and	  Jean-­‐Michel	  Kantor.	  Naming	  Infinity:	  A	  True	  Story	  of	  Religious	  Mysticism	  
and	  Mathematical	  Creativity	  (Cambridge:	  Harvard	  University	  Press,	  2009).	  
Howe,	  Marvine.	  “For	  Émigré	  Scientists,	  Job	  Hunting	  is	  Difficult,”	  The	  New	  York	  Times,	  August	  
12,	  1990.	  

62
Hunt,	  Jennifer,	  and	  Marjolaine	  Gauthier-­‐Loiselle.	  "How	  Much	  Does	  Immigration	  Boost	  
Innovation?"	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics,	  2	  (2010),	  31–56.	  
International	  Monetary	  Fund	  et	  al,	  A	  Study	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Economy,	  Volume	  3	  (Washington,	  DC:	  
IMF,	  1991).	  
Jones,	  Charles	  I.	  “Growth	  and	  Ideas,”	  Handbook	  of	  Economic	  Growth,	  1	  (2005),	  1063-­‐1111.	  
Jones,	  Charles	  I.,	  and	  Paul	  M.	  Romer.	  “The	  New	  Kaldor	  Facts:	  Ideas,	  Institutions,	  Population,	  
and	  Human	  Capital,”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics,	  2	  (2010),	  January	  
2010.	  
Kaiser,	  David.	  “Booms,	  Busts,	  and	  the	  World	  of	  Ideas:	  Enrollment	  Pressures	  and	  the	  Challenge	  
of	  Specialization,”	  Osiris,	  forthcoming	  2012.	  
Kolata,	  Gina.	  “Soviet	  Scientists	  Flock	  to	  U.S.,	  Acting	  as	  Tonic	  for	  Colleges,”	  The	  New	  York	  Times,	  
May	  8,	  1990.	  
Laqueur,	  Walter.	  The	  Dream	  That	  Failed:	  Reflections	  on	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  (New	  York:	  Oxford	  
University	  Press,	  1996).	  
Lefschetz,	  Solomon,	  “Topology,”	  in	  Summary	  Report	  of	  the	  Panel	  on	  Soviet	  Mathematics,	  Joseph	  
P.	  LaSalle,	  ed.	  (Baltimore:	  Research	  Institute	  for	  Advanced	  Study,	  1961).	  
Lucas,	  Robert	  E.	  “On	  the	  Mechanics	  of	  Economic	  Development,”	  Journal	  of	  Monetary	  
Economics,	  22	  (1988),	  3-­‐42.	  
Lucas,	  Robert	  E.	  “Ideas	  and	  Growth,”	  Economica,	  76	  (2009),	  1-­‐19.	  
McClure,	  Donald.	  “AMS	  Task	  Force	  on	  Employment	  Report	  to	  the	  Mathematical	  Community	  
Part	  I:	  Academic	  Hiring	  Survey,	  1991-­‐1992.”	  AMS	  Notices,	  39	  (1992),	  754-­‐758.	  

63
O’Connor,	  J.J.,	  and	  E.F.	  Robertson,	  “Biography	  of	  Nikolai	  Nikolaevich	  Luzin,”	  Mac	  Tutor	  History	  
of	  Mathematics	  Archive,	  University	  of	  St.	  Andrews,	  Scotland,	  1999.	  http://www-­‐
history.mcs.st-­‐and.ac.uk/.	  
O’Dette,	  Ralph	  E.	  “Russian	  Translation,”	  Science,	  125	  (1957),	  579-­‐585.	  
Polyak,	  B.T.	  “History	  of	  Mathematical	  Programming	  in	  the	  USSR:	  Analyzing	  the	  Phenomenon,”	  
Mathematical	  Programming,	  91	  (2002),	  401-­‐416.	  
Romer,	  Paul	  M.	  “Increasing	  returns	  and	  long-­‐run	  growth,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  1986.	  
Romer,	  Paul	  M.	  “Endogenous	  Technological	  Change,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  Vol.	  98,	  No.	  
5,	  Part	  2	  (Oct.,	  1990),	  pp.	  S71-­‐S102.	  
Smithies,	  F.	  “The	  1936	  Luzin	  Affair:	  Review	  of	  Delo	  akademika	  Nikolaya	  Nikolaevicha	  Luzina	  
[The	  Case	  of	  Academician	  Nikolai	  Nikolaevich	  Luzin],”	  Mac	  Tutor	  History	  of	  
Mathematics	  Archive,	  University	  of	  St.	  Andrews,	  Scotland,	  2003.	  http://www-­‐
history.mcs.st-­‐and.ac.uk/.	  
Tybulewicz,	  A.	  “Cover-­‐to-­‐Cover	  Translations	  of	  Soviet	  Technical	  Journals.”	  Aslib	  Proceedings,	  
22	  (1970),	  55-­‐62.	  
U.S.	  National	  Science	  Foundation.	  Federal	  Funds	  for	  Research	  and	  Development:	  Fiscal	  Years	  
1973–2003.	  (Washington:	  Division	  of	  Science	  Resources	  Statistics,	  2004).	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian.	  “Quality	  Matters:	  The	  Expulsion	  of	  Professors	  and	  the	  Consequences	  for	  
Ph.D.	  Student	  Outcomes	  in	  Nazi	  Germany,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  118	  (2010),	  
787-­‐831.	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian.	  “Peer	  Effects	  in	  Science—Evience	  from	  the	  Dismissal	  of	  Scientists	  in	  Nazi	  
Germany,”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies,	  forthcoming	  2012.	  
	  
	  

	  

64
Figure	  I	  
	  
Ratio	  of	  Soviet	  papers	  to	  American	  papers,	  by	  field,	  1984-­‐89	  
	  
Integral#equa/ons#
Ordinary#diﬀeren/al#equa/ons#
Fourier#analysis#
Par/al#diﬀeren/al#equa/ons#
Sequences,#series,#summability#
Poten/al#theory##
Calculus#of#varia/ons#and#op/mal#control;#op/miza/on##
Geophysics##
Mechanics#of#par/cles#and#systems#
Integral#transforms,#opera/onal#calculus##
Func/ons#of#a#complex#variable##
General#algebraic#systems#
Diﬀerence#and#func/onal#equa/ons#
Operator#theory#
Probability#theory#and#stochas/c#processes##
Func/onal#analysis#
Nonassocia/ve#rings#and#algebras#
Mechanics#of#solids#
Op/cs,#electromagne/c#theory##
Classical#thermodynamics,#heat#transfer#
Diﬀeren/al#geometry#
Approxima/ons#and#expansions##
Global#analysis,#analysis#on#manifolds##
$K$Utheory#
Quantum#theory#
Sta/s/cal#mechanics,#structure#of#maQer#
Astronomy#and#astrophysics##
Several#complex#variables#and#analy/c#spaces##
Rela/vity#and#gravita/onal#theory#
Special#func/ons##
Numerical#analysis#
Topological#groups,#Lie#groups##
Fluid#mechanics##
General#topology##
Group#theory#and#generaliza/ons#
Measure#and#integra/on#
Systems#theory;#control#
Category#theory;#homological#algebra#
Algebraic#topology#
Real#func/ons#
General#
Number#theory#
History#and#biography##
Opera/ons#research,#mathema/cal#programming#
Convex#and#discrete#geometry#
Informa/on#and#communica/on,#circuits#
Associa/ve#rings#and#algebras##
Mathema/cal#logic#and#founda/ons#
Algebraic#geometry#
Abstract#harmonic#analysis##
Linear#and#mul/linear#algebra;#matrix#theory#
Order,#laIces,#ordered#algebraic#structures#
Computer#science##
Field#theory#and#polynomials#
Number#Theory#
Biology#and#other#natural#sciences#
Combinatorics#
Geometry##
Manifolds#and#cell#complexes#
Sta/s/cs#
Set#theory#
Commuta/ve#rings#and#algebras#
0.00#

	  

0.20#

0.40#

0.60#

0.80#

1.00#

1.20#

1.40#

1.60#

	  

Notes:	  The	  paper	  counts	  are	  obtained	  directly	  from	  the	  web-­‐based	  AMS	  Mathematical	  Reviews	  database	  
(MathSciNet)	  and	  consist	  of	  all	  papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  Soviet	  or	  American	  
institutions	  between	  1984	  and	  1989.	  

65
Figure	  II	  
	  
Trend	  in	  coauthorship	  rate	  between	  Soviet	  and	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
0.014#
0.012#

Frac%on(

0.010#
0.008#
0.006#
0.004#
0.002#
0.000#
1975#

1980#

1985#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Year(

	  

Notes:	  The	  denominator	  of	  this	  fraction	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  each	  year	  where	  at	  least	  one	  
author	  reports	  an	  American	  affiliation.	  The	  numerator	  is	  the	  number	  of	  such	  papers	  in	  which	  one	  other	  
author	  also	  reports	  a	  Soviet	  affiliation.	  

	  
	  

	  

66
Figure	  III	  
	  
Employment	  trends	  for	  new	  mathematics	  doctorates	  	  
	  granted	  by	  North	  American	  institutions	  
	  
0.35#
0.30#

Frac%on(

0.25#
0.20#

Employment#at#PhD8gran?ng#
ins?tu?ons#in#autumn#post8PhD#

0.15#
0.10#

Unemployment#in#autumn#
post8PhD#

0.05#
0.00#
1975#

1980#

1985#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Year(
	  
Source:	  Data	  compiled	  by	  the	  authors	  from	  American	  Mathematical	  Society	  (various	  issues).	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

67
Figure	  IV.	  Citations	  to	  American	  or	  Soviet	  papers	  by	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
A.	  Citations	  to	  American	  papers	  

	  
0.8"

Frac%on(

0.6"

0.4"

0.2"

0"
1975"

1980"

1985"

1990"

1995"

2000"

2005"

2010"

Year(

	  

B.	  Citations	  to	  Soviet	  papers	  

	  
0.018#
0.015#

Frac%on(

0.012#
0.009#
0.006#
0.003#
0.000#
1975#

1980#

1985#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Year(

	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  numerator	  is	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  in	  American	  papers	  published	  in	  a	  given	  year	  that	  go	  to	  
either	  American	  (panel	  A)	  or	  Soviet	  (panel	  B)	  papers	  published	  during	  the	  entire	  1978-­‐2008	  period.	  The	  
denominator	  is	  the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  made	  by	  American	  papers	  in	  any	  given	  year	  to	  papers	  published	  
with	  a	  valid	  research	  address	  between	  1978	  and	  2008.	  
	  

68
Figure	  V	  
	  
Frequency	  distribution	  of	  output	  for	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
a. Papers	  

	  

Number'of'mathema-cians'

6,000"
5,000"
4,000"
3,000"
2,000"
1,000"
0"
0"

25"

50"

75"

100"

125"

150"

175"

200"

Number'of'papers,'197882008'

	  

	  
b.	  Citations	  (ISI)	  
	  
1,800"

Number'of'mathema-cians'

1,600"
1,400"
1,200"
1,000"
800"
600"
400"
200"
0"
0"

100"

200"

300"

400"

500"

600"

700"

800"

Number'of'cita-ons,'197872008'

	  

	  
Note:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  were	  predominantly	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  institution	  
before	  1990	  and	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1978	  and	  2008.	  The	  maximum	  number	  of	  papers	  
is	  801,	  and	  the	  maximum	  number	  of	  (ISI)	  citations	  is	  31,962.	  

69
Figure	  VI	  
	  
Fraction	  of	  publications	  published	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés,	  by	  type	  of	  field	  
	  
0.12#

Share&of&output&

0.10#

Soviet1style#ﬁelds#

0.08#
0.06#
0.04#
0.02#
0.00#
1980#

U.S.1style#ﬁelds#
1985#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Year&
	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  U.S.-­‐style	  fields	  consist	  of	  the	  bottom	  10	  fields	  in	  Figure	  I	  (those	  with	  the	  highest	  ratios	  of	  pre-­‐
influx	  American	  papers	  to	  pre-­‐influx	  Soviet	  papers),	  while	  the	  Soviet-­‐style	  fields	  consist	  of	  the	  top	  10	  fields	  in	  
Figure	  1	  (those	  with	  the	  lowest	  ratios).	  The	  denominator	  of	  the	  “share	  of	  output”	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  in	  
the	  given	  subfields	  published	  in	  the	  United	  States	  by	  mathematicians	  who	  were	  never	  affiliated	  with	  a	  Soviet	  
institution.	  The	  numerator	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  in	  the	  given	  subfield	  published	  in	  the	  United	  States	  by	  
mathematicians	  who	  were	  active	  before	  1990	  and	  had	  a	  former	  Soviet	  affiliation.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

70
Figure	  VII	  
	  
Impact	  of	  index	  of	  similarity	  on	  output	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
A.	  Annual	  number	  of	  papers	  per	  mathematician	  
1.4#

Number'of'papers'

1.2#
1.0#
0.8#
0.6#
0.4#
0.2#
0.0#
1975#

1980#

1985#

1990#
1995#
2000#
2005#
2010#
Year'
Low/exposure#mathema:cians,#pre/1989#
High/exposure#mathema:cians,#pre/1989#
Low/exposure#mathema:cians,#post/1990#

	  

High/exposure#mathema:cians,#post/1990#

	  
b.	  Annual	  number	  of	  papers	  per	  mathematician,	  removing	  individual	  fixed	  effects	  

	  

Residual)number)of)papers)

0.4%

0.2%

0.0%

!0.2%

!0.4%
1975%

1980%

1985%

1990%
1995%
2000%
2005%
2010%
Year)
Low!exposure%mathema9cians,%pre!1989%
High!exposure%mathema9cians,%pre!1989%
Low!exposure%mathema9cians,%post!1990%

High!exposure%mathema9cians,%post!1990%

	  
	  
	  
Notes:	  The	  low	  exposure	  group	  consists	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  bottom	  quartile	  of	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  
index	  of	  similarity,	  while	  the	  high	  exposure	  group	  consists	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  top	  quartile.	  The	  residual	  
papers	  in	  panel	  B	  are	  calculated	  from	  a	  regression	  that	  contains	  individual	  fixed	  effects	  (demeaning	  the	  data	  
for	  each	  individual).	  

71
Figure	  VIII	  
	  
Survival	  functions	  for	  American	  mathematicians,	  by	  level	  of	  exposure	  
	  

	  

a.	  Low-­‐exposure	  mathematicians	  
	  

	  

	  

b.	  High-­‐exposure	  mathematicians	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
Notes:	  The	  survival	  curve	  is	  calculated	  from	  the	  hazard	  function	  specification	  reported	  in	  row	  1,	  column	  3	  of	  
Table	  4.	  A	  low	  (high)	  exposure	  mathematician	  is	  the	  typical	  mathematician	  in	  the	  bottom	  (top)	  quartile	  of	  the	  
distribution	  of	  the	  index	  of	  similarity.	  

72

	  

Figure	  IX	  
	  
International	  differences	  in	  productivity	  impact	  of	  Soviet	  influx	  
(countries	  with	  more	  than	  2,000	  mathematicians)	  

a.	  Immigrant	  share	  
1$

China$

Produc'vity,impact,

Japan$
0$
Poland$Germany$

Italy$
UK$

:1$

France$

Canada$
India$

USA$

:2$
0$

0.5$

1$

1.5$

2$

2.5$

3$

3.5$

Quality2adjusted,immigrant,share,(%),

	  

	  
b.	  Journal	  connectivity	  

Produc'vity,impact,

1$

China$

Japan$
0$
Germany$
Poland$

Italy$
UK$

:1$

France$
Canada$
India$

USA$

:2$
0.1$

0.11$

0.12$

0.13$

0.14$

0.15$

0.16$

Connec'vity,index,

	  

0.17$

0.18$

0.19$

0.2$

	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  productivity	  impact	  is	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  between	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  and	  the	  
post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable	  from	  a	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  estimated	  separately	  in	  each	  country.	  The	  dependent	  
variable	  in	  the	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  a	  mathematician	  in	  a	  given	  year.	  
The	  quality-­‐adjusted	  immigrant	  share	  is	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  1984-­‐1989	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  émigrés	  who	  
eventually	  moved	  to	  a	  particular	  country	  to	  the	  number	  of	  1984-­‐1989	  citations	  generated	  by	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  
mathematicians	  in	  that	  country.	  The	  index	  of	  connectivity	  is	  defined	  in	  the	  text.	  

	  

73
Table	  I	  
	  
Summary	  statistics	  for	  samples	  of	  American	  and	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Variable:	  
Number	  of	  mathematicians	  
	  
Papers	  published,	  1978-­‐1991	  
Mean	  papers	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  papers	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  papers	  
Papers	  published,	  1992-­‐2008	  
Mean	  papers	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  papers	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  papers	  
	  
Citations,	  AMS,	  1978-­‐1991	  
Mean	  citations	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  citations	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  citations	  
Citations,	  AMS,	  1992-­‐2008	  
Mean	  citations	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  citations	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  citations	  
	  
Citations,	  ISI,	  1978-­‐1991	  
Mean	  citations	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  citations	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  citations	  
Citations,	  ISI,	  1992-­‐2008	  
Mean	  citations	  per	  mathematician	  
Median	  citations	  	  
Maximum	  number	  of	  citations	  
	  
Median	  number	  of	  fields	  
Percent	  first	  published	  after	  1980	  

Group	  of	  mathematicians:	  
	  
	  
Americans	  
29392	  
	  
	  
6.7	  
3.0	  
232.0	  
	  
6.8	  
1.0	  
768.0	  
	  
	  
29.1	  
1.0	  
5550.0	  
	  
33.6	  
0.0	  
3404.0	  
	  
	  
110.2	  
20.0	  
20274.0	  
	  
52.1	  
0.0	  
11688.0	  
	  
2.0	  
45.2	  

Soviet	  
émigrés	  	  
to	  US	  
336	  
	  
	  
17.8	  
13.0	  
104.0	  
	  
27.2	  
21.0	  
128.0	  
	  
	  
74.6	  
10.0	  
1276.0	  
	  
177.4	  
62.0	  
1709.0	  
	  
	  
185.1	  
25.5	  
7232.0	  
	  
209.0	  
88.5	  
3371.0	  
	  
5.5	  
40.5	  

Soviet	  
émigrés	  
elsewhere	  
715	  
	  
	  
14.6	  
10.0	  
152.0	  
	  
28.8	  
22.0	  
317.0	  
	  
	  
32.8	  
6.0	  
1441.0	  
	  
110.3	  
37.0	  
1988.0	  
	  
	  
79.8	  
11.0	  
3040.0	  
	  
156.2	  
60.0	  
4442.0	  
	  
5.0	  
46.7	  

	  
All	  other	  
Soviets	  
11173	  
	  
	  
8.1	  
5.0	  
180.0	  
	  
7.6	  
1.0	  
311.0	  
	  
	  
8.6	  
0.0	  
2928.0	  
	  
13.4	  
0.0	  
1287.0	  
	  
	  
25.3	  
3.0	  
3054.0	  
	  
27.3	  
0.0	  
1258.0	  
	  
2.0	  
48.8	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  “active”	  mathematicians	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1970	  and	  
1989.	  An	  American	  mathematician	  is	  someone	  who	  was	  predominantly	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  
institution	  prior	  to	  1989,	  while	  a	  Soviet	  mathematician	  is	  someone	  who	  was	  predominantly	  affiliated	  with	  a	  
Soviet	  institution	  prior	  to	  1989.	  The	  post-­‐1992	  modal	  affiliation	  of	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  is	  located	  outside	  the	  
geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  USSR.	  
	  

74
Table	  II	  
	  
American	  mathematicians	  with	  the	  largest	  number	  of	  publications,	  1960-­‐89	  
	  
Mathematician:	  
Frank	  Harary	  
Pranab	  Kumar	  Sen	  
Richard	  Ernest	  Bellman	  
Ciprian	  Foias	  
Avner	  Friedman	  
Robert	  E.	  Kalaba	  
Peter	  C.	  Fishburn	  
Bang-­‐Yen	  Chen	  
Barry	  Simon	  
V.	  Lakshmikantham	  

Number	   Correlation	   Index	  of	   Index	  of	  
of	  papers	   coefficient	   intensity	   similarity	  
416	  
-­‐0.039	  
0.101	  
0.096	  
318	  
0.035	  
0.199	  
0.090	  
317	  
0.420	  
0.339	  
0.410	  
299	  
0.295	  
0.414	  
0.291	  
290	  
0.629	  
0.633	  
0.411	  
241	  
0.272	  
0.306	  
0.308	  
232	  
0.157	  
0.302	  
0.126	  
220	  
0.009	  
0.164	  
0.070	  
217	  
0.537	  
0.580	  
0.325	  
215	  
0.467	  
0.633	  
0.310	  
	  

Notes:	  The	  correlation	  coefficient,	  index	  of	  intensity,	  and	  index	  of	  similarity	  measure	  each	  mathematician’s	  
research	  overlap	  with	  the	  Soviet	  research	  program	  for	  papers	  published	  between	  1960	  and	  1989.	  See	  the	  text	  
for	  the	  definition	  of	  the	  various	  indices.	  

	  

75
	  Table	  III	  
	  
Impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  on	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
	  
	  
Specification/regressor	  
A.	  Author-­‐year	  regressions	  
Correlation	  coefficient	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  
B.	  Author-­‐year	  regressions,	  short	  run	  
Correlation	  coefficient	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  
C.	  Author-­‐year	  regressions,	  long	  run	  
Correlation	  coefficient	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  
D.	  Author-­‐field-­‐year	  regressions	  
Correlation	  coefficient	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  

	  

Mathematicians	  
predominantly	  in	  U.S.	  
Number	  of	  
papers	  
	  

Number	  of	  
citations	  
	  

-­‐0.133	  
(0.036)	  
-­‐0.047	  
(0.028)	  
-­‐1.523	  
(0.113)	  
	  
-­‐0.102	  
(0.032)	  
-­‐0.045	  
(0.023)	  
-­‐1.056	  
(0.111)	  
	  
-­‐0.122	  
(0.049)	  
-­‐0.019	  
(0.039)	  
-­‐1.930	  
(0.150)	  
	  
-­‐0.0021	  
(0.0006)	  
-­‐0.0007	  
(0.0004)	  
-­‐0.0238	  
(0.0017)	  

Mathematicians	  	  
always	  in	  U.S.	  
Number	  of	  
papers	  
	  

-­‐19.577	  
(1.576)	  
-­‐14.845	  
(1.293)	  
-­‐69.155	  
(4.645)	  
	  
-­‐14.214	  
(1.783)	  
-­‐10.944	  
(1.221)	  
-­‐48.547	  
(4.232)	  
	  
-­‐25.219	  
(2.037)	  
-­‐19.179	  
(1.687)	  
-­‐91.211	  
(5.961)	  
	  
-­‐0.3048	  
(0.0249)	  
-­‐2378	  
(0.0206)	  
-­‐1.0248	  
(0.0732)	  

Number	  of	  
Citations	  
	  

-­‐0.116	  
(0.034)	  
-­‐0.042	  
(0.027)	  
-­‐1.419	  
(0.108)	  
	  
-­‐0.085	  
(0.030)	  
-­‐0.039	  
(0.022)	  
-­‐0.985	  
(0.108)	  
	  
-­‐0.108	  
(0.046)	  
-­‐0.015	  
(0.037)	  
-­‐1.802	  
(0.145)	  
	  
-­‐0.0020	  
(0.0005)	  
-­‐0.0007	  
(0.0004)	  
-­‐0.0240	  
(0.0016)	  

-­‐16.298	  
(1.540)	  
-­‐12.293	  
(1.261)	  
-­‐58.494	  
(4.655)	  
	  
-­‐11.404	  
(1.410)	  
-­‐8.830	  
(1.181)	  
-­‐39.054	  
(4.117)	  
	  
-­‐21.095	  
(2.019)	  
-­‐15.889	  
(1.666)	  
-­‐77.930	  
(6.055)	  
	  
-­‐0.2578	  
(0.0244)	  
-­‐0.2005	  
(0.0202)	  
-­‐0.8696	  
(0.0732)	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  table	  reports	  the	  
coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  between	  the	  overlap	  index	  and	  a	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable.	  Each	  observation	  in	  
panels	  A,	  B,	  and	  C	  represents	  a	  unique	  author-­‐year	  permutation;	  an	  observation	  in	  panel	  D	  represents	  a	  
unique	  author-­‐field-­‐year	  permutation.	  The	  regressions	  use	  the	  entire	  sample	  period	  1978-­‐2008	  in	  Panels	  A	  
and	  D,	  the	  1978-­‐1999	  period	  in	  the	  short-­‐run,	  and	  the	  1978-­‐1991	  and	  2000-­‐2008	  periods	  in	  the	  long	  run.	  The	  
numbers	  of	  papers	  (citations)	  regressions	  in	  the	  predominantly	  American	  sample	  have	  804,180	  (611,916)	  
observations	  in	  Panel	  A;	  540,896	  (413,082)	  observations	  in	  Panel	  B;	  510,260	  (389,836)	  observations	  in	  Panel	  
C;	  and	  51,467,520	  (37,278,675)	  observations	  in	  Panel	  D.	  All	  regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  
experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  quartic	  polynomial),	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  
regressions	  in	  panel	  D	  also	  include	  all	  interactions	  between	  the	  year	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  field	  fixed	  effects.	  	  

76

	  

Table	  IV	  
	  
Impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  on	  number	  of	  “Home	  Runs”	  	  
	  (Conditional	  fixed	  effects	  Poisson	  model)	  

	  
	  
Sample:	  
Correlation	  coefficient	  in:	  
Bottom	  quartile	  
	  
Middle	  50	  percent	  
	  
Top	  quartile	  
	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  in:	  
Bottom	  quartile	  
	  
Middle	  50	  percent	  
	  
Top	  quartile	  
	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  in:	  
Bottom	  quartile	  
	  
Middle	  50	  percent	  
	  
Top	  quartile	  
	  

Number	  of	  papers	  with	  citations	  
above	  xth	  percentile:	  
	  
90th	  	  
	  

	  
95th	  	  
	  

0.058	  
(0.066)	  
0.012	  
(0.032)	  
-­‐0.204	  
(0.032)	  
	  
	  
0.089	  
(0.068)	  
-­‐0.043	  
(0.031)	  
-­‐0.166	  
(0.034)	  
	  
	  
0.331	  
(0.069)	  
0.011	  
(0.037)	  
-­‐0.158	  
(0.029)	  

	  
99th	  	  
	  

-­‐0.055	  
(0.097)	  
0.029	  
(0.044)	  
-­‐0.160	  
(0.043)	  
	  
	  
-­‐0.025	  
(0.101)	  
-­‐0.025	  
(0.042)	  
-­‐0.123	  
(0.045)	  
	  
	  
0.366	  
(0.095)	  
-­‐0.020	  
(0.050)	  
-­‐0.122	  
(0.039)	  

0.211	  
(0.237)	  
0.120	  
(0.090)	  
-­‐0.121	  
(0.087)	  
	  
	  
0.127	  
(0.260)	  
0.112	  
(0.086)	  
-­‐0.115	  
(0.090)	  
	  
	  
0.402	  
(0.198)	  
-­‐0.004	  
(0.106)	  
0.016	  
(0.079)	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

By	  coauthorship	  status	  
(95th	  percentile)	  

Coauthored	  
Did	  not	  
with	  émigré	  	   coauthor	  
	   	  
	  
	   0.005	  
-­‐0.055	  
	   (0.279)	  
(0.103)	  
	   0.058	  
0.021	  
	   (0.144)	  
(0.046)	  
	   0.014	  
-­‐0.215	  
	   (0.091)	  
(0.049)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   0.022	  
-­‐0.025	  
	   (0.286)	  
(0.108)	  
	   0.040	  
-­‐0.036	  
	   (0.131)	  
(0.044)	  
	   0.019	  
-­‐0.169	  
	   (0.095)	  
(0.051)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   -­‐0.190	  
0.393	  
	   (0.507)	  
(0.096)	  
	   -­‐0.096	  
-­‐0.024	  
	   (0.162)	  
(0.053)	  
	   0.072	  
-­‐0.180	  
	   (0.085)	  
(0.044)	  

	  
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  reported	  in	  parentheses.	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  predominantly	  American	  
mathematicians.	  An	  observation	  consists	  of	  an	  author-­‐year	  pair	  for	  each	  year	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  The	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  number	  of	  “home	  runs”,	  defined	  as	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  in	  that	  year	  that	  
have	  received	  a	  sufficiently	  high	  number	  of	  citations	  to	  place	  them	  in	  the	  top	  90th,	  95th,	  or	  99th	  percentile	  for	  
papers	  published	  that	  year.	  The	  regression	  includes	  a	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable,	  years	  of	  experience	  
(introduced	  as	  a	  quartic),	  and	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  coefficient	  reported	  in	  the	  table	  is	  that	  of	  the	  post-­‐
1992	  dummy	  variable.	  Each	  coefficient	  in	  the	  table	  is	  drawn	  from	  a	  separate	  Poisson	  regression	  estimated	  in	  
the	  respective	  sample.	  The	  regressions	  in	  the	  last	  two	  columns	  re-­‐estimate	  the	  95th	  percentile	  regressions	  
separately	  on	  the	  samples	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  who	  either	  coauthored	  or	  did	  not	  coauthor	  with	  a	  
Soviet	  émigré	  at	  any	  point	  after	  1992.	  The	  number	  of	  observations	  for	  the	  (bottom,	  middle,	  top)	  groups	  are	  
(142,563,	  292,446,	  156,996)	  in	  Panel	  A,	  (136,590,	  303,751,	  151,664)	  in	  Panel	  B,	  and	  (128,617,	  289,149,	  
174,239)	  in	  Panel	  C.	  

77
Table	  V	  
	  
Impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  on	  probability	  of	  “retirement”	  from	  publishing	  
(Cox	  proportional	  hazard	  models)	  
	  
	  

Measure	  of	  overlap	  

	  
Sample	  
	  
All	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians	  	  
	  
	  
Less	  than	  10	  years	  of	  experience	  
	  
	  
10-­‐19	  years	  of	  experience	  
	  
	  
At	  least	  20	  years	  of	  experience	  
	  

Correlation	  
coefficient	  
	  

Index	  of	  
intensity	  
	  

	  0.410	  
(0.090)	  
	  
1.099	  
(0.229)	  
	  
0.166	  
(0.192)	  
	  
0.099	  
(0.181)	  

Index	  of	  
similarity	  
	  

0.230	  
(0.084)	  
	  
0.653	  
(0.176)	  
	  
0.299	  
(0.175)	  
	  
0.101	  
(0.183)	  

5.571	  
(0.298)	  
	  
10.340	  
(0.962)	  
	  
0.232	  
(0.645)	  
	  
1.433	  
(0.491)	  

	  
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  	  The	  sample	  
consists	  of	  predominantly	  American	  mathematicians.	  Each	  observation	  in	  the	  data	  represents	  an	  individual-­‐
year	  of	  experience	  record,	  beginning	  in	  1978	  until	  the	  year	  of	  the	  individual’s	  last	  observed	  publication.	  The	  
regression	  model	  includes	  a	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable,	  the	  mathematician’s	  overlap	  index,	  and	  the	  
interaction	  between	  the	  overlap	  index	  and	  the	  post-­‐1992	  indicator	  (which	  is	  the	  coefficient	  reported	  in	  the	  
table).	  The	  sample	  sizes	  (by	  row)	  are:	  446,720	  observations,	  151,012	  observations,	  143,442	  observations,	  
and	  152,267	  observations.	  	  

	  

	  

78
Table	  VI	  
	  
Impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  on	  institutional	  mobility	  	  
	  
	  

Measure	  of	  overlap/Dependent	  variable	  

	  
Correlation	  
	  
coefficient	  
Sample/regressor	  
Moved	   Δ	  Quality	  
A.	  All	  mathematicians	  
	  
	  
Institution	  hired	  émigré	  	  
0.046	  
-­‐2.382	  
	  
(0.013)	  
(.122)	  
Overlap	  index	  
0.172	  
-­‐0.415	  
	  
(0.025)	  
(0.308)	  
	  
	  
	  
B.	  First	  published	  after	  1980	  
	  
Institution	  hired	  émigré	  	  
0.098	  
-­‐2.408	  
	  
(0.020)	  
(.158)	  
Overlap	  index	  
0.216	  
-­‐0.618	  
	  
(0.040)	  
(0.373)	  
	  
	  
	  
C.	  First	  published	  before	  1980	  
	  
Institution	  hired	  émigré	  	  
0.001	  
-­‐2.274	  
	  
(0.015)	  
(.188)	  
Overlap	  index	  
0.100	  
0.225	  
	  
(0.029)	  
(0.538)	  

	  

	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
Moved	  
Δ	  Quality	  
	  
	  
0.046	  
-­‐2.383	  
(0.013)	  
(.122)	  
0.158	  
-­‐0.282	  
(0.022)	  
(0.252)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.098	  
-­‐2.411	  
(0.020)	  
(.158)	  
0.157	  
-­‐0.394	  
(0.031)	  
(0.285)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.001	  
-­‐2.277	  
(0.015)	  
(.189)	  
0.099	  
0.356	  
(0.029)	  
(0.540)	  

	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
Moved	   Δ	  Quality	  
	  
	  
0.047	  
-­‐2.385	  
(0.013)	  
(.122)	  
0.321	  
-­‐1.329	  
(0.066)	  
(.997)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.099	  
-­‐2.407	  
(0.020)	  
(.158)	  
0.676	  
-­‐2.606	  
(0.151)	   (1.499)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.001	  
-­‐2.272	  
(0.015)	  
(.189)	  
0.218	  
-­‐.180	  
(0.069)	   (1.345)	  

Notes:	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses.	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  predominantly	  American	  
mathematicians	  whose	  last	  observed	  affiliation	  before	  1990	  and	  the	  modal	  post-­‐1992	  observation	  were	  both	  
in	  the	  United	  States.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  in	  the	  “moved”	  regressions	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  set	  to	  unity	  if	  
the	  mathematician’s	  last	  observed	  affiliation	  before	  1990	  is	  different	  from	  the	  post-­‐1992	  modal	  affiliation,	  
while	  the	  dependent	  variable	  in	  the	  “change	  in	  quality”	  regressions	  is	  the	  difference	  (among	  movers)	  in	  the	  
log	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  these	  two	  institutions.	  The	  “moved”	  regressions	  have	  13,137	  observations	  
in	  panel	  A,	  6,513	  observations	  in	  panel	  B,	  and	  6,624	  observations	  in	  panel	  C.	  The	  “change	  in	  quality”	  
regressions	  have	  4,029	  observations	  in	  panel	  A,	  3,021	  observations	  in	  panel	  B,	  and	  1,008	  observations	  in	  
panel	  C.	  All	  regressions	  hold	  constant	  the	  log	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  mathematician	  between	  
1978	  and	  1990	  and	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience;	  the	  “moved”	  regressions	  also	  include	  the	  
log	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  pre-­‐1990	  institution.	  	  
	  
	  
	  

79

	  

Table	  VII	  
	  
Impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  on	  productivity	  of	  students	  
(Dependent	  variable	  =	  Student’s	  annual	  number	  of	  papers	  or	  citations)	  

	  
Index/Variable	  
(1)	  
Correlation	  coefficient	   	  
Soviet	  advisor	  
0.225	  
	  
(0.040)	  
Advisor’s	  index	  ×	  T	  
-­‐0.425	  
	  
(0.092)	  
	  
	  
Index	  of	  intensity	  
	  
Soviet	  advisor	  
0.256	  
	  
(0.041)	  
Advisor’s	  index	  ×	  T	  
-­‐0.508	  
	  
(0.095)	  
	  
	  
Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  
Soviet	  advisor	  
0.295	  
	  
(0.041)	  
Advisor’s	  index	  ×	  T	  
-­‐0.408	  
	  
(0.187)	  
	  
	  
Institution	  fixed	  effects	  
No	  
Advisor’s	  fixed	  effects	  
No	  

Papers	  
(2)	  
	  

(3)	  
	  

0.232	  
(0.041)	  
-­‐0.386	  
(0.091)	  
	  
	  
0.265	  
(0.042)	  
-­‐0.465	  
(0.095)	  
	  
	  
0.296	  
(0.042)	  
-­‐0.369	  
(0.182)	  
	  

-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐0.178	  
(0.106)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐0.236	  
(0.106)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐0.129	  
(0.242)	  
	  

Yes	  
No	  

Yes	  
Yes	  

	  
	  
	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   	  
	  
	  

(1)	  
0.557	  
(0.211)	  
-­‐6.936	  
(1.124)	  
	  
	  
1.147	  
(.225)	  
-­‐9.036	  
(1.346)	  
	  
	  
0.875	  
(0.223)	  
-­‐5.529	  
(1.944)	  
No	  
No	  

Citations	  (ISI)	  
(2)	  
	  
	  
0.693	  
(0.223)	  
-­‐6.482	  
(1.127)	  
	  
	  
1.309	  
(.236)	  
-­‐8.495	  
(1.349)	  
	  
	  
0.877	  
(0.235)	  
-­‐5.143	  
(1.976)	  
	  
	  
Yes	  
No	  

(3)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐3.808	  
(1.445)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐5.429	  
(1.576)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐1.302	  
(3.073)	  
Yes	  
Yes	  

	  
Notes:	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  average	  annual	  
number	  of	  papers	  published	  or	  (ISI)	  citations	  received	  between	  the	  time	  the	  student	  obtained	  his	  doctoral	  
degree	  and	  2011.	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  students	  who	  received	  doctoral	  degrees	  from	  American	  institutions	  
between	  1978	  and	  2008,	  and	  whose	  advisor	  was	  either	  a	  predominantly	  American	  pre-­‐existing	  
mathematician	  or	  a	  Soviet	  émigré.	  The	  papers	  regressions	  have	  20,822	  observations,	  and	  the	  citations	  
regressions	  have	  20,743	  observations.	  The	  “Soviet	  Advisor”	  variable	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  set	  to	  unity	  if	  the	  
advisor	  is	  a	  Soviet	  émigré;	  the	  “Advisor	  index”	  variable	  is	  the	  American’s	  advisor’s	  value	  of	  the	  overlap	  index	  
(set	  to	  zero	  if	  the	  advisor	  is	  a	  Soviet	  émigré);	  and	  T	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  set	  to	  unity	  for	  the	  post-­‐1992	  period.	  
All	  regressions	  include	  the	  value	  of	  the	  advisor’s	  overlap	  index	  (if	  American)	  and	  a	  set	  of	  fixed	  effects	  
indicating	  the	  calendar	  year	  of	  receiving	  the	  doctoral	  degree.	  	  
	  
	  

80
Table	  VIII	  
	  
Predicting	  annual	  output	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  
	  
	  
	  
Number	  of	  papers,	  
short-­‐run	  prediction	  
Actual	  
	  
Predicted	  
	  
Difference	  
	  
	  
Long-­‐run	  prediction:	  
Number	  of	  papers	  
Actual	  
	  
Predicted	  
	  
Difference	  
	  
Number	  of	  citations	  
Actual	  
	  
Predicted	  
	  
Difference	  
	  

American	  mathematicians	  
	  
Most	  
Middle	  50	  
Least	  
All	  
Soviet	  
	  
exposed	  
percent	  
exposed	   Americans	   émigrés	  
Total	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
4015.0	  
3606.6	  
1253.3	  
8874.9	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
5062.0	  
3519.2	  
900.6	  
9481.8	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐1047.0	  
87.4	  
352.7	  
-­‐606.9	  
(121.2)	  
(126.5)	  
(72.1)	   (189.5)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
3350.6	  
3013.1	  
1035.3	  
7398.9	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
3879.9	  
2910.3	  
757.4	  
7547.5	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐529.3	  
102.8	  
277.9	  
-­‐148.6	  
(76.3)	  
(119.0)	  
(88.0)	   (166.5)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
19355.5	  
13372.8	  
3939.2	   36667.5	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
22088.5	  
13191.7	  
2914.3	   38194.5	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐2733.0	  
181.1	  
1024.9	  
-­‐1527.0	  
(1083.2)	   (1693.2)	   (1239.9)	   (2361.7)	  

	  

370.6	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
432.5	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
2944.8	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  

9245.5	  
	  
9481.8	  
	  
-­‐235.9	  
(189.5)	  
	  
	  
	  
7831.4	  
	  
7547.5	  
	  
283.9	  
(166.5)	  
	  
39612.3	  
	  
38194.5	  
	  
1417.8	  
(2361.7)	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  standard	  errors	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  give	  the	  forecast	  error	  of	  the	  predicted	  number	  of	  papers	  
or	  citations,	  adjusted	  for	  the	  correlation	  across	  observations	  for	  the	  same	  individual.	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  
persons	  who	  were	  always	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  institution	  prior	  to	  1990.	  The	  predicted	  number	  of	  
papers	  in	  the	  short	  run	  is	  based	  on	  a	  regression	  estimated	  separately	  in	  each	  of	  the	  three	  samples	  of	  
mathematicians	  ranked	  according	  to	  their	  placement	  in	  the	  distribution	  of	  the	  coefficient	  of	  similarity.	  The	  
unit	  of	  observation	  is	  an	  author-­‐year;	  the	  regression	  uses	  observations	  between	  1970	  and	  1991;	  and	  the	  
regressors	  include	  a	  quartic	  in	  experience	  and	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  We	  then	  use	  this	  regression	  to	  predict	  
each	  mathematician’s	  output	  in	  each	  year	  between	  1992	  and	  1999,	  and	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  sum	  of	  these	  
predictions.	  The	  long-­‐run	  predictions	  are	  based	  on	  the	  specification	  estimated	  over	  the	  entire	  sample	  period	  
1978-­‐2008	  and	  reported	  in	  Panel	  A	  of	  Table	  3	  (using	  the	  index	  of	  similarity).	  This	  regression	  is	  then	  used	  to	  
predict	  a	  mathematician’s	  output	  in	  each	  year	  between	  1992	  and	  2008	  assuming	  that	  no	  Soviet	  influx	  
occurred	  (so	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  plays	  no	  differential	  role	  before	  and	  after	  1992).	  The	  predictions	  are	  then	  
summed	  within	  each	  of	  the	  three	  exposure	  groups.	  The	  counts	  of	  papers	  and	  citations	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  only	  
include	  the	  post-­‐1992	  papers	  published	  and	  citations	  received	  while	  the	  émigré	  was	  affiliated	  an	  American	  
institution.	  

81
Table	  IX	  
	  
The	  diaspora	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  
	  

Country:	  
United	  States	  
China	  
Germany	  
Japan	  
France	  
United	  Kingdom	  
Italy	  
Canada	  
India	  
Poland	  
Spain	  
Netherlands	  
Australia	  
Israel	  
Romania	  
Czechoslovakia	  
Brazil	  
Bulgaria	  
Switzerland	  
Belgium	  
Hungary	  
Taiwan	  
Yugoslavia	  
Greece	  
Austria	  
Sweden	  

First-­‐stage	  
coefficient	  
-­‐1.452**	  
0.853*	  
-­‐0.462	  
0.190	  
-­‐0.915**	  
-­‐0.982**	  
-­‐0.577**	  
-­‐1.040**	  
-­‐1.299**	  
-­‐0.530*	  
1.902**	  
-­‐1.748**	  
0.459	  
-­‐0.803	  
-­‐0.177	  
-­‐0.435	  
0.132	  
-­‐0.108	  
-­‐0.942*	  
-­‐1.401*	  
-­‐2.954**	  
-­‐2.043	  
-­‐0.612	  
-­‐1.540	  
-­‐0.387	  
-­‐1.497**	  

Number	  of	  
Number	  of	  
mathematicians	   émigrés	  
22449	  
336	  
6563	  
0	  
6223	  
66	  
4848	  
7	  
4114	  
72	  
3804	  
78	  
3364	  
12	  
3155	  
36	  
3098	  
8	  
2310	  
33	  
1614	  
7	  
1374	  
7	  
1178	  
22	  
1014	  
122	  
1012	  
3	  
933	  
4	  
822	  
16	  
808	  
4	  
661	  
4	  
655	  
19	  
654	  
5	  
590	  
1	  
543	  
2	  
539	  
1	  
520	  
5	  
513	  
26	  

Immigrant	  
share	  (%)	  
1.50	  
0.00	  
1.06	  
0.14	  
1.75	  
2.05	  
0.36	  
1.14	  
0.26	  
1.43	  
0.43	  
0.51	  
1.87	  
12.03	  
0.30	  
0.43	  
1.95	  
0.50	  
0.61	  
2.90	  
0.76	  
0.17	  
0.37	  
0.19	  
0.96	  
5.07	  

Quality-­‐
adjusted	   Connectivity	  
share	  (%)	  
index	  
2.65	  
0.199	  
0.00	  
0.129	  
1.68	  
0.131	  
0.47	  
0.126	  
3.05	  
0.129	  
2.82	  
0.126	  
2.19	  
0.123	  
1.27	  
0.166	  
0.48	  
0.129	  
1.56	  
0.106	  
0.20	  
0.133	  
0.06	  
0.143	  
1.64	  
0.139	  
10.33	  
0.169	  
0.39	  
0.103	  
3.09	  
0.094	  
1.52	  
0.145	  
0.16	  
0.133	  
0.10	  
0.130	  
1.22	  
0.091	  
0.53	  
0.117	  
1.71	  
0.155	  
0.00	  
0.119	  
0.25	  
0.141	  
0.23	  
0.128	  
16.61	  
0.135	  

	  
Notes:	  An	  “active”	  mathematician	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  in	  the	  period	  between	  1984	  and	  1989.	  The	  
active	  mathematicians	  are	  then	  allocated	  to	  the	  country	  of	  their	  modal	  affiliation	  during	  this	  period.	  The	  first-­‐
stage	  coefficient	  is	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  between	  the	  index	  of	  similarity	  and	  the	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  
variable,	  estimated	  separately	  in	  each	  country;	  an	  “*”	  indicates	  that	  the	  coefficient	  is	  between	  1.50	  and	  1.99	  
times	  the	  size	  of	  the	  clustered	  standard	  error,	  and	  “**”	  indicates	  that	  it	  is	  at	  least	  twice	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
standard	  error.	  The	  destination	  country	  for	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés	  is	  the	  modal	  country	  of	  affiliation	  between	  
1992	  and	  2008.	  The	  “immigrant	  share”	  is	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  number	  of	  émigrés	  in	  each	  country	  to	  the	  number	  of	  
active	  mathematicians.	  The	  “quality-­‐adjusted	  share”	  is	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  
the	  émigrés	  in	  1984-­‐1989	  to	  the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  produced	  by	  the	  country’s	  mathematicians	  in	  that	  
period.	  The	  connectivity	  index	  measures	  the	  publication	  link	  between	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  country	  
and	  other	  countries;	  see	  the	  text	  for	  a	  definition.	  
	  

82
Table	  X	  
	  
Determinants	  of	  international	  differences	  in	  impact	  of	  Soviet	  supply	  shock	  
	  

	  
Sample/Variables:	  
Ten	  largest	  countries:	  
Immigrant	  share	  (%)	  	  
	  
Connectivity	  index	  
	  
	  
R2	  
	  
All	  26	  countries:	  
Immigrant	  share	  (%)	  	  
	  
Connectivity	  index	  
	  
	  
R2	  

Measure	  of	  overlap	  index	  used	  in	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  
Correlation	  coefficient	   Index	  of	  intensity	   Index	  of	  similarity	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐0.076	  
-­‐0.041	  
-­‐0.382	  
(0.029)	  
(0.022)	  
(0.130)	  
-­‐2.431	  
-­‐1.812	  
-­‐8.259	  
(0.633)	  
(0.537)	  
(10.188)	  
	  
	  
	  
0.806	  
0.744	  
0.814	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐0.013	  
-­‐0.009	  
-­‐0.062	  
(0.007)	  
(0.005)	  
(0.037)	  
-­‐2.609	  
-­‐1.620	  
-­‐10.553	  
(0.603)	  
(0.517)	  
(10.672)	  
	  
	  
	  
0.230	  
0.167	  
0.374	  

	  
Notes:	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  
between	  the	  index	  of	  overlap	  and	  the	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable	  from	  the	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  estimated	  
separately	  in	  each	  country.	  The	  regressions	  in	  the	  top	  panel	  use	  the	  sample	  of	  10	  countries	  where	  there	  are	  at	  
least	  2,000	  active	  mathematicians,	  while	  the	  regressions	  in	  the	  bottom	  panel	  use	  the	  26	  countries	  with	  at	  
least	  500	  active	  mathematicians.	  The	  regressions	  are	  weighted	  by	  the	  inverse	  of	  the	  sampling	  variance	  of	  the	  
dependent	  variable.	  The	  “immigrant	  share”	  is	  quality-­‐adjusted,	  giving	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  number	  of	  AMS	  
citations	  received	  in	  1984-­‐1989	  by	  Soviet	  émigrés	  who	  eventually	  moved	  to	  country	  i	  to	  the	  total	  number	  of	  
citations	  received	  by	  mathematicians	  in	  country	  i	  over	  the	  same	  period.	  The	  connectivity	  index	  measures	  the	  
publication	  link	  between	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  country	  and	  other	  countries;	  see	  the	  text	  for	  a	  
definition.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

