                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS AND CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY:
                          EVIDENCE FROM TAX REBATES

                                             Tal Gross
                                       Matthew J. Notowidigdo
                                            Jialan Wang

                                        Working Paper 17807
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17807


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We are grateful to Ben Keys, Erik Hurst, Neale Mahoney, Nick Souleles, and seminar participants
at the University of California at Los Angeles, University of Illinois, University of Miami, the Olin
School of Business, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and Columbia University for useful
feedback. We thank Ido Moskovich and Anthony Vashevko for helpful research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Tal Gross, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Constraints and Consumer Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates
Tal Gross, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 17807
February 2012
JEL No. H31,K35

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the extent to which legal fees prevent liquidity-constrained households from declaring
bankruptcy. To do so, it studies how the 2001 and 2008 tax rebates affected consumer bankruptcy
filings. We exploit the randomized timing of the rebate checks and estimate that the rebates caused
a significant, short-run increase in consumer bankruptcies in both years, with larger effects in 2008
when the rebates were more generous and more widely distributed. Using hand-collected data from
individual bankruptcy petitions, we document that the rebates caused an increase in the average liabilities
and the liabilities-to-income ratios of filers.


Tal Gross                                            Jialan Wang
Department of Health Policy and Management           Olin Business School
Mailman School of Public Health                      Washington University in St. Louis
Columbia University                                  208 Simon Hall
600 West 168th Street, Sixth Floor                   1 Olympian Way
New York, NY 10032                                   St. Louis, MO, 63130
tg2370@columbia.edu                                  jialan.wang@wustl.edu

Matthew J. Notowidigdo
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
noto@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction

Over the past three decades, consumer bankruptcy rates have tripled. As of the late 1990s,

nearly ten percent of American households had declared bankruptcy (Stavins, 2000). By

2001, over 1.3 percent of American households were filing for bankruptcy every year (Zywicki,

2005). In an attempt to slow the increase in bankruptcies, the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse

Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (bapcpa) raised the barriers consumers must

overcome in order to file for bankruptcy. The bapcpa requires that bankruptcy filers undergo

mandatory credit counseling at their own expense. Furthermore, the act raises the legal and

administrative fees that households have to pay in order to declare bankruptcy. These

“entrance fees” for bankruptcy increased from an average of $921 before the reform to an

average of $1,477 after the reform (GAO, 2008).

    While there exists a divisive debate over these entrance fees (Zywicki, 2005; Mann and

Porter, 2010), little empirical research has estimated their effect. Unfortunately, economic

theory provides little guidance, as the welfare consequences of entrance fees are theoretically

ambiguous. On the one hand, fees may act as an ordeal mechanism, screening out households

who stand to gain little from filing for bankruptcy (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982). On the

other hand, the fees may prevent liquidity-constrained households from filing for bankruptcy,

and those households may benefit the most from filing.

    In this paper, we find that a significant fraction of bankruptcy filers are liquidity-

constrained. We exploit plausibly exogenous variation in liquidity induced by the 2001

and 2008 income tax rebates. The rebates were distributed over 9–10 week periods in both

years, and households received between $300 and $1,200. The date households received their

rebates was effectively randomly assigned, which allows us to estimate the causal effect of a

one-time, anticipated increase in liquidity on consumer bankruptcy filings.

    We find that the tax rebates led to a significant, short-run increase in consumer bankrupt-


                                               1
cies. Total bankruptcies increased by roughly 2 percent after the 2001 rebates, and by 7

percent after the 2008 rebates. The increase in bankruptcies was driven entirely by Chapter

7 filings, which is consistent with the existence of liquidity constraints.1 We find no evidence

that the increase consisted of bankruptcies that otherwise would not have occurred. Instead,

the rebates likely allowed households to file months earlier than they otherwise would have

been able to file.

       To interpret our results, we develop a simple model of consumer bankruptcy.2 The

model is motivated by the relevant case law regarding how bankruptcy courts treated the

tax rebates. It suggests that tax rebates should only affect the filing decisions of liquidity-

constrained households. The model allows us to translate our empirical results into an

estimate of the share of households who wish to file for bankruptcy but cannot afford to

do so. Combining our model and empirical results, we conclude that 2.0 percent of filers in

2001 and 3.8 percent of filers in 2008 could not afford to file for bankruptcy in the absence

of the tax rebates. The larger share in 2008 is likely driven by the larger average value of

the rebate checks as well as the more severe recession, which likely increased the number of

liquidity-constrained households.

       Our results are consistent with existing evidence on household liquidity constraints (Lusardi

et al., 2011), and our paper contributes to the literature on the economic effects of these con-

straints. Liquidity constraints have been shown to cause excessive consumption responses

to transitory changes in income (Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003; Souleles, 1999; Hsieh, 2003;

Stephens, 2003), limit investment in human capital (Dynarski, 2003), and amplify the behav-

ioral response to unemployment insurance benefits (Chetty, 2008).3 Additionally, liquidity
   1
      Households can file for bankruptcy either under Chapter 7 or Chapter 13. Chapter 7 filers are more
likely to be liquidity-constrained since they have lower incomes and fewer assets. Moreover, the majority
of Chapter 7 legal fees must be paid in advance of filing, while Chapter 13 legal fees can be paid gradually
after filing.
    2
      See Wang and White (2000) for a related model.
    3
      Liquidity constraints also affect sub-prime mortgage defaults in the months following lump-sum property
tax payments (Anderson and Dokko, 2011). By contrast, Hurst and Lusardi (2004) do not find clear evidence



                                                     2
constraints likely play an important role in the optimal design of social insurance programs

(Chetty, 2008; Hansen and İmrohoroğlu, 1992). Since consumer bankruptcy functions—at

least in part—as a social insurance program, our paper is broadly related to the literature

on the role of ordeal mechanisms and entrance fees in the optimal design of social insurance

programs (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982). We discuss below how our estimates shed light

on the welfare consequences of changing the structure of the consumer bankruptcy system.

    Our paper is also part of a growing literature on the economic effects of tax rebates.

Most related papers focus on the effects of the tax rebates on consumption and expenditures

(Johnson et al., 2006; Agarwal et al., 2007; Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003; Bertrand and Morse,

2009), while other studies have estimated the effect of the tax rebates on mortality and

morbidity (Evans and Moore, 2011; Gross and Tobacman, 2011). To our knowledge, no

previous studies have focused on the effect of the tax rebates on take-up of social insurance

programs or consumer bankruptcy.

    The tax rebates were designed to stimulate the economy. Our results therefore shed

light on how the rebates actually stimulated consumption. Previous studies have con-

cluded that households consumed a moderate-to-large share of the rebates (Johnson et al.,

2006; Parker et al., 2010). Our results suggest that many households used the rebates to

file for bankruptcy. Moreover, households may increase consumption by a great deal af-

ter bankruptcy (Filer and Fisher, 2005; Zhu, 2011). Thus our results suggest that—for

some households—the rebates may have increased short-run consumption by more than the

amount of the rebates themselves. In this sense, reducing the barriers to bankruptcy may

be a particularly effective economic stimulus, as the timely discharge of household debt may

increase household consumption substantially (Mian et al., 2011).

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background on

the tax rebates and describes the bankruptcy data that we have compiled. Section 3 outlines
that liquidity constraints restrict entry into entrepreneurship.


                                                       3
a theoretical model that explains how the tax rebates can affect bankruptcy rates. Section 4

demonstrates how the rebates affected the number of bankruptcies. Section 5 describes how

the characteristics of the filers changed after the rebates. Section 6 discusses the alternative

explanations for our findings and their policy implications. Section 7 concludes.



2        Background on the Bankruptcy Data and the Tax Rebates

In order to estimate the impact of the rebates on bankruptcy rates, we have compiled a

unique data set based on the Public Access to Court Electronic Records system.4 Our

sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings in the 72 courts that agreed to grant us

full electronic access to their dockets. Figure 1 presents a map of our sample coverage. We

verified that the data match aggregate counts of bankruptcies reported by the Administrative

Office of the us courts.

        Table 1 compares the characteristics of districts in our sample to those not in our sample.

The sample covers roughly 74 percent of bankruptcies in the United States and 73 percent of

the population. Coverage remains consistent across our sample period, which extends from

1998 to 2008. The districts in the sample have populations with slightly lower income, less

college education, and a lower unemployment rate.

        The tax rebates were disbursed as part of the economic stimulus bills passed by Congress

in 2001 and 2008, and were specifically designed to stimulate the economy during the on-

going recessions.5 The Internal Revenue Service (irs) sent the rebate checks on a schedule

determined by the head-of-household’s social security number (ssn). Table 2 presents the

dates on which checks were sent. We include in our sample all bankruptcies that were filed

at most 30 weeks prior to the date that checks were sent and at most 40 weeks after that
    4
     We are grateful to Tom Chang for providing some of the computer code necessary to parse the electronic
records.
   5
     The rebates were mandated by the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and the
Economic Stimulus Act of 2008.



                                                    4
date.6 In 2001, social security numbers were divided into ten equally-sized groups. Checks

were mailed from the 20th of July through the 21st of September. The payments ranged from

$300–$600.7 In 2008, households could elect to receive their stimulus payments via either

check or direct deposit. As indicated in the third panel of Table 2, there were only three

dates on which direct-deposit transfers were made. Roughly 40 percent of households elected

to receive their rebate checks via direct deposit (Parker et al., 2010). The rebate payments

were higher in 2008 than in 2001, ranging from $300–$600 for single filers to $600–$1200 for

couples.8

        Figure 2 summarizes the bankruptcy rates by two-digit ssn group. Reassuringly, the

figure demonstrates that there is no systematic variation in bankruptcy rates across ssn

groups in the months leading up to the rebates.9



3        Conceptual Framework

This section presents a simple model that describes how an increase in liquidity can affect

bankruptcy rates. The model suggests that liquidity-constrained households are the only

households who change their filing behavior after the rebates. Such households can only file

after receiving the rebates. Thus bankruptcy rates increase after the rebates are distributed,

and the increase is driven by liquidity-constrained households.
    6
     We restrict the sample by time relative to when the checks were sent, so that we have the same number
of observations for each group. The results are similar when we restrict by absolute, calendar time and are
also similar when we extend the sample window.
   7
     Individual tax filers with no dependents could receive up to $300 through the rebate, single parents a
maximum of $500, and married couples jointly filing could receive $600. To receive the full amount, a single
taxpayer had to have earned at least $6,000 in taxable income in 2000 while a married couple jointly filing
had to have earned at least $12,000 in taxable income.
   8
     If a filer’s 2007 tax return indicated over $3,000 in qualifying income, the filer was eligible for at least the
minimum payment based on the following general guidelines: $300 to $600 for individuals, $600 to $1,200
for joint filers, and $300 for each qualifying child.
   9
     An F -test fails to reject the hypothesis that the bankruptcy rates are equal across all groups with a
p-value of 0.726 in 2001 and 0.864 in 2008.




                                                         5
3.1      Model Assumptions

Consider the following three-period model. In period 0, households borrow an exogenous

amount of debt, B. We assume that debt is exogenous because of our empirical setting.

All households eventually receive the rebate within a short window of time, so neither the

amount nor maturity of their debt should depend on the timing of the rebates.

       In period 1, households’ wealth, W ∼ f (w), is realized. In addition, households anticipate

receiving the rebate, with value I, in period 2. Households can decide to file in period 1, in

period 2, or not at all. Households consume all of their wealth net of debt and bankruptcy

costs at the end of period 2.10

       Households file for bankruptcy when it is financially beneficial to do so, even if they have

the ability to repay their debts (Fay et al., 2002). Specifically, households decide whether

and when to file by maximizing consumption in period 2 subject to liquidity constraints.

If a household declares bankruptcy, it pays a fixed filing fee, c, and loses a share 1 − e of

its wealth. The parameter e captures the generosity of the exemptions provided by the

bankruptcy court.11 A larger value of e means that a larger share of the household’s wealth

is exempt and does not need to be turned over to the bankruptcy court during a bankruptcy

filing. Once the household has filed for bankruptcy, it is absolved of its debts.12

       A key assumption of the model involves how the bankruptcy court treats the filers’ tax

rebates. We assume that the tax rebate is treated the same whether the household files

in period 1 or in period 2, and we further assume that the rebate is treated identically
  10
     We assume no consumption takes place in period 1. Including consumption in period 1 would not
qualitatively change our results. It would, however, introduce another mechanism whereby some low-wealth
households that could technically afford to file would choose to file for bankruptcy in period 2 rather than
in period 1 due to the high marginal utility of consumption in period 1.
  11
     In practice, exemptions are governed by both federal and state bankruptcy law. Exemption levels vary
widely by state and have been relatively stable at the state level since the early twentieth century (Mahoney,
2010; Gropp et al., 1997).
  12
     Bankruptcy in this model is a composite of Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy. While in practice
Chapter 13 filers repay their debts based on a three to five year schedule, our framework can capture this
by setting the present value of repayments to 1 − e times wealth net of legal fees.



                                                      6
to the rest of the household’s wealth. This assumption implies that households will not

strategically manipulate their filing date to try to shield their rebate from the courts. The

relevant case law strongly supports this assumption.13 If some households nonetheless choose

to file before receiving their rebates in an attempt to prevent them from becoming part of

the estate, then we would underestimate the percentage of constrained filers. We discuss this

possibility below. But given the assumptions above, consumption is equal to e · (W + I − c)

if a household decides to file for bankruptcy and W + I − B otherwise.


3.2      Bankruptcy Filing Decisions

When deciding whether or not to file for bankruptcy, households face the following constraint.

The filing fee, c, must be paid in advance, so it must be the case that W > c if the household

declares bankruptcy in period 1 and W +I > c if the household declares bankruptcy in period

2. This assumption is particularly relevant for Chapter 7 filings. Court fees of approximately

$300 are paid in advance for both Chapter 7 and 13 filings. Legal fees for Chapter 7 are

almost always paid in advance, while those for Chapter 13 are often paid gradually, through

the filer’s payment plan.

       Household filing behavior depends on the level of realized wealth in period 1. We can

divide households into several groups. Some households have sufficient wealth that they do

not file for bankruptcy at all. Such wealthy households are those for which


                                                                 B − e · c − I · (1 − e)
                  W + I − B ≥ e · (W + I − c) ⇒           W ≥                            .               (1)
                                                                          1−e


       Other households file for bankruptcy because it is financially advantageous to do so. The

wealth of such households must satisfy two constraints. First, they are able to pay the filing
  13
    Several court cases (in re Rivera, in re Lambert, in re Howell, and in re Alguires) have established that
for bankruptcies filed after the passage of the two stimulus acts, the tax rebates become property of the
bankruptcy estate and are subject to normal rules governing other cash assets.



                                                     7
fee in period 1 and in period 2, thus W > c. Second, it is in their economic interest to file

for bankruptcy. Such households then have wealth that satisfies:


                                                B − e · c − I · (1 − e)
                                    c<W <                               .                                  (2)
                                                         1−e


These households are indifferent between filing in period 1 versus filing in period 2. Consis-

tent with the characteristics of a typical bankruptcy, we assume that B is large relative to c

so that there exist households within this range of wealth. Because B is large relative to c

and the bankruptcy court treats the rebate as identical to other assets, a household that can

pay its debts by definition can also afford the filing fee. Therefore, there is no incentive for

an unconstrained household to manipulate its filing date. Any change in filing rates between

period 1 and period 2 will not be due to such households.

       Finally, there exist households whose wealth is less than their debts but that do not have

enough wealth to file in period 1.14 Such liquidity-constrained households cannot borrow to

pay the filing fee in period 1, and so must wait until period 2 to file for bankruptcy. By

definition, then, such households have wealth that satisfies:


                                              c − I < W < c.                                               (3)


These households can only afford to file in period 2. Figure 3 shows how equations (1)

through (3) divide households into groups based on realized wealth.15
  14
     A final type of household is of little interest, given our empirical setting. Households with wealth
W < c − I have so little wealth that they cannot afford the filing fee either in period 1 or in period 2. These
households will remain constrained and unable to file. They will be unaffected by the rebates and we will
not observe them in the data.
  15
     The value c − I is non-negative as long as the costs of filing are greater than the value of the rebates.
The value of the rebates were, at most, $600 in 2001 and $1,200 in 2008. In contrast, average bankruptcy
costs are estimated at $1,477 in 2007 (GAO, 2008).




                                                      8
3.3     Predictions of the Model

The model implies that only liquidity-constrained households change the date of their bank-

ruptcy based on the tax rebates. Such households can only afford to file after receiving their

rebate checks.

      The model also yields a direct interpretation of our empirical estimates. Let X be the

share of households that are unconstrained and declare bankruptcy, and let Y be the share

of households that are unable to file at time 1 but can file at time 2:

                                        Z    B−e·c−I(1−e)
                                                 1−e
                                X =                           f (W )dW
                                         c
                                        Z    c
                                Y   =            f (W )dW.
                                         c−I



Since unconstrained filers are indifferent between filing in period 1 or in period 2, we as-

sume that half file in each period. The regressions below measure the percent change in

bankruptcies after the tax rebates are sent. In the simple case where all households receive

tax rebates, this empirical estimate β is the share of households filing in period 2 that are

constrained filers. The model thus suggests that


                                                       Y
                                            β=     1      .                                (4)
                                                   2
                                                       ·X


      By relaxing one of the model’s key assumptions, we find that our empirical results may

underestimate the true fraction of constrained households. Consistent with several legal

decisions, the model assumes that courts treat the rebate checks as a part of the bankruptcy

estate regardless of whether households file in period 1 or period 2. However, suppose that

some households are unaware of this and choose to file at period 1 in an effort to hide the

rebates from the court. In this case, the share of households that are unconstrained and file

at period 1 would be equal to γ · X, where γ > 12 . In this case, the empirical estimates would


                                                  9
equal:
                                        Y − (1 − γ) · X         Y
                                β=                      <   1      .                       (5)
                                             γ·X            2
                                                                ·X

Our empirical results would therefore underestimate the fraction of filers who are constrained.

Thus, to the extent that households misperceive the laws regarding the treatment of rebates

under bankruptcy, our regressions will provide a lower bound for the share of bankruptcy

filers who are liquidity constrained.

    Additionally, not all households received rebate checks. Assume that a fraction λ of

households receive rebate checks. If we assume that households that received rebate checks

are otherwise identical to households that did not, then our empirical estimate equals:


                                                 λ·Y
                                            β=   1     .                                   (6)
                                                 2
                                                   · X


We can use equation (6) to translate our empirical estimates (β) into an estimate s =

Y /(X + Y ), the share of households who wish to file for bankruptcy but cannot afford to do

so in the absence of the rebate. Equation (6) suggests that s = Y /(X + Y ) can be re-written

as follows:
                                                  β
                                           s=          .                                   (7)
                                                β + 2λ

We use this expression to translate our regression estimates into estimates of s.



4    The Effect of the Tax Rebates on Bankruptcies

This section presents our main empirical results. We first describe how the bankruptcy

rate changed after the tax rebates were distributed. We then describe how the rebate effect

evolved over time.




                                                 10
4.1     The Change in the Bankruptcy Rate After the Rebates

The way in which both the 2001 and 2008 tax rebates were distributed lends itself to a simple

difference-in-difference empirical framework. For the 2001 sample, we construct aggregate

counts of bankruptcies by two-digit ssn group (g) and week (w), and estimate the following

regression:

                       ygw = β · I{After Check Sent}gw + αg + αw + εgw .                     (8)


The outcome ygw is either the number of bankruptcies in group g and week w or its loga-

rithm, and αg and αw are group and week fixed effects, respectively. The indicator function

I{After Check Sent}gw is equal to unity starting one week after checks are sent for group

g, and zero otherwise. For the 2008 sample, we include an additional indicator function to

control for whether the ssn group has been given its direct deposit.

      Panel A of Table 3 presents estimates of this regression for the 2001 rebates, while panel

B presents estimates for 2008. The first two columns present results when the level and the

logarithm of Chapter 7 bankruptcies is the outcome of interest, respectively. Both columns

suggest a significant increase in Chapter 7 filings after the rebates were distributed. In 2001,

each two-digit ssn group experienced an average of 5.6 additional bankruptcies per week.

The estimates in column two indicate a 3.8 percent increase in bankruptcies after the rebates.

      Panel B demonstrates that this effect was larger in 2008. The bankruptcy rate increased

by 5.1 percent after the 2008 rebate checks were sent. But bankruptcies also increased by 6.2

percent after direct deposits were made. The total increase in bankruptcies after the 2008

tax rebates was thus 11.3 percent.

      There are several possible explanations for the larger rebate effect in 2008. First, the

rebate checks were larger in 2008, and the larger rebate checks may have enabled more

liquidity-constrained households to file for bankruptcy. Second, the rebate checks were more

widely distributed: roughly 85 percent of households received rebate checks in 2008 versus


                                                11
57 percent in 2001 (Johnson et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2010). Third, the recession was

more severe in 2008, which could have resulted in more liquidity-constrained households.

All of these explanations would suggest a larger effect in 2008. Additionally, the bapcpa

dramatically changed the bankruptcy system in the intervening period (McIntyre et al.,

2010), raising attorney fees and encouraging households to choose Chapter 13 rather than

Chapter 7, though the expected effect of these legal changes on the 2008 results is less clear.

       In contrast to the results for Chapter 7 filings, Table 3 suggests that the rebates had a

smaller impact on Chapter 13 bankruptcies. Columns 3 and 4 present point estimates for

Chapter 13 bankruptcies that are much smaller in magnitude than those for Chapter 7. The

estimates suggest a 2–5 percent decrease in Chapter 13 filings, decreases that are marginally

statistically significant in 2001 but not in 2008. The small decrease in Chapter 13 filings

suggests that some households may have switched from Chapter 13 to Chapter 7 after the

tax rebates. The increase in Chapter 7 filings, however, is much larger than the decrease in

Chapter 13 filings, thus the filers who switch represent a small share of bankruptcies affected

by the rebates.

       This contrast between chapters is consistent with the existence of liquidity constraints.

There are two relevant differences between Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. First, Chapter 7

filers have lower incomes and fewer assets than Chapter 13 filers. Second, households who

file under Chapter 13 are charged higher legal fees, but are allowed to pay their attorneys

after filing.16 Chapter 7 filers, on the other hand, must usually pay their attorneys in

advance of filing. Both of these differences suggest that Chapter 7 filers are more likely to

be liquidity constrained.17 And, indeed, Table 3 presents a much larger rebate effect for
  16
     We constructed a random sample of 2001 and 2008 filings from the Central District of California. The
average total cost of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy was $1,100, while the average total cost of a Chapter 13
bankruptcy was $1,749. The average attorney fees paid before filing were $995 for Chapter 7 and $684 for
Chapter 13.
  17
     An additional reason for the contrast by chapter is that a large share of Chapter 13 filers turn to
bankruptcy in order to halt a foreclosure (Mann and Porter, 2010). The timing of such bankruptcies is then
determined by the foreclosure process rather than by rebates.



                                                   12
Chapter 7 bankruptcies.

       Finally, columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 present estimates for Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings

combined. The point estimates are positive and statistically significant at conventional levels.

They suggest that consumer bankruptcy filings overall increased by 2.3 percent in 2001 and

by 6.8 percent in 2008. Using equation (7), we can convert the estimated rebate effects into

estimates of s, the share of bankruptcy filers who are constrained. The results suggest that

s = 2.0 percent in 2001 and s = 3.8 percent in 2008.18

       The remainder of this section discusses a simple falsification test. Figure 4 presents the

results of this test. Each point represents estimates from specifications identical to those

in column 2 of Table 3, but which are estimated for each year in our sample. We focus on

Chapter 7 filings since our main effect is most pronounced for Chapter 7, and rely on the log-

based specification in order to control for differences in filing rates across years. Tax rebates

were not distributed by ssn group in years other than 2001 and 2008, but we construct

indicator variables as if they were. Specifically, we construct placebo indicator variables

consistent with the 2001 rebate distribution for 1998 through 2004. For 2005 through 2008,

we construct placebo indicator variables consistent with the 2008 rebate distribution, and

plot the sum of the paper check and direct deposit placebo effects.19

       The figure presents no evidence of a strong rebate effect in any years other than those

in which rebates were actually distributed. In all placebo tests, the confidence intervals do

not exclude zero. A joint test of the hypothesis that all estimates except those for 2001 and

2008 are equal to zero fails to reject the null hypothesis with a p-value of 0.136. In contrast,

a joint test that the 2001 and 2008 estimates are jointly equal to zero leads to a p-value less

than 0.001.
  18
     These estimates are based on assumptions that 57 percent of households received rebate checks in 2001,
and 85 percent received them in 2008 (Johnson et al. (2006), Parker et al. (2010)).
  19
     Note that the confidence intervals in Figure 4 are wider for estimates after 2004, because we plot the
sum of the paper check and direct deposit effects.




                                                    13
4.2      Variation in the Rebate Effect Over Time

This section describes how filing rates evolved over the weeks surrounding the rebates. To

measure such patterns, we estimate an event-study specification. We modify the regression

equation above to include indicator variables for 2-week intervals before and after the rebates.

The 2 weeks before each group received its rebate is the omitted category.

       Figure 5 presents the estimates from that regression when the outcome is the logarithm of

Chapter 7 filings in 2001. The dotted lines plot 95-percent confidence intervals and the solid

line plots the point estimates. The figure demonstrates that the bankruptcy rate increased

by roughly 4 percent in the month after the rebates were distributed, and the treatment

effect decreases monotonically after week 4.20 Figure 6 presents analogous estimates for

2008 which show a similar pattern.21

       Figure 7 and Figure 8 present the same event-study estimates for Chapter 13 bankruptcies

in 2001 and 2008. Nearly all of the point estimates are statistically indistinguishable from

zero, though the figures suggest a slight decline in Chapter 13 bankruptcies following the

rebates, consistent with the results in Table 3.

       As a whole, these figures suggest that the tax rebates led to an immediate, short-run

increase in Chapter 7 bankruptcies. The increase in bankruptcies lasted for roughly four

weeks after the rebates were distributed.

       We interpret these results as providing evidence of the short-run, transitory effect of
  20
     The results in Figure 5 suggest a modest, marginally significant increase in filing rates 3 and 4 weeks
before the checks are sent in 2001. In contrast, Figure 6 suggests no discernable pre-trend in 2008. We cannot
identify a cause for the pre-trend in Figure 5; potentially, households may have filed early, hoping to receive
their rebates after their bankruptcy case was discharged. We view this as unlikely, however, as bankruptcies
generally last for months, and judges were aware of the pending rebates. Nevertheless, it is possible that
some households misperceived the laws regarding how the rebates were treated by the bankruptcy courts.
  21
     The regression underlying Figure 6 also includes an indicator variable for whether the ssn group had
received its direct deposit, so that these event study estimates report the dynamic effects of the rebates sent
through the mail. A similar event study graph using the direct deposit dates is extremely imprecise due
to the fact that there are only three direct deposite dates that are three weeks apart. This makes it very
difficult to estimate the dynamic effects of the rebates sent via direct deposit. By contrast, the paper dates
span roughly two months and are sent out at nine different dates.




                                                      14
the rebates on consumer bankruptcies. We cannot identify households that did not receive

a rebate, as all ssn groups eventually received rebates; therefore, we cannot estimate the

long-run effects of the rebates. We strongly suspect, however, that the rebates had little

permanent effect on bankruptcy filing rates. Instead, our estimates likely represent a shift

in the timing of bankruptcies for households who were unable to file when they first wished

to do so. We have two pieces of evidence in support of this interpretation. First, the

pattern of event-study coefficients suggests the absence of a long-run effect; the estimated

coefficients on the furthest lags are statistically and economically insignificant. Additionally,

Appendix Table A1 reports results of an alternative specification that attempts to estimate

the permanent effect of the rebates by comparing bankruptcy rates across months in different

years. The test assumes that the permanent effect of the rebates can be estimated by

comparing the total number of bankruptcies in the months during and after the rebates

with the same months in other years, controlling for (within-year) seasonality in bankruptcy

filings and controlling for long-run (across-year) trends in bankruptcy filings.22 Consistent

with the event-study figures, Appendix Table A1 also suggests no permanent effect of the

2001 tax rebates.23


4.3    Variation in the Rebate Effect by Local Characteristics

This section tests how local characteristics are associated with the rebate effects. We record

the zip code of residence for each bankruptcy filer in our database. We merge those zip codes

to median household income and home ownership rate, as measured in the 2000 decennial

census. This allows us to stratify our main specification by income. We also stratify filers by
  22
     An important weakness of this strategy is that it assumes that the timing of the rebate programs
was exogenous. This is unlikely to be true; the rebate programs themselves were a political response to
macroeconomic conditions that likely affected overall bankruptcy filings. Nevertheless, we are reassured by
the similarity between the time-series results and the furthest lagged coefficients in the baseline model which
suggest no permanent effects of the rebates.
  23
     We only estimate the long-run effect of the 2001 tax rebate, because we have too little data after the
2008 rebates.



                                                      15
a proxy for their access to credit. Following Mian and Sufi (2009), we merge each zip code

to the share of its residents in 1996 that were categorized as subprime borrowers.24 Due to

the rapid expansion of mortgage credit in subprime zip codes not matched by increases in

household income, subprime zip codes are a plausible proxy for liquidity constraints (Mian

and Sufi, 2009).

       The theoretical model in Section 3 predicts that areas in which liquidity constraints

are more prevalent should be associated with larger rebate effects. Thus, if income, home

ownership, and sub-prime borrowing predict liquidity constraints, then these proxies should

be associated with larger rebate effects. Liquidity, however, is determined by the difference

between a household’s income and expenditures, not just income, assets, or subprime status.

Therefore, it is not clear a priori whether such proxies will have a discernible relationship

with the rebate effect.

       Table 4 presents estimates of equation (8) for Chapter 7 bankruptcies when the sample

is stratified by terciles of these three variables. The first three columns present results for

terciles of median income. The point estimates form different patterns in the two rebate

years. In 2001, the point estimates suggest a U-shaped pattern; the second tercile of income

is associated with the smallest rebate effect. In 2008, the first tercile of income is associated

with the smallest total rebate effect. We emphasize, however, that none of these differences

across the terciles is statistically significant at conventional levels.

       The second set of columns of Table 4 present results when the sample is stratified by the

likelihood of being a sub-prime borrower. The results also do not suggest a clear pattern. A

Wald test of equality of the three coefficients in 2001 has a p-value of 0.11, and in 2008 the

associated p-value is 0.82. We cannot reject the hypothesis that households from all terciles

exhibited the same rebate effect. The last set of columns presents results when we stratify
  24
    The variable captures the share of adults in the zip code whose fico credit score was 660 or lower in
1996 (Mian and Sufi, 2009). We are extremely grateful to Atif Mian and Amir Sufi for assistance in acquiring
these data.


                                                    16
the sample by homeownership rate. Again, no clear pattern is present.

         Overall, these results suggest a weak relationship between local characteristics and the

rebate effect. The pattern of point estimates by tercile suggests that the rebate effect is

not monotonically related to these proxies. Interestingly, Johnson et al. (2006) and Parker

et al. (2010) find a non-monotonic effect for consumption. Both studies find that both low-

and high-income households exhibit a higher sensitivity to tax rebates than middle-income

households. The 2001 results in Table 4 exhibit the same pattern. Such a pattern suggests a

complex relationship between liquidity and income, although we do not have enough precision

to reach strong conclusions on this point.



5         Analysis of Filers’ Characteristics

While the results above demonstrate that Chapter 7 bankruptcy rates increased after the

tax rebates, a remaining question is which types of filers were responsible for that increase.

In this section, we describe how the average characteristics of bankruptcy filers changed

after the rebates. To do so, we collected legal documents for a random sample of consumer

bankruptcies in ten districts.25 We randomly selected 250 Chapter 7 filings from each district

in 2001 and 500 filings per district in 2008.26 For each filing, research assistants read the

associated legal documents and recorded the financial characteristics of the household.


5.1        Sample Statistics

Households declaring bankruptcy must reveal many financial and demographic details to

the court. Summary statistics for these details are presented in Table 5. The first set of
    25
     We selected the districts based on whether the court judge was willing to grant us a waiver to download
the files, and whether electronic records were available for both 2001 and 2008. The ten districts were:
the Central District of California, the Northern and Southern Districts of Iowa, the Western District of
Louisiana, the Southern District of New York, the Eastern and Western Districts of Oklahoma, the District
of South Carolina, the Eastern District of Texas, and the Northern District of West Virginia.
  26
     Twice as many filings were used in 2008 because the significant fraction of households receiving direct
deposits instead of checks decreases the precision of our estimates.


                                                    17
rows describe the demographics of filers. These average characteristics changed relatively

little between 2001 and 2008. For instance, the percentage of primary filers who were female

increased from 24 percent to 25 percent between the two years. A t-test fails to reject that

the fraction of female filers remained constant (the associated p-value is 0.53). Filers were

single in 34–35 percent of cases, separated or divorced in 16–20 percent of cases, and married

in 46–49 percent of cases.27

       The next set of rows in Table 5 describe the fees paid by filers. Fees generally increased

from 2001 to 2008, largely driven by the bapcpa. Filing fees are paid to the court at the

time of filing. The bapcpa standardized filing fees to $299 for all Chapter 7 cases starting

in 2005, increasing the average filing fee 50 percent from 2001 to 2008.28 Average legal fees

increased 70 percent from $746 in 2001 to $1,265 in 2008; that difference across years is

statistically significant at the 1-percent level.29

       As shown in Table 5, the majority of legal fees are paid by the time of filing. Despite the

increase in fees, the percentage of fees paid increased from 79 percent in 2001 to 86 percent in

2008. Instead of paying for formal legal representation, filers can elect to represent themselves

in court and pay a smaller amount for legal advice and document preparation. The share of

filers representing themselves declined from 3.4 percent to 1.8 percent. This last comparison

suggests that the increased paperwork required by the bapcpa made it more difficult for

filers to forego formal legal representation.

       The last set of numbers in Table 5 present statistics on the filers’ finances. These statistics

suggest three general patterns. First, filers were significantly wealthier in 2008 than in 2001.

Average annual income increased from $23,784 to $31,581, total assets increased from $70,923
  27
      All filers were categorized into one of three marital-status categories according to the bankruptcy petition.
If no marital information was provided, we categorized the filer as single. A χ2 -test fails to reject that the
shares of filers in the marital status categories changed between 2001 and 2008, p-value 0.18.
   28
      A small number of filers receive waivers for the filing fees or arrange to pay them on installment. We
find that fewer than 1 percent fail to pay the full amount by the time of filing.
   29
      These numbers are roughly consistent with findings by the Government Accountability Office that at-
torney fees increased from $712 in 2005 to $1,078 in 2007 (GAO, 2008).



                                                        18
to $112,259, and total liabilities increase from $136,541 to $181,823.30 These patterns are

surprising since a main goal of the bapcpa was to discourage high-income households from

filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. At the same time, the average liabilities-to-income ratio

rose from 5.9 in 2001 to 6.6 in 2008, suggesting greater indebtedness. Consequently, it is not

clear from these simple comparisons whether filers were more or less liquidity constrained in

2008.

       Another pattern is that filers’ liabilities dwarf their assets and income. In both years,

the average filer bore liabilities roughly 6 times larger than their annual income and nearly

twice as large as total assets. Finally, it is important to note that these financial variables

are heavily skewed. For instance, mean liabilities in 2001 were $135,649 while the median

was less than half as large: $61,989. As a result, we take the logarithm of these variables in

the regression analysis reported in Appendix Table A2.


5.2      Effect of the Rebates on the Characteristics of Bankruptcy Filers

This section presents evidence of the effect of rebates on the characteristics of households

filing for bankruptcy. Both our model and the estimates in section 4 suggest that the number

of liquidity-constrained filers increases in the weeks after the rebates. This should lead to a

change in the average characteristics of the filers.

       We evaluate whether the rebates changed the characteristics of filers by presenting the

distribution of several financial characteristics: (1) total liabilities, (2) debt-to-income ratio,

and (3) annual income. The distributions allow us to compare those who filed before to those

who filed after the rebates. We also report Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) tests of the equality

of these distributions. Additionally, Appendix Table A2 reports regression tables analogous

to the figures presented in this section.31
  30
    These differences across years are statistically significant at the 1-percent level
  31
    The results in Appendix Table A2 are qualitatively similar to the figures reported in the main text,
although the statistical precision is somewhat limited, especially when we include week fixed effects.



                                                  19
      Figure 9 and Figure 10 present empirical cumulative distribution functions for the total

liabilities of filers in 2001 and 2008. In each figure, the solid line plots the distribution of total

liabilities for those who filed after the rebates, while the dashed line plots the distribution

for the filers who filed before the rebates. Both figures suggest that filers who filed after the

rebates had higher total liabilities. In both figures, the associated K-S test rejects the null

hypothesis that the distributions are identical.

      Figure 11 and Figure 12 present a similar pattern for the ratio of total liabilities to income

of each filer (debt-to-income ratio). The post-rebate filers have higher debt-to-income ratios.

By contrast, we do not find consistent evidence that the distribution of income differs across

the two groups of filers (Figure 13 and Figure 14).

      Overall, the results above suggest that households filing for bankruptcy after the rebates

are more likely to be liquidity constrained. Households filing after the rebates have larger

liabilities and a higher debt-to-income ratio than households filing before the rebates. In

contrast, they have roughly similar incomes.



6      Discussion

This section explores alternative explanations of our empirical results and discusses their

implications for policy.


6.1     Alternative Explanations

We consider two alternative explanations for our findings. A first alternative explanation is

that households timed their bankruptcy in order to keep their rebates from creditors or the

court. This explanation, however, is unlikely. All pre-filing income and assets are subject to

creditor action. Thus households trying to shield rebate income from creditors would have




                                                 20
to file months before the rebates were sent.32 We find no evidence for such an effect. Were

it to exist, this effect would bias our difference-in-difference estimates towards zero. Finally,

as described in footnote 13 above, bankruptcy judges were aware of the rebates and were

instructed to treat rebate income identically to other income.

       A second alternative explanation is that households timed their bankruptcy so that they

could consume the rebates before filing. This second explanation is also unlikely. The average

“wild card” exemption under Chapter 7 is $7,073 (Mahoney, 2010). It is unlikely that the

rebates shifted a large share of households beyond that threshold. Moreover, if households

were to file for bankruptcy only after consuming their rebates, then we would observe a

decrease in bankruptcies before the rebates were distributed. The event study results above

do not suggest such a decrease. Finally, this alternative explanation cannot readily account

for the pattern across chapters or for the change in average liabilities before and after the

rebates, as demonstrated in section 5.


6.2      Policy Implications

Our empirical evidence suggests that legal fees force liquidity-constrained households to delay

filing for bankruptcy. It is not obvious, however, whether lower fees would raise welfare. The

effect of fees on social welfare depends on whether liquidity-constrained filers are those with

the largest or the smallest utility gain from bankruptcy. If liquidity-constrained filers have

the most to gain from bankruptcy, then entrance fees are likely to be socially inefficient.

In this case, the bankruptcy system could otherwise rely on exemptions and the seizure

of assets to deter bankruptcies. Conversely, if liquidity-constrained filers gain less from

bankruptcy than other filers, then entrance fees may serve as an efficient mechanism to

deter such bankruptcies. In this way, liquidity constraints transform entrance fees into
  32
    Bankruptcy cases are open for many months. The filer can choose the filing date, but cannot choose the
date when the case closes That date is determined by the resources of the court at the time of filing.




                                                   21
ordeal mechanisms (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982).

         The theoretical model in Section 3 suggests that constrained households suffer the great-

est utility loss from fees and enjoy the greatest utility gain from being able to file for

bankruptcy, thus supporting the argument made by Mann and Porter (2010) that a re-

duction in legal fees would be welfare enhancing.33 However, there are countervailing costs

that must also be considered.         High fees may prevent two forms of moral hazard. First,

fees may inhibit households from borrowing excessively. Second, fees may deter bankruptcy,

holding borrowing constant. Both of these forms of moral hazard must be balanced against

the benefits of reducing fees. To the extent that liquidity-constrained filers impose larger

moral hazard costs than the average filer, then filing fees may be effective in reducing moral

hazard costs overall. An important task in future work will be quantifying the moral hazard

costs associated with reducing entrance fees to bankruptcy.



7         Conclusion

We find that tax rebates cause a significant, short-run increase in consumer bankruptcies.

This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that legal fees force liquidity-constrained

households to delay filing. These results highlight the importance of liquidity constraints in

the optimal design of the consumer bankruptcy system.

         An important area of future work is the consumption-smoothing benefits of bankruptcy.

This is an important parameter in any comprehensive welfare analysis of the bankruptcy

system. Such research will shed light on the extent to which rebate-induced bankruptcies

provide effective economic stimulus. Our evidence suggests that tax rebates allow some

households to avoid a delay in filing for bankruptcy. If these households substantially increase

consumption following the discharge of their debts, then perhaps the timely discharge of
    33
    Mann and Porter (2010) argue that congress can lower the amount of paperwork required for bankruptcy,
which in turn, would lower legal fees. They propose an expedited form of bankruptcy for low-asset filers.



                                                   22
household debt is an important component of economic stimulus policies.

   Another area of future work is further investigation into the determinants of bankruptcy.

A long-running debate centers over whether bankruptcies are primarily caused by unexpected

negative shocks (Himmelstein et al., 2009; Fay et al., 2002). More recent work has emphasized

the importance of myopic behavior (Hankins et al., 2011; Zhu, 2011). By contrast, our results

suggest than an important (and overlooked) determinant of bankruptcy may be the ability

of households simply to afford the fees.

   Lastly, the concept that liquidity constraints affect the utilization (or take-up) of social

insurance likely extends beyond consumer bankruptcy. Previous work has found that liquid-

ity constraints are an important determinant of the behavioral response to unemployment

insurance (Chetty, 2008), and we suspect that the decision to utilize unemployment insurance

at all is also affected by liquidity constraints. Similarly, we suspect that the waiting periods

for disability insurance interact with liquidity constraints in determining utilization. Thus,

we believe a promising area for future research involves estimating the effect of liquidity

constraints on the take-up of a broad range of social insurance programs.




                                              23
References
Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. Souleles (2007). The Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt to
  Tax Rebates-Evidence from Consumer Credit Data. Journal of Political Economy 115 (6),
  986–1019.

Anderson, N. B. and J. K. Dokko (2011). Liquidity problems and early payment default
 among subprime mortgages. Working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System.

Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2009, May). What do high-interest borrowers do with their tax
  rebate? American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.

Chetty, R. (2008). Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. The
 Journal of Political Economy 116 (2), 173–234.

Dynarski, S. (2003). Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
 Attendance and Completion. The American Economic Review .

Evans, W. N. and T. J. Moore (2011, June). The Short-Term mortality consequences of
  income receipt. Journal of Public Economics.

Fay, S., E. Hurst, and M. White (2002, June). The household bankruptcy decision. American
  Economic Review 92 (3), 706–718.

Filer, L. H. and J. D. Fisher (2005). The consumption effects associated with filing for
  personal bankruptcy. Southern Economic Journal 71 (4), 837–854.

Gropp, R., J. K. Scholz, and M. J. White (1997). Personal bankruptcy and credit supply
  and demand. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 217–251.

Gross, T. and J. Tobacman (2011, January). Income shocks and the demand for health care:
  Evidence from the 2008 stimulus payments. Unpublished.

Hankins, S., M. Hoekstra, and P. M. Skiba (2011, August). The ticket to easy street? the
  financial consequences of winning the lottery. Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3),
  961–969.

Hansen, G. D. and A. İmrohoroğlu (1992). The role of unemployment insurance in an
  economy with liquidity constraints and moral hazard. The Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 100 (1), 118–142.

Himmelstein, D., D. Thorne, E. Warren, and S. Woolhandler (2009, August). Medical
  bankrutpcy in the United States, 2007: Results of a national study. The American Journal
  of Medicine 122 (8), 741–746.

Hsieh, C. (2003). Do consumers react to anticipated income changes? Evidence from the
  Alaska permanent fund. The American Economic Review 93 (1), 397–405.



                                            24
Hurst, E. and A. Lusardi (2004). Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneur-
 ship. Journal of Political Economy, 319–347.

Johnson, D., J. Parker, and N. Souleles (2006). Household expenditure and the income tax
  rebates of 2001. The American Economic Review 96 (5), 1589–1610.

Lusardi, A., D. J. Schneider, and P. Tufano (2011, May). The state of macro. Working
  Paper 17072, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mahoney, N. (2010, December). Bankruptcy as implicit health insurance. Mimeo, Stanford
 University.

Mann, R. and K. Porter (2010). Saving up for Bankruptcy. Georgetown Law Journal 98,
 289–290.

McIntyre, F., D. Sullivan, and T. Layton (2010, January). Did BAPCPA Deter the Wealthy?
 The 2005 Bankruptcy Reform’s Effect on Filings Across the Income and Asset Distribution.
 Unpublished.

Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2011, November). Household balance sheets, consumption,
 and the economic slump.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
 the us mortgage default crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1449–1496.

Nichols, A. L. and R. J. Zeckhauser (1982). Targeting transfers through restrictions on
  recipients. The American Economic Review 72 (2), 372–377.

Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2010). Consumer spending
  and the economic stimulus payments of 2008. Unpublished paper, Northwestern University.

Shapiro, M. and J. Slemrod (2003). Did the 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending? Evidence
  from Taxpayer Surveys. Tax Policy and the Economy 17, 83–109.

Souleles, N. (1999). The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds. The
  American Economic Review 89 (4), 947–958.

Stavins, J. (2000, July/August).  Credit card borrowing, deliquency, and personal
  bankruptcy. New England Economic Review , 15–30.

Stephens, M. (2003). “3rd of the Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth Consump-
  tion Between Checks? The American Economic Review 93 (1), 406–422.

GAO (2008, June). Bankruptcy reform: Dollar costs associated with the bankruptcy abuse
 prevention and consumer protection act of 2005. Report to Congressional Requesters
 GAO-08-697, United States Government Accountability Office.

Wang, H.-J. and M. White (2000, January). An optimal personal bankruptcy procedure and
 proposed reforms. Journal of Legal Studies 29, 255–286.


                                            25
Zhu, N. (2011). Household consumption and personal bankruptcy. Journal of Legal Stud-
  ies 40 (1), 1–37.

Zywicki, T. J. (2005). An economic analysis of the consumer bankruptcy crisis. Northwestern
  University Law Review 99 (4), 1463–1542.




                                            26
                                                  Figure 1: Bankruptcy Districts in Sample




                                                                         Figure 2. Randomization Test
                                       400
Weekly Bankruptcy Rate in Pre-Period




                                       300
                                                                                                                               2001


                                       200



                                       100           2008



                                        0
                                             00        10         20        30        40       50        60            70     80      90   99
                                                                                     Last two digits of SSN
                                             This graph plots bankruptcies in March, April, and May of 2001 and in
                                             January, February, and March of 2008. The distribution of the 2001 tax rebates
                                             began in July, and the distribution of the 2008 tax rebates began in May. An
                                             F-test fails to reject the hypothesis that weekly bankruptcy rates are
                                             equal across groups with p-value 0.726 in 2001 and 0.864 in 2008.




                                                                                           27
                                                                        Figure 3. Types of Households

                                                                Unconstrained filers:
                                                                             B     e · c + (e   1) · I
                                                                cW <
          Constrained filers:                                                           1 e
                                                                                                               Non-filers:
          c            IW <c
                                                                                                               B    e · c + (e       1) · I
                                                                                                                                              W
                                                                                                                         1 e
density




                                                                                                                                 W




                                                               Figure 4. Chapter 7 Rebate Effect by Year
                                         .15



                                           .1
              Difference-in-Difference
                   Point Estimate




                                         .05



                                           0



                                         -.05
                                                1998              2000                2002            2004   2006            2008
                                                                                      Year Used For Sample
                                                Note: Tax rebates were sent in 2001 and 2008.




                                                                                          28
                                      Figure 5. Event Study Point Estimates, 2001
                                      Dependent Variable: Log of Chapter 7 Filings
                   .1


                 .05
Point Estimate




                   0


                 -.05


                  -.1
                        <-16      -14       -10        -6      -2       3       7      11                15       19   23+
                                                            Weeks Since Rebate Receipt
                         The figure presents point estimates from a regression of log counts of bankruptcies on
                         indicators for two-week intervals. The dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals
                         that are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same SSN group. The
                         sample consists of bankruptcies by SSN group and week, covering 30 weeks before and 40
                         weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. SSN-group fixed effects and week
                         fixed effects not shown. The omitted time period is 1 and 2 weeks before rebate checks
                         were sent.




                                      Figure 6. Event Study Point Estimates, 2008
                                      Dependent Variable: Log of Chapter 7 Filings
                   .1


                 .05
Point Estimate




                   0


                 -.05


                  -.1
                        <-16      -14       -10        -6      -2       3       7      11                15       19   23+
                                                            Weeks Since Rebate Receipt
                         The figure presents point estimates from a regression of log counts of bankruptcies on
                         indicators for two-week intervals. The dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals
                         that are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same SSN group. The
                         sample consists of bankruptcies by SSN group and week, covering 30 weeks before and 40
                         weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. SSN-group fixed effects and week
                         fixed effects not shown. The omitted time period is 1 and 2 weeks before rebate checks
                         were sent.




                                                                     29
                                      Figure 7. Event Study Point Estimates, 2001
                                     Dependent Variable: Log of Chapter 13 Filings
                 .15

                   .1
Point Estimate

                 .05

                   0

                 -.05

                  -.1

                 -.15
                        <-16      -14       -10        -6      -2       3       7      11                15       19   23+
                                                            Weeks Since Rebate Receipt
                         The figure presents point estimates from a regression of log counts of bankruptcies on
                         indicators for two-week intervals. The dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals
                         that are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same SSN group. The
                         sample consists of bankruptcies by SSN group and week, covering 30 weeks before and 40
                         weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. SSN-group fixed effects and week
                         fixed effects not shown. The omitted time period is 1 and 2 weeks before rebate checks
                         were sent.




                                      Figure 8. Event Study Point Estimates, 2008
                                     Dependent Variable: Log of Chapter 13 Filings
                 .15

                   .1
Point Estimate




                 .05

                   0

                 -.05

                  -.1

                 -.15
                        <-16      -14       -10        -6      -2       3       7      11                15       19   23+
                                                            Weeks Since Rebate Receipt
                         The figure presents point estimates from a regression of log counts of bankruptcies on
                         indicators for two-week intervals. The dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals
                         that are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same SSN group. The
                         sample consists of bankruptcies by SSN group and week, covering 30 weeks before and 40
                         weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. SSN-group fixed effects and week
                         fixed effects not shown. The omitted time period is 1 and 2 weeks before rebate checks
                         were sent.




                                                                     30
                               Figure 9: Filers' Liabilities Before and After the Rebates, 2001
                          1


Cumulative Distribution
                          .9




                          .8




                          .7
                                       $200,000                 $400,000             $600,000                $800,000
                                                                    Total Liabilities of Filers

                                                        After Paper Checks                          Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2001. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.001.




                               Figure 10: Filers' Liabilities Before and After the Rebates, 2008
                          1
Cumulative Distribution




                          .9




                          .8




                          .7
                               $200,000                  $400,000               $600,000                 $800,000
                                                                      Total Liabilities of Filers

                                                        After Paper Checks                          Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2008. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.001.




                                                                             31
                                              Figure 11: Filers' Liabilities-to-Income Ratio
                                                  Before and After the Rebates, 2001
                          1
Cumulative Distribution
                          .8


                          .6


                          .4


                          .2
                                                      5                       10                         15                    20
                                                                    Liabilities-to-Income Ratio

                                                          After Paper Checks                        Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2001. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.004.




                                              Figure 12: Filers' Liabilities-to-Income Ratio
                                                  Before and After the Rebates, 2008
                          1
Cumulative Distribution




                          .8


                          .6


                          .4


                          .2
                                                  5                         10                  15                        20
                                                                    Liabilities-to-Income Ratio

                                                          After Paper Checks                        Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2008. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.015.




                                                                             32
                                Figure 13: Filers' Income Before and After the Rebates, 2001
                          1


Cumulative Distribution
                          .8



                          .6



                          .4

                                         $30,000                        $60,000                      $90,000              $120,000
                                                                          Income of Filers

                                                        After Paper Checks                          Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2001. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.097.




                                Figure 14: Filers' Income Before and After the Rebates, 2008
                          1
Cumulative Distribution




                          .8



                          .6



                          .4

                                   $30,000                          $60,000                         $90,000               $120,000
                                                                         Income of Filers

                                                        After Paper Checks                          Before Paper Checks
                               The figure presents the empirical cumulative distribution function
                               based on a random sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcies in 2008. A
                               Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the null hypothesis that the two
                               distributions are equal leads to a p-value of 0.002.




                                                                             33
                                        Table 1: Sample Coverage

                                           Districts             Districts             All        Coverage
                                          in sample         not in sample        Districts    in our sample

                                                                 A. 2001 Sample
Consumer bankruptcies                      259,961                90,020         349,981                 74%
 Chapter 7                                 186,229                58,484         244,713                 76%
 Chapter 13                                 73,613                31,487         105,100                 70%
Population                             201,904,852            75,112,770     277,017,622                 73%
Median Family Income                        40,990                48,139          42,497
Unemployment Rate                           4.70%                 4.86%           4.75%
Percent College                             23.9%                 27.4%           25.5%
Median Housing Value                       117,012               151,670         124,076

                                                              B. 2008 Sample
Consumer bankruptcies                       272,182             90,559             362,741               75%
  Chapter 7                                 183,788             58,740             242,528               76%
  Chapter 13                                 88,208             31,706             119,914               74%
Total population                       222,045,717          54,971,905        304,059,728                73%
Median Family Income                         50,169             61,021              50,861
Unemployment Rate                            5.69%              6.06%               5.79%
Percent College                              27.0%              29.4%               27.7%
Median Housing Value                        210,302            306,000             214,900
Note: This table describes the characteristics of the bankruptcy districts in our sample. See text for
details.




                                                       34
                                    Table 2. Dates When Rebate Checks Were Sent


Last 2 Digits        2001 Rebate          Last 2 Digits        2008 Stimulus      Last 2 Digits      2008 Stimulus
  of SSN's            Check Sent            of SSN's             Check Sent         of SSN's         Deposit Made


  00 – 09                 July 20           00 – 09                  May 16         00 – 20                  May 2
  10 – 19                 July 27           10 – 18                  May 23         21 – 75                  May 9
  20 – 29               August 3            19 – 25                  May 30         76 – 99                May 16
  30 – 39              August 10            26 – 38                   June 6
  40 – 49              August 17            39 – 51                 June 13
  50 – 59              August 24            52 – 63                 June 20
  60 – 69              August 31            64 – 75                 June 27
  70 – 79            September 7            76 – 87                   July 4
  80 – 89          September 14             88 – 99                  July 11
  90 – 99           September 21
Note: This table describes the dates on which the Internal Revenue Service sent tax rebate payments. The timing of
when payments were sent was determined by the last two digits of the head-of-household's social security number.




                                                          35
                    Table 3: The Effect of Rebate Checks on Bankruptcies
                Dependent Variable: Level or logarithm of total bankruptcy filings
                                   per SSN group per week

                    (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)        (6)

                   Chapter 7                     Chapter 13                           All

                 Levels          Logs           Levels          Logs          Levels          Logs

                                            A. 2001 Tax Rebates
After            5.640          0.038         - 1.160     - 0.024              4.480         0.023
Check           (1.024)        (0.007)         (0.564)     (0.011)            (1.116)       (0.006)
Sent            [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.042]     [0.030]            [0.000]       [0.000]

R2                0.776         0.787            0.473          0.473          0.771         0.791

                                            B. 2008 Tax Rebates
After            5.445          0.051         - 0.471     - 0.011              4.974         0.033
Check           (0.948)        (0.009)         (0.535)     (0.012)            (1.039)       (0.007)
Sent            [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.380]     [0.361]            [0.000]       [0.000]

After            6.388          0.062         - 1.538         - 0.037          4.850         0.035
Direct          (1.695)        (0.017)         (0.889)         (0.023)        (1.817)       (0.013)
Deposit         [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.087]         [0.105]        [0.009]       [0.009]

Total           11.834          0.113         - 2.009         - 0.048          9.824         0.068
Effect          (1.973)        (0.020)         (1.092)         (0.027)        (2.161)       (0.016)
                [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.069]         [0.079]        [0.000]       [0.000]

R2                 0.865         0.860            0.559         0.568           0.868         0.866
Note: N = 7,100. The sample consists of counts of bankruptcies by two-digit SSN group and week,
covering 30 weeks before and 40 weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. The
standard errors in parentheses are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same
SSN group. The associated p-values are in brackets. SSN-group fixed effects and week fixed effects
not shown.




                                                36
                                      Table 4: The Effect of Rebate Checks by Local Characteristics
                           Dependent Variable: logarithm of chapter 7 bankruptcy filings per SSN group per week

                    (1a)          (1b)        (1c)               (2a)        (2b)        (2c)              (3a)       (3b)         (3c)

              Bankruptcies stratified by median                Bankruptcies stratified by
                     family income in                     share of zip code residents who are          Bankruptcies stratified by
                         zip code                                sub-prime borrowers                 homeownership rate in zip code

                   First       Second        Third              First     Second        Third             First    Second        Third
                 Tercile        Tercile     Tercile           Tercile      Tercile     Tercile          Tercile     Tercile     Tercile

                                                                  A. 2001 Tax Rebates
After             0.048         0.026       0.045              0.044        0.052      0.019             0.029      0.028        0.057
Check            (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.015)            (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.011)           (0.012)    (0.013)      (0.012)
Sent             [0.000]       [0.032]     [0.003]            [0.002]      [0.000]    [0.105]           [0.015]    [0.028]      [0.000]

R2                0.585          0.599       0.465             0.512       0.595        0.555            0.555       0.581       0.522

                                                                  B. 2008 Tax Rebates
After             0.053         0.054       0.050              0.049        0.058      0.046             0.045      0.048        0.059
Check            (0.016)       (0.015)     (0.014)            (0.016)      (0.014)    (0.017)           (0.019)    (0.015)      (0.013)
Sent             [0.002]       [0.000]     [0.000]            [0.003]      [0.000]    [0.009]           [0.020]    [0.002]      [0.000]

After             0.005         0.085       0.076              0.075       0.058       0.047             0.022      0.066        0.084
Direct           (0.030)       (0.030)     (0.030)            (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.035)           (0.035)    (0.033)      (0.027)
Deposit          [0.863]       [0.006]     [0.012]            [0.016]     [0.057]     [0.176]           [0.540]    [0.049]      [0.002]

Total             0.058         0.139       0.126              0.075       0.058       0.047             0.066      0.114        0.143
Effect           (0.035)       (0.034)     (0.035)            (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.035)           (0.041)    (0.038)      (0.032)
                 [0.098]       [0.000]     [0.001]            [0.016]     [0.057]     [0.176]           [0.107]    [0.004]      [0.000]

R2                 0.616       0.702         0.658             0.648        0.702       0.632               0.613       0.669     0.669
Note: N = 7,100. The sample consists of counts of bankruptcies by two-digit SSN group and week, covering 30 weeks before and 40
weeks after groups were sent their tax rebate checks. The standard errors in parentheses are robust to autocorrelation between
observations from the same SSN group. The associated p-values are in brackets. SSN group fixed effects and week fixed effects not
shown.
                                                                    37
                        Table 5: Summary Statistics for Filings from Ten Districts


                                      Mean     Median       Std. Dev.         Mean      Median Std. Dev.

                                                A. 2001                               B. 2008
Household Composition
 Female                                24%                                     25%
 Single                                35%                                     34%
 Separated or Divorced                 16%                                     20%
 Married                               49%                                     46%
 Number of children                    1.04           1          1.20          0.92           0       1.20

Fees
 Filing fee                           $199        $200           $15           $299       $299          $0
 Legal fee promised                   $746        $700          $397         $1,265     $1,099        $654
 Legal fee % paid                     79%        100%           30%            86%       100%         30%
 Self-representation                  3.4%                                    1.8%

Financial Characteristics
  Annual income                       $23,784 $20,403           $24,656       $31,581 $26,738 $26,369
  Annual expenses                     $28,212 $23,712           $54,312       $35,868 $30,480 $28,668
  Total assets                        $70,923 $31,883         $310,346       $112,259 $55,074 $440,894
  Total liabilities                  $136,541 $62,896 $1,021,721             $181,823 $101,943 $392,214
  % of liabilities secured                42%        46%           30%           42%      44%          30%
  Liabilities-to-income ratio               5.9      3.05          34.5            6.6      3.7        20.5
Note: This table presents statistics for a sample of chapter 7 bankruptcies from 10 bankruptcy districts.
The sample consists of 2,132 bankruptcies in 2001 and 4,355 bankruptcies in 2008. See text for details on
how the sample was constructed.




                                                    38
     Appendix Table A1: The Long-Run Effect of the 2001 Rebates
     Dependent Variable: Log of chapter 7 bankruptcies by month

                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

After 2001                          0.000 - 0.004 - 0.017         0.006
Tax Rebates                        (0.039) (0.050) (0.050)       (0.030)
                                   [1.000] [0.937] [0.743]       [0.844]

R2                                  0.660     0.661     0.666     0.908
N                                      84        84        84        84

Cubic polynomial in time                  X
Quartic polynomial in time                          X
Quintic polynomial in time                                   X         X
Month fixed effects                                                    X
Note: This table reports results from a regression of log bankruptcies
on a dummy for the period between June, 2001 and March, 2002
(inclusive). This captures two months before the 2001 tax rebate and
six months afterwards. The sample includes the months between
January, 1998 and December, 2004 (inclusive), and the unit of
observation is month-year. The time polynomials are functions of the
number of months since the start of the sample period, and are
intended to capture long-run trends in bankruptcy filings.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses, and p-
values are in brackets.




                                  39
            Appendix Table A2: The Effect of the Tax Rebates on Characteristics of the Filers

                              (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)


                                         Log of                                        Log of
                                   Liabilities-to-                               Liabilities-to-
Dependent                Log of         Income        Log of           Log of         Income        Log of
Variable:              Liabilities         Ratio     Income          Liabilities         Ratio     Income

                                                     A. 2001 Tax Rebates
After                      0.155          0.111       0.044             0.318           0.260       0.059
Check                     (0.045)        (0.039)     (0.028)          (0.107)          (0.084)     (0.059)
Sent                      [0.001]        [0.005]     [0.119]           [0.003]         [0.002]     [0.317]

R2                         0.105          0.084           0.100          0.126          0.108        0.127

                                                      B. 2008 Tax Rebates
After                    - 0.020          0.020      - 0.041           - 0.103        - 0.080      - 0.023
Check                     (0.053)        (0.042)      (0.030)           (0.078)        (0.066)      (0.045)
Sent                      [0.702]        [0.630]      [0.175]           [0.186]        [0.228]      [0.601]

After                      0.107          0.025        0.082             0.151          0.059       0.092
Direct                    (0.054)        (0.043)      (0.031)           (0.210)        (0.149)     (0.151)
Deposit                   [0.048]        [0.566]      [0.009]           [0.472]        [0.693]     [0.541]

Total                      0.086          0.045        0.041             0.048        - 0.021       0.069
Effect                    (0.032)        (0.029)      (0.021)           (0.227)        (0.167)     (0.160)
                          [0.007]        [0.126]      [0.046]           [0.832]        [0.901]     [0.667]

R2                         0.156          0.104           0.080          0.170          0.118        0.091

Fixed Effects
  SSN group FEs                Y              Y              Y               Y              Y            Y
  Office FEs                   Y              Y              Y               Y              Y            Y
  Week FEs                     N              N              N               Y              Y            Y
Note: The sample consists of Chapter 7 filings randomly selected from ten court districts: 2,132
bankruptcies in 2001 and 4,355 bankruptcies in 2008. The standard errors in parentheses are robust to
autocorrelation between observations from same SSN group, and associated p-values are in brackets.




                                                     40
