                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DRAWN INTO VIOLENCE:
EVIDENCE ON 'WHAT MAKES A CRIMINAL' FROM THE VIETNAM DRAFT LOTTERIES

                                          Jason M. Lindo
                                         Charles F. Stoecker

                                        Working Paper 17818
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17818


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We thank Josh Angrist, Alan Barreca, Sandy Black, Colin Cameron, Trudy Ann Cameron, Scott Carrell,
Stacey Chen, Ben Hansen, Hilary Hoynes, Doug Miller, Marianne Page, Chris Rohlfs, Peter Siminski,
Ann Huff Stevens, Joe Stone, Matt Taylor, and Glen Waddell along with seminar and conference participants
at UC-Davis, University of Oregon, the 2010 WEAI Conference, the 2010 San Francisco Fed Applied
Micro Conference, and the 2011 SOLE meetings for helpful comments. Special thanks to Josh Angrist
and Stacey Chen for providing us with results based on their restricted-use U.S. Census data and to
Chris Rohlfs for sharing his NCRP code with us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jason M. Lindo and Charles F. Stoecker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Drawn into Violence: Evidence on 'What Makes a Criminal' from the Vietnam Draft Lotteries
Jason M. Lindo and Charles F. Stoecker
NBER Working Paper No. 17818
February 2012
JEL No. H56,K42

                                              ABSTRACT

Draft lottery number assignment during the Vietnam Era provides a natural experiment to examine
the effects of military service on crime. Using exact dates of birth for inmates in state and federal prisons
in 1979, 1986, and 1991, we find that draft eligibility increases incarceration for violent crimes but
decreases incarceration for non-violent crimes among whites. This is particularly evident in 1979,
where two-sample instrumental variable estimates indicate that military service increases the probability
of incarceration for a violent crime by 0.34 percentage points and decreases the probability of incarceration
for a nonviolent crime by 0.30 percentage points. We conduct two falsification tests, one that applies
each of the three binding lotteries to unaffected cohorts and another that considers the effects of lotteries
that were not used to draft servicemen.


Jason M. Lindo
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
jlindo@uoregon.edu

Charles F. Stoecker
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
cfstoecker@ucdavis.edu
1         Introduction

          “CRIMINALS ARE MADE, NOT BORN.”
          —Stenciled sign left behind by Michigan school board member and suicidal mass
          murderer Andrew Kehoe after killing 45 people, mostly school children.

        Understanding the extent to which criminals are “made” and, further, identifying the de-
terminants of criminal behavior is of utmost importance to any society that wants to reduce
crime. To date, most research in this area has focused on the causal effects of individuals’
immediate environments.1 Quasi-experimental studies that explore how individuals’ back-
grounds affect criminal behavior are more rare with a handful of studies on neighborhoods
(Oreopoulos 2006), education (Lochner and Moretti 2004), foster care (Doyle 2008), peers
(Bayer, Hjalmarsson, and Pozen’s 2009), and beauty (Mocan and Tekin 2010) providing
notable exceptions. In this paper, we add to this strand of the literature by exploiting the
randomness of the national Vietnam draft lotteries to examine the effects of military service
on subsequent incarceration.
        Our study also has implications for the military and for the treatment of veterans. First,
this paper can be thought of as exploring a potentially important long-term cost of military
engagements that might be important for comprehensive cost-benefit considerations. Second,
our results speak to what types of special accommodations might be reasonably made for
those who have served in the military. This is an issue that has been taken quite seriously
in the criminal justice system, as special courts that focus on rehabilitation have been set
up to try cases involving non-violent veteran offenders. Further, the results of our analysis
    1
    For example, researchers have considered the effects of punishments for infractions (Levitt 1998; Drago
Galbiati, and Vertrova 2009), policing (Levitt 1997; Levitt 2002; McCrary 2002; Yang 2008), punishment
(Lee and McCrary 2009; Hansen 2011) temporary income shocks (Miguel 2005; Foley 2011), unemployment
(Gould, Weinberg, and Mustard 2006; Mocan and Bali 2010), inequality (Kelly 2000), drugs and alcohol
(Grogger and Willis 2000; Carpenter 2007; Carpenter and Dobkin 2008), neighborhoods (Ludwig, Duncan,
and Hirschfield 2001; Kling, Ludwig, and Katz 2004), guns (Duggan 2001; Duggan, Hamjalmarrson, and
Jacob forthcoming), sporting events and movies (Rees and Schnepel 2009; Card and Dahl 2009; Dahl and
DellaVigna 2009), casinos (Grinols and Mustard 2006), and incapacitation (Jacob and Lefgren 2003; Dahl
and DellaVigna 2009).

                                                    1
can inform the extent to which resources ought to be allocated towards the treatment of
veterans who might exhibit signs of instability.
       While we consider the impacts of military service on multiple types of crimes, our primary
focus is on violent crimes. Although this would be a natural choice for any study considering
the effects of military service on crime since the military trains soldiers to engage in violence,
the Vietnam Era provides an especially interesting context. Notably, the Vietnam Era coin-
cided with an important shift in military training motivated by S.L.A. Marshall’s pioneering
research documenting extremely-low firing rates for U.S. soldiers serving in World War II.
In order to overcome soldiers reluctance to fire at enemy combatants, in the late-1960s the
military began making conscious efforts to provide more realistic training scenarios (Gross-
man 2009).2 While this desensitization to engaging in violence may be crucial to survival
in a combat zone, it is easy to see how it might lead to problems after a soldier returns to
civilian life.3
       Of course, there are several other possible mechanisms through which military service
might affect crime. Engagements with real-enemy combatants in the combat zone has been
shown to have impacts over and above the effects of being in the military (Rohlfs 2010;
Galiani, Rossi, and Schargrodsky 2011; Cesur, Sabia, and Tekin 2011). In addition, military
service may increase crime because it precludes labor market experience and thus reduces
wages (Angrist 1990; Imbens and van der Klaauw 1995; Abadie 2002; Angrist and Chen
   2
      For example, using silhouettes in place of bulls-eye targets. Slone and Friedman (2008) describe modern
training as preparing soldiers “to react within a split-second of any provocative activity and [to shut down]
emotions.”
    3
      In a similar fashion, this training may in part be responsible for some of the violent conflicts amongst
fellow servicemen. In Another Brother, Greg Payton describes one such conflict:
         We had been brought to Vietnam for violence, for violent purposes, so it wasn’t unusual for
         us to be violent amongst ourselves you know. I remember the first time I got shot at it was
         Christmas Eve and an African American GI had a fight with a white GI. The white GI went
         back to his hooch and he got his weapon. We heard a weapon being loaded. Instinctively we
         hit the ground and he opened up automatic fire. It was just by split seconds that we weren’t
         all killed.




                                                      2
2011; Siminski and Ville 2011) or because of possible effects on opiate use (Robins, Davis,
and Goodwin 1974). On the other hand, the discipline imparted by the military environment
may make individuals less likely to commit crimes. Further, military service could reduce
criminality via an incapacitation effect, as individuals are in the military environment at the
ages at which they are at highest risk of incarceration.
       A sizable literature links military service to criminal behavior, particularly to violent
behavior, but much of the prior work on this topic lacks plausibly exogenous variation and
focuses on small non-random samples. Exogenous variation in military service is crucial
since men who are more likely to engage in criminal activities may be disproportionately
likely to enlist. Galiani, Rossi, and Schargrodsky (2011) overcome this selection bias using
variation driven by Argentina’s draft lotteries. Relative to our study, this earlier work has
the advantage of being able to explore cohorts serving the Malvinas War and others serving
during peacetime. However, it is somewhat limited in its ability to measure impacts by type
of crime, which can only be identified for those going through the criminal justice system
approximately 20–30 years after service. Our results suggest that this limitation is not trivial,
as we find offsetting effects on incarceration for violent and nonviolent crimes seven to nine
years after conscription.4
       In this paper, we also use variation provided by draft lotteries but focus on the U.S.
context. In particular, our identifying variation is driven by: (1) the Vietnam Era draft
lotteries which randomly assigned lottery numbers to exact dates of birth and (2) the fact
   4
     Rohlfs (2006) is the only prior work to use plausibly exogenous variation to consider the effects of
military service on incarceration in the U.S. In this study, in which he compares the fraction of Vietnam
Era draft eligible inmates in prison to the fraction expected based on cohorts not subjected to the drafts, he
finds imprecise effects effects on overall rates of incarceration. Our study offers several advantages over this
work. First, we improve precision by using within cohort variation provided by the draft lotteries instead of
a cross-cohort difference-in-differences framework. This further enables us to use non-affected cohorts as a
robustness check to verify that our results are not driven by the particular sets of birthdays selected in the
drafts. In addition, our outcome variable lends itself to a natural interpretation, providing a direct estimate
of the effect of draft eligibility on the probability of incarceration in the survey years. Finally, we present
a more-comprehensive exploration of the effects of draft eligibility on crime by separately considering its
effects on violent crime, drug-related crime, property-related crime, and public-order crime.



                                                       3
that the military drafted men, starting with the lowest lottery numbers, until manpower
requirements were met each year. Utilizing this exogenous variation in draft status, we are
able to determine the extent to which military service affects criminal behavior by comparing
the probability of incarceration (based on the number births) for those whose lottery numbers
were called to report for induction into the military to the incarceration rates those whose
numbers were not called. We do this by combining data from the 1979, 1986, and 1991
Surveys of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities (SISFCF) with data from the
Vital Statistics of the United States to create measures of incarceration probabilities for each
day of birth for the cohorts affected by the draft lotteries. We supplement this analysis with
data on prison admissions from 1983–1991 via the National Corrections Reporting Program
(NCRP).
   While these inmate data are well-suited to identifying the effect of draft eligibility, they
are not well-suited to directly estimating the effect of military service. In particular, it would
be inappropriate to estimate the first-stage effect of draft eligibility on military service using
an endogenously-selected subsample of individuals exposed to the draft, such as a sample
of inmates. For this reason, we obtain first-stage estimates for the overall population using
restricted U.S. Census data from 2000. Combining the estimates from each of these sources,
we obtain two-sample instrumental-variable estimates of the effect of military service on
incarceration. We discuss potential threats to the validity of this approach in Section 4.
   We find evidence of positive impacts on incarceration for violent crimes among whites
and offsetting impacts of a similar magnitude on incarceration for nonviolent crimes. This
is particularly evident in 1979, where two-sample instrumental variable estimates indicate
that military service increases the probability of incarceration for a violent crime by 0.34
percentage points and decreases the probability of incarceration for a nonviolent crime by
0.30 percentage points. We find less convincing evidence of impacts on nonwhites.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the


                                                4
Vietnam Era draft lotteries. Sections 3 and 4 describe our data and empirical strategy.
Section 5 presents our results and robustness checks. Section 6 discusses our results and
concludes.



2     Background on the Draft Lotteries

In an attempt to fairly allocate military service in Vietnam, a total of seven national lottery
drawings were held to determine who would serve in the military—although conscription was
halted after the third lottery. The three lotteries used to draft servicemen were held in 1969,
1970, and 1971. While the 1969 lottery applied to those born 1944–1950, each subsequent
drawing applied only to men who turned 18 in the year of the lottery. In particular, the 1970
lottery applied to those born in 1951 and the 1971 lottery applied to those born in 1952.
    In each drawing, the birthdays of the year were randomly assigned a Random Sequence
Number (RSN). In the 1969 drawing September 1st was assigned RSN 1 so men born on
September 1st were asked to report to their local draft boards for potential induction before
men born on other days. April 24th was assigned RSN 2 so men born on that day were asked
to report second, and so forth. The military continued to call men for potential induction in
order of RSN until the manpower requirements were met for that year. The last RSN called
for service, also known as the highest Administrative Processing Number (APN), was 195 for
the 1969 drawing, 125 for the 1970 drawing, and 95 for the 1971 drawing. Throughout the
paper, we refer to indivduals with RSNs less than or equal to the APN as “draft eligible.”
    While the issue was addressed for later drawings, there was a noteworthy mechanical
problem with the randomization mechanism used in the 1969 drawing. In particular, each
birthday was coded onto a capsule and these capsules were added month by month into a
drawer, with the drawer being “shuffled” after each month. As a result of incomplete mixing,
dates later in the year remained on top of the pile and were more likely to be drawn first and


                                              5
thus called first for induction (Fienberg 1971). This phenomenon is shown in Figure A1 in
the appendix, which plots the number of draft eligible days by month for each lottery. To the
extent to which people born in later months might be more or less likely to commit crimes,
this could lead to omitted variable bias. We follow the previous literature and address this
potential issue by controlling for year by month of birth fixed effects in our analysis (Conley
and Heerwing 2009, Eisenberg and Rowe 2009, Angrist, Chen, and Frandsen 2010, Angrist
and Chen 2011).5
        For multiple reasons, military service is not perfectly predicted by being born on a draft-
eligible day. Men born on non-eligible birthdays could volunteer and men born on eligible
days could fail the medical exams, refuse to report, or apply for various exemptions. Despite
these issues, the draft had a significant effect on military service, the magnitude of which is
discussed in Section 5.1.



3         Data Description and Construction

Our primary analysis uses data on incarceration from the 1979, 1986, and 1991 Surveys of
Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities (SISFCF), which are representative of the
prison population in state and federal correctional facilities. Although it would be desirable
to use the 1974 survey to consider potential incapacitation effects, exact dates of birth are
not available for this survey year. In addition to exact dates of birth, the survey waves we
use contain information on each prisoner’s race, sex, and the type of offense for which he
was incarcerated. The type of offense is classified according to approximately 80 offense
codes and each inmate is associated with up to four different offense codes (since inmates
can concurrently serve time for multiple offenses). We define a prisoner as incarcerated for a
violent crime if any of the listed offenses involve violence and as incarcerated for a nonviolent
    5
    Information on the details of the Vietnam Draft lottery can be found at the Selective Service Website
http://www.sss.gov/lotter1.htm and in Flynn (1993) and Baskir and Strauss (1978).


                                                   6
crime if none of the listed offenses involve violence.
   The 1979, 1986, and 1991 waves of the SISFCF used in this analysis contain information
on 6642, 6612, and 6631 male inmates subjected to the drafts, respectively. In selecting
an appropriate sample to analyze, there is a tradeoff between ease of interpretation of the
results and sample size. The most-straightforward results to interpret are those where data
are limited to a single survey wave. For example, if we limit the sample to cells collapsed
from the 1979 data, the estimates will provide the estimated effect of military service on the
probability of being incarcerated seven to nine years after conscription. The interpretation
is more complicated when we expand the sample to include all three survey waves, where we
are estimating a combination of the probabilities of being observed in prison 7–9, 14–16, and
19–21 years later. On the other hand, pooling survey years can improve precision. For this
reason, we present estimates that utilize all of the available data and estimates stratified on
survey years.
   Limiting the sample to males, we conduct the analysis separately for whites and non-
whites at the date of birth by survey year level. Each observation represents a collapsed cell
measuring the probability of incarceration in survey year s for individuals born on day d.
To construct this variable, we divide the number of male convicts we observe in prison in
survey year s with date of birth d, calculated using the SISFCF’s sampling weights, by the
number of males that were born in the United States on day d:

                                                         #of Inmatessd
                       IncarcerationP robabilitysd =                   .                   (1)
                                                          #of Birthsd

The denominator for the equation above comes from the Vital Statistics of the United States
(VSUS) which reports births by race, gender, and month. Since the VSUS only reports
births by month prior to 1969, we construct the number of births for each given day. We
report results in which the number of births in each month are apportioned evenly across


                                               7
the days in the month. The results are nearly identical using strategies for constructing the
denominator that adjust for differing birth patterns observed on weekdays versus weekends.
These robustness checks are described further in the appendix.
    The data used to estimate the first-stage effect of draft eligibility on military service
are from the 2000 Census long-form sample, which includes approximately one-sixth of U.S.
households. For more details on these data, see Angrist and Chen (2011) whose sample is
identical.
    To properly link each birthday with a particular draft lottery number we use the draft
lottery information available from the Selective Service System. This allows us to associate
each birth date with a lottery number for each of the lotteries.



4     Empirical Strategy

If military service were purely random, we could use our data to analyze the effect of military
service on incarceration rates by estimating


             IncarcerationP robabilitysd = θ + α ∗ V eteranP robabilityd + usd ,           (2)


where IncarcerationP robabilitysd is the fraction of individuals born on day d who are in-
carcerated in survey year s and V eteranP robabilityd is the fraction of veterans among those
who were born on day d. Because selection into the military is not random, this approach
would likely lead to biased estimates of α. Perhaps of greatest concern is the possibility that
aggressive individuals are more likely to serve in the military and also to commit crimes, in
which case the effect of being a veteran, α, would be would be biased upwards. Alternatively,
if individuals with more respect for authority are more likely to become veterans and less




                                               8
likely to commit crimes then α will be biased downwards.6 Given the random assignment of
draft eligibility by date of birth, we instead estimate


                    IncarcerationP robabilitysd = φ + γ ∗ Draf tEligibled + sd                              (3)


where Draf tEligibled is an indicator variable that equals one if men born on date d are
assigned a lottery number that makes them eligible to be drafted into the military and zero
otherwise. The parameter γ provides the estimate of the average reduced-form effect of draft
eligibility on the probability of incarceration. Due to the mechanical issues associated with
the draft lotteries described above and because the data span multiple survey years, we also
include year by month of birth fixed effects and survey year fixed effects where applicable.7
       To recover the estimated effect of military service on the probability of incarceration, we
need to know the effect of draft eligibility on military service, which can be estimated by


                       V eteranP robabilityd = η + β ∗ Draf tEligibled + ωd .                                (4)


Because an unbiased estimate of β requires data on a random sample of the population,
as opposed to an endogenously-selected subsample of inmates, we estimate the person-level
analogue of Equation 4 using restricted-use U.S. Census data from 2000.8 We then obtain the
two-sample instrumental-variable estimate by taking the ratio of the reduced-form estimate
and the first-stage estimate,
                                                             γ̂
                                                 α̂T SIV =        ,                                          (5)
                                                             β̂
   6
     Note that, although aggregation to the date-of-birth level may lessen such concerns, they would likely
remain because of seasonal patterns in fertility that are associated with socioeconomic status (Buckles and
Hungerman 2010). This approach is also problematic because, outside of the cohorts subject to the draft
lotteries, there is unlikely to be much variation in veteran status across dates of birth.
   7
     While it is desirable to control for other covariates to increase the precision of estimates, Angrist (1989)
suggests that this is not necessary to avoid bias since there is no correlation between draft lottery status and
characteristics besides subsequent veteran status.
   8
     That is, we regress whether an individual is a veteran on whether an individual was draft eligible.


                                                       9
and estimate its standard error using the delta method.9 The standard-error estimates for
the first-stage and reduced-form estimates used in this calculation are clustered on lottery
numbers to address the fact that the former is based on individual-level data while the latter
is based on data aggregated to the birth-date level.
       While random assignment ensures that γ̂ will be unbiased, the instrumental variables
estimation strategy relies on the assumption that veteran status is the only mechanism of
transmission between draft eligibility and the probability of incarceration. We acknowledge
that α̂ will be biased if draft eligibility also affects incarceration probabilities through other
mechanisms. It has been documented that eligibility had a positive impact on educational
attainment (Angrist and Krueger 1992, Card and Lemieux 2001; and Angrist and Chen
2011).10 To the extent that increased education levels lead to decreased crime (Lochner and
Moretti 2004) the extra education conferred by draft eligibility should bias our estimates of α
downward. Another potential issue is that military service might affect incarceration through
its impacts on mortality; however researchers have found little evidence that military service
affects health (Conley and Heerwig 2009; Dobkin and Shabani 2009; Siminski and Ville
2011), which might be explained by the generous health benefits that tend to be provided to
veterans.11 In addition, the fact that our data exclude those serving in military prisons may
cause us to understate the effect of military service on criminal behavior. In addition, we
acknowledge that impacts on crime may diverge from impacts on incarceration if military
service affects the probability of getting caught conditional on committing a crime or if
veterans receive differential treatment from law enforcement officers or judges. We should
also note that this instrumental variable approach identifies the local average treatment effect
   9
       In particular, we assume cov(γ̂, β̂) = 0, which is likely to hold since the the estimates are based on
                                                           2
independent samples, yielding var(α̂T SIV ) = var(γ̂)
                                                  β̂ 2
                                                       + γ̂ ∗var(
                                                             β̂ 4
                                                                  β̂)
                                                                      . Bootstrapping produces nearly identical
standard-error estimates.
  10
     In contrast to these studies focusing on the United States, Siminski (forthcoming) finds no evidence of
similar effects for Australia where there was no GI Bill.
  11
     Bedard and Deschênes (2006) provide a notable exception, finding that military service in World War II
and the Korean War led to increased mortality due to increased smoking.


                                                      10
(LATE), or the effect of military service on those individuals who can be compelled to enter
the military by the draft lotteries.



5        Results

This section is organized into multiple parts. We begin by presenting estimates of the first-
stage effect of draft eligibility on military service. Next, we show summary statistics for
incarceration probabilities and provide visual evidence supporting our main results. We
then present our main results, which are followed by robustness checks to verify that these
results are not driven by the particular birthdays that were drawn in any given lottery or
by avoidance behaviors among eligible men. Finally, we conduct a supplementary analysis
using prison admissions data from 1983–1991.


5.1       First Stage Effect of Eligibility on Military Service

As described above, an unbiased estimate of the effect of the Vietnam draft lotteries on
military service requires a random sample of individuals exposed to the draft. We obtain
these estimates using restricted-use U.S. Census data from 2000.12
       Table 1 shows how draft eligibility affected military service for the 1944–1952 cohorts.
As demonstrated in earlier studies, draft eligibility did not have a significant impact on
the earliest of these cohorts subject to the national lottery—this is not surprising because
a large share of the capable men in these cohorts were already called to serve via local
drafts. In subsequent sections we follow the existing literature and focus on the 1948–1952
cohorts, for whom the first-stage estimate is clearly strong for both whites and nonwhites.
  12
    Because of confidentiality requirements, we do not have direct access to this data. These results are
based on specifications that Josh Angrist and Stacey Chen have generously run for us. Angrist and Chen
(2011) also explore a specification in which the effects are interacted with groups of lottery numbers. They
find that these additional instruments do not increase precision. For this reason, we focus on the single
instrument case which simplifies statistical inference for the two-sample instrumental-variable estimates.



                                                    11
For these cohorts, eligibility increased the probability of military service by approximately
11 percentage points for whites and 7 percentage points for nonwhites, on average, with
especially large impacts for those born 1950–1952.


5.2       Summary Statistics

Table 2 presents incarceration probabilities by survey wave, race, and draft eligibility sta-
tus.13 The table separately considers incarceration for all crimes, violent crimes, drug-related
crimes, property crimes, and public order crimes.14 These categories are mutually exclusive,
but since an inmate can be concurrently serving time for multiple offenses, he may contribute
to multiple lines in the table. In most cases, the statistics in Table 2 suggest that induction
had only a small effect, if any, on criminality among whites. On the other hand, they suggest
that induction increased incarceration for violent crimes by approximately 15 percent.


5.3       Visual Evidence

Figures 1 through 4 plot estimated probabilities of male incarceration by quarter of birth and
draft eligibility. Although the data can be used to construct more-disaggregated (e.g., month,
week, day) plots, aggregating to the quarterly level better allows us to discern patterns in
the data; however, we also present month-level plots in the appendix.
       Figure 1 focuses on white males incarcerated for violent crimes, with separate panels
for those incarcerated in 1979, 1986, and 1991. Though the estimates are somewhat noisy,
incarceration probabilities in 1979 appear systematically higher for those who are draft
eligible relative to those whose birthdays made them ineligible. In particular, the estimated
  13
    In the Appendix, tables A1, A2, and A3 present similar statistics by draft cohort.
  14
    We follow the National Prisoner Statistics offense code categorization. Violent crimes include any at-
tempt at murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, rape, robbery, assault, or extortion. Drug-related crimes in-
clude traffic in or possession of drugs. Property crimes include robbery, extortion, burglary, auto theft,
fraud, larceny, embezzlement, any stolen property crime, and drug trafficking. Finally, public order crimes
are more varied but primarily consist of weapons violations and serious traffic offenses.



                                                    12
probability of incarceration is higher among those who are draft eligible for 15 of 20 birth
quarters. It is also the case that incarceration probabilities are usually higher among those
who are draft eligible in 1986 and 1991 although this is less clear to the eye.
       Figure 2 shows similar graphs for white males incarcerated for nonviolent crimes. The
estimates are again imprecise but collectively suggest that incarceration probabilities for
nonviolent crimes are lower in 1979 and 1986 among those were draft eligible.
       Figures 3 and 4 show similar graphs for nonwhite males incarcerated for violent and non-
white violent crimes, respectively. These graphs largely suggest that there is no relationship
between draft eligibility and incarceration among nonwhites. The one exception, investi-
gated in more detail below, is that incarceration for violent crimes appears higher among
the draft eligible population than the ineligible population in 1991.
       These figures provide suggestive evidence of effects on criminal behavior, though the
means presented in these figures are rather noisy. For this reason, we pool all of the cohorts
together in the next section to improve precision.15


5.4       Main Results

Table 3 reports the estimated effects of draft eligibility and military service on incarceration
probabilities among whites, with separate panels for violent crimes, nonviolent crimes, and
all crimes. The data are aggregated to the exact date of birth by survey year level. The
estimates control for month by year of birth fixed effects to deal with the fact that later
birth months had a higher probability of being drawn in the 1969 draft due to mechanical
problems with the lottery board’s randomization method.
       Column 1 shows estimates that pool data from the three survey years while also control-
ling for survey year fixed effects. These estimates echo the results presented in the previous
  15
    With more data, it would be quite informative to obtain separate estimates for each cohort, especially
because they had differing experiences as the war was winding down when the youngest cohorts served.



                                                   13
section. The estimated impact on incarceration for a violent crime is significant at the
ten-percent level, indicating that eligibility increased the probability of incarceration by ap-
proximately 0.03 percentage points. The corresponding two-sample instrumental-variables
estimate indicates that Vietnam Era military service increased the probability of incarcera-
tion for a violent crime by 0.27 percentage points. In contrast, these data indicate a negative
effect on incarceration for a nonviolent crime, although this estimate is not close to being
statistically significant at any conventional level. That said, because of this offsetting im-
pact, the estimated effect on the probability of incarceration for any crime (Panel C, Column
1) is close to zero.
    Columns 2 through 4 stratify on the three survey years, with the most precise estimates
using data from 1979 and the least precise estimates using data from 1991. To put these
results into context, it is important to keep in mind that the men conscripted by the lotteries
would have finished their mandatory service five to seven years before the 1979 survey was
conducted.
    The estimates using data from 1979 (Column 2) are qualitatively similar but stronger
than the estimates that pool together the three survey years. The estimated impact of
Vietnam Era military service on incarceration for a violent crime is 0.34 percentage points and
significant at the five-percent level. The estimated impact on incarceration for a nonviolent
crime is of a similar magnitude (-0.30 percentage points) and significant at the ten-percent
level. Not surprisingly then, the estimated impact on incarceration for any crime is close to
zero.16
    The estimates using data from 1986 are qualitatively similar but do differ in important
ways. In particular, the estimated impact on incarceration for a violent crime is smaller
in magnitude (0.15 percentage points) and the estimated impact on incarceration for a
  16
     Correlational evidence based on the 1980 Census suggests a small but significant negative effect of service
in Vietnam on being observed in a correctional facility.




                                                      14
nonviolent crime is larger in magnitude (-0.47 percentage points). However, these estimates
are not close to being statistically distinguishable from those focusing on incarceration in
1979.
   The estimates using data from 1991 suggest a positive effect on incarceration for a violent
crime and no effect on incarceration for a non-violent crime. That said, these estimates the
least precise among those shown in Table 3, with standard error estimates two- to three-times
larger than similar estimates using data from 1979.
   Table 4 presents estimates for nonwhite men. These estimates suggest there is no effect
of Vietnam Era service on incarceration for violent crimes in 1979 or 1986 but, curiously,
indicate an large effect in 1991. These estimates suggest that there was either a large delayed
impact on nonwhite males that manifested in the late 1980s or that the 1991 estimate
is a statistical artifact. The results in Section 5.7, where we estimate impacts on prison
admissions from 1983–1991, suggest that the latter explanation is most likely.
   The estimated effects on nonwhite incarceration for nonviolent crimes are never statis-
tically significant and, like the estimated effects on incarceration for violent crimes, vary in
sign. That said, it is important to note that the first stage is relatively small for nonwhites
and thus the confidence intervals relatively large. We cannot rule out that the effects of
military service are the same for whites and nonwhites.


5.5     Estimates Using More-Narrow Crime Categories

In order to shed light on our main results, tables 5 and 6 show the effect of draft eligibility
on subcategories of violent, property, and drug related crimes. Because incarceration proba-
bilities are small for these narrowly-defined categories, these tables report estimated effects
per 10,000 births instead of per person. These estimates should be interpreted with caution
because the sample size of inmates contributing to each estimate is relatively small when
the data has been disaggregated in this fashion. As a result, the estimates rarely rise to the

                                              15
level of statistical significance and often change signs when considering data from different
survey years.
   The estimates that are relatively robust for whites (Table 5) suggest that the overall
impact on violent crime among whites is driven by incarcerations for murder, robbery and
kidnapping offenses. In contrast, the estimated impacts on nonviolent crime categories are
not sufficiently robust to yield insight into our earlier results. The estimates for nonwhites
(Table 6) demonstrate that the estimated impact on violent crime in 1991 among nonwhites
is driven by robberies. More broadly, the estimated effects on these narrow categories of
crime are not robust across survey years for nonwhites, with the exception of burglary for
which we sometimes see significantly elevated rates among the draft eligible population.


5.6    Robustness Checks Using Lotteries for Unaffected Cohorts

In this section, we conduct two falsification tests, similar in spirit to those in Galiani, Rossi,
and Schargrodsky (2011), in order to address potential concerns regarding the use of the
lottery for identification.
   One possible concern with our main estimation strategy is that, despite being random, the
first numbers drawn (which led to eligibility) may have included a disproportionate number
of birth dates that we would expect to be associated with higher rates of crime even if no
one was called to serve in the military. For example, this could occur if men born on dates
with the earliest lottery numbers disproportionately came from disadvantaged backgrounds.
   To verify that this type of phenomenon is not driving our results, we apply each of
the three lotteries to cohorts that the given lottery did not affect and conduct the analysis
as before. For example, we test the 1969 draft that applied to the 1944–1950 cohorts by
matching the 1969 lottery numbers to the birth dates in the 1941–1942 and 1951–1959 cohorts
and testing for effects. Since the 1969 lottery did not actually apply to these cohorts, we
should not find significant effects unless the 1969 lottery suffered from the potential problem

                                               16
described above. We test each lottery using all of the unaffected cohorts that our data sets
allow us to cover, ranging from 1942–1959.17
    The results of this falsification exercise, by race and crime type, are presented in Table
7. Consistent with random assignment, the estimates are neither uniformly positive nor
uniformly negative. Further, just two of the 48 “placebo tests” are significant at the ten-
percent level.
    A second possible concern with our empirical strategy relates to the validity of the exclu-
sion restriction for the two-sample instrumental-variable estimates. In particular, one might
be concerned that draft-eligible men may have engaged in draft avoidance behaviors that
could affect their probability of incarceration.18 Using hypothetical APNs taken from the
1969, 1970, and 1971 drawings, we test for this possibility by considering possible effects on
men who were assigned low draft lottery numbers in the four non-binding lotteries that took
place in 1972–1975. Since these lottery numbers were assigned but their results were not
used to induct men into the military, we expect to see no link between low lottery numbers
and violent crime unless lottery numbers affected criminality through mechanisms besides
military service. Table 8 shows these results by race and crime type. Again, the results are
not consistently positive or negative and just two of 48 are statistically significant at the
ten-percent level.19
  17
     We cannot use earlier cohorts in this falsification exercise because earlier Vital Statistics of the United
States reports do not provide birth data by month, gender, and race.
  18
     Of particular concern, although the evidence is based on a very small sample, Kuziemko (2008) presents
suggestive evidence that men with low lottery numbers may have engaged in delinquent behaviors to avoid
being drafted. She also examines Georgia prison admissions data and finds that men with low lottery numbers
in the non-binding 1972 lottery were over-represented. We also examine the 1972 lottery as a robustness
check and find no detectable relationship between low lottery number and being incarcerated for the serious
crimes that would have kept an offender in prison until the 1979 inmate survey. One possible reconciliation
of our findings is that while some men may have “dodged down” into prison to avoid conscription, they did
not commit the serious crimes with multi-year sentences we examine here.
  19
     As another robustness check, we have considered the interaction between incarceration for a violent
crime and non-Army military service as an outcome. Since nearly all drafted men served in the Army, we
should not find significant effects on this outcome. Indeed, we find draft eligibility significantly raises the
probability of being a violent offender and an army veteran and has no effect on being a violent offender and
a veteran from another branch of service.



                                                      17
5.7    Analysis of Prison Admissions Data, 1983–1991

In this section we use data from the NCRP to further investigate some of the results presented
in prior sections. The NCRP provides data on all prisoners admitted to state correctional
facilities on an annual basis. Although these data track all movements across prisons, we
focus on admissions that are due to court commitments to reduce the likelihood of “double
counting” prisoners. As in previous sections, we combine these data with vital statistics
data, which are used for the denominator of the outcome variable. However, here we use the
number of number of individuals admitted per 10,000 births at the exact date of birth level
since the number of inmates admitted into prison per year is relatively small.
   Panels A and B of Table 9 show no systematic evidence that draft eligibility is related to
new admission of white prisoners in the mid-1980s to early 1990s, for violent or nonviolent
crimes. In light of the results shown in the previous sections, there are two potential expla-
nations for this finding. It may be the case that the effects of military service on criminal
behavior fade out as veterans spend more time as civilians. Or this finding may simply reflect
an incapacitation effect—we may be less likely to observe impacts on prison admissions in
the 1980s because men who were affected most were already incarcerated in earlier years, as
evidenced by the significant impacts we found on the prison population in 1979.
   Panels C and D focus on admissions of nonwhite prisoners. Here, we again see no sys-
tematic evidence of a relationship between draft eligibility and prison admissions in the
mid-1980s to early 1990s. This suggests that the statistically significant effect on of eligi-
bility on incarceration for violent crimes that manifests in the 1991 prisoner survey data is
likely a statistical artifact. Further corroborating this interpretation, we find similar results
when we focus on robberies, the category that drove the aforementioned estimate in the
prisoner data.




                                               18
6     Discussion and Conclusion

Our results highlight the importance of one’s background on criminal behavior. We find that
military service increases the probability of incarceration for violent crimes among whites,
with point estimates suggesting an impact of 0.27 percentage points. Putting aside differences
between the United States and Argentina, these results may initially seem to be at odds with
Galiani, Rossi, and Schargrodsky (2011) who also exploit a draft lottery but do not find any
evidence that military service affects violent crime. However, our analysis suggests that the
effects on violent crime manifest soon after military service is complete, as they are present
in 1979 for cohorts who served in the early 1970s. This is critical, as Galiani, Rossi, and
Schargrodsky (2011) would be unable to detect such effects in their analysis that identifies
the 1958–1962 cohorts going through the criminal justice system from 2000–2005.
    We also find evidence of offsetting impacts on incarceration for nonviolent crimes among
whites. This suggests that military service may not change an individual’s propensity to
commit crime but instead may cause them to commit more-severe crimes involving violence.
    While our identification strategy only allows us to estimate the effects of military service
on conscripts during the Vietnam Era, multiple features of today’s military suggest that
our results may be relevant today. The military has continued and escalated the use of
highly realistic training simulations, a legacy of late-1960s efforts to desensitize soldiers to
engaging with enemy combatants. For example, the military currently uses Iraqi nationals
as role-players in training exercises in order to help cadets “put a human face and picture on
Iraqi society.”20 In addition, the rates of posttraumatic stress disorder for veterans of Iraq
and Afganistan (14 to 25 percent) are quite similar to the rates for those who served in the
Vietnam War (18 to 20 percent).21
  20
     For more details, see http://www.army.mil/-news/2010/06/17/40960-iraqi-role-players-add-realism-to-
cadet-training/.
  21
     These statistics are congressional testimony by Thomas R. Insel before the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform in 2007. Available online at: http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2007/05/t20070524a.html



                                                   19
       Further, today’s military readily acknowledges that soldiers often struggle with the tran-
sition to civilian life and that skills that promote success in combat can translate into un-
healthy behaviors at home. For this reason, each branch of the military has programs to
help ease the transition. Although research highlights some promising results for the average
soldier (Castro et al. 2006; Adler et al. 2009), recent evidence raises serious concerns about
the treatment of servicemen with the most-severe mental problems (Stahl 2009).22 Coupled
with this mixed evidence on the efficacy of the treatment provided to soldiers at risk of men-
tal health problems, our results, which demonstrate grave consequences of military service,
highlight the need for further research in this area.
       Finally, our results have important implications for the legal system, which has 23
recently-established pilot courts that try only cases in which the offender is a veteran.23
Possibly out of some sense of society’s responsibility for their behavior, these courts focus
on rehabilitation and treatment programs instead of incarceration. In 2008, senators Kerry
and Murkowski introduced legislation to extend the program nationally. The existence of
this special court system implicitly creates a separate legal class for veterans and tacitly
acknowledges that military service can have negative consequences that manifest in crimi-
nal behavior once servicemen return home. But these courts exclude the violent offenders.
Our analysis suggests that these are the offenses for which military service is most clearly
responsible.




  22
     In response to a survey from the Warrior Transition Unit at Fort Hood, where physically and mentally
wounded soldiers are sent to heal, 41 percent of commanding officers thought more than half of soldiers
claiming to have symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder were faking or exaggerating versus 11 percent
of nurse case managers.
  23
     Details on these courts can be found at the Veterans Treatment Court Clearinghouse which is hosted by
the National Association of Drug Court Professionals.


                                                   20
References
Abadie, A. (2002): “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental Variable
 Models,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457), 284–292.

Adler, A. B., P. D. Bliese, D. McGurk, C. W. Hoge, and C. A. Castro (2009): “Battle-
 mind Debriefing and Battlemind Training as Early Interventions with Soldiers Returning from
 Iraq: Randomization by Platoon,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(5), 928–
 940.

Angrist, J. D. (1989): “Using the Draft Lottery to Measure the Effect of Military Service On
 Civilian Labor Market Outcomes,” in Research in Labor Economics, Volume 10, ed. by R. Ehren-
 berg. JAI Press, Inc., Greenwich.

         (1990): “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social
  Security Administrative Records,” American Economic Review, 80(3), 313–336.

        (1991): “The Draft Lottery and Voluntary Enlistment in the Vietnam Era,” Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 86(415), 584–595.

Angrist, J. D., and S. H. Chen (2011): “Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill: Evidence
 from the Draft Lottery,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Angrist, J. D., S. H. Chen, and B. R. Frandsen (2009): “Did Vietnam Veterans Get Sicker
 in the 1990s? The Complicated Effects of Military Service on Self-Reported Health,” NBER
 Working Paper No. 14781.

Angrist, J. D., and A. B. Krueger (1992): “Estimating the Payoff to Schooling Using the
 Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery,” Mimeo.

Baskir, L. M., and W. A. Strauss (1978): Chance and Circumstance: The Draft, the War,
 and the Vietnam Generation. Knopf.

Bayer, P., R. Hjalmarsson, and D. Pozen (2009): “Building Criminal Capital behind Bars:
  Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 105–147.

Bedard, K., and O. Deschênes (2006): “The Impact of Military Service on Long-Term Health:
  Evidence from World War II and Korean War Veterans,” American Economic Review, 96(1),
  176–194.

Buckles, K., and D. Hungerman (2010): “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions,
 New Answers,” Mimeo.

Card, D., and G. Dahl (2009): “Family Violence and Football: The Effect of Unexpected
 Emotional Cues On Violent Behavior,” NBER Working Paper No. 15497.

Card, D., and T. Lemieux (2001): “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended
 Legacy of the Vietnam War,” American Economic Review, 91(2), 97–102.



                                               21
Carpenter, C. (2007): “Heavy Alcohol Use and Crime: Evidence From Underage Drunk?Driving
 Laws,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 50(3), 539–557.

Carpenter, C., and C. Dobkin (2008): “The Drinking Age, Alcohol Consumption, and Crime,”
 Mimeo.

Castro, C., C. Hoge, C. Milliken, D. McGurk, A. Adler, A. Cox, and P. Bliese (2006):
 “Battlemind Training: Transitioning Home from Combat,” Mimeo.

Cesur, R., J. J. Sabia, and E. Tekin (2011): “The Psychological Costs of War: Military
  Combat and Mental Health,” NBER Working Paper No. 16927.

Chaiken, J. M. (2000): “Correctional Populations in the United States, 1997,” U.S. Department
 of Justice Report.

Conley, D., and J. A. Heerwig (2009): “The Long-term Effects of Military Conscription on
 Mortality: Estimates from the Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery,” NBER Working Paper No. 15105.

Dahl, G., and S. DellaVigna (2009): “Does Movie Violence Increase Violent Crime?,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 677–734.

Dickert-Conlin, S., and A. Chandra (1999): “Taxes and the Timing of Births,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 107(1), 161–177.

Dobkin, C., and R. Shabani (2009): “The Long Term Health Effects of Military Service: Evi-
 dence From the National Health Interview Survey and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery,” Economic
 Inquiry, 47(1), 69–80.

Doyle Jr., J. J. (2008): “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
 Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(4), 746–770.

Drago, F., R. Galbiati, and P. Vertova (2009): “The Deterrent Effects of Prison: Evidence
 from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(2), 257–280.

Duggan, M. (2001): “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 1086–1114.

Duggan, M., R. Hamjalmarrson, and B. Jacob (2007): “The Effect of Gun Shows On Gun-
 Related Deaths: Evidence From California and Texas,” Mimeo.

Duggan, M., R. Hjalmarsson, and B. A. Jacob (forthcoming): “The Short-Term and Lo-
 calized Effect of Gun Shows: Evidence from California and Texas,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, p. null.

Eisenberg, D., and B. Rowe (2009): “Effects of Smoking in Young Adulthood on Smoking Later
  in Life: Evidence from the Vietnam Era Lottery,” Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 12(2).

Fienberg, S. E. (1971): “Randomization and Social Affairs: The 1970 Draft Lottery,” Science,
  171(3968), 255–261.

Flynn, G. Q. (1993): The Draft: 1940-1973. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

                                              22
Foley, C. F. (2011): “Welfare Payments and Crime,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1),
  97–112.

Fryer, R. G., P. S. Heaton, S. D. Levitt, and K. M. Murphy (2010): “Measuring Crack
  Cocaine and Its Impact,” Mimeo.

Galiani, S., M. A. Rossi, and E. Schargrodsky (2011): “The Effects of Peacetime and
 Wartime Conscription On Criminal Activity,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 3(2), 119–136.

Gould, E. D., B. A. Weinberg, and D. B. Mustard (2002): “Crime Rates and Local Labor
 Market Opportunities in the United States: 19791997,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 84(1), 45–61.

Grinols, E. L., and D. B. Mustard (2006): “Casinos, Crime, and Community Costs,” Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 28–45.

Grogger, J., and M. Willis (2000): “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in Urban
 Crime Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4), 519–529.

Grossman, D. (2009): On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society
 (Revised Edition). Back Bay Books.

Hansen, B. (2011): “Punishment and Recidivism in Drunk Driving,” Mimeo.

Hearst, N., J. W. Buehler, T. B. Newman, and G. W. Rutherford (1991): “The Draft
 Lottery and AIDS: Evidence Against Increased Intravenous Drug Use by Vietnam-era Veterans,”
 American Journal of Epidemiology, 134(5), 522–525.

Imbens, G., and W. van der Klaaw (1995): “Evaluating the Cost of Conscription in The
  Netherlands,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13(2), 7280.

Jacob, B. A., and L. Lefgren (2003): “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
  Concentration and Juvenile Crime,” American Economic Review, 93(5), 1560–1577.

Kelly, M. (2000): “Inequality and Crime,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4), 530–539.

Kling, J. R., J. Ludwig, and L. F. Katz (2005): “Neighborhood Effects On Crime for Female
 and Male Youth: Evidence From a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 120(1), 87–130.

Kuziemko, I. (2008): “Dodging Up to College or Dodging Down to Jail: Behavioral Reponses to
 the Vietnam Draft by Race and Class,” Mimeo.

Lee, D. S., and J. McCrary (2009): “The Deterrence Effect of Prison: Dynamic Theory and
  Evidence,” Mimeo.

Levitt, S. D. (1997): “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police
  On Crime,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 270–290.


                                              23
          (1998): “Juvenile Crime and Punishment,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1156–
  1185.

        (2002): “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police On Crime:
  Reply,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 1244–1250.

Lochner, L., and E. Moretti (2004): “The Effect of Education On Crime: Evidence From
  Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 155–189.

Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, and P. Hirschfield (2001): “Urban Poverty And Juvenile Crime:
  Evidence From A Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 116(2), 655–679.

McCrary, J. (2002): “Do Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring Really Help Us Estimate the Effect
 of Police On Crime? Comment,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 1236–1243.

Miguel, E. (2005): “Poverty and Witch Killing,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(4), 1153–1172.

Mocan, H. N., and T. G. Bali (2010): “Asymmetric Crime Cycles,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 92(4), 899–911.

Mocan, N., and E. Tekin (2010): “Ugly Criminals,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(1),
 15–30.

Oreopoulos, P. (2003): “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1533–1575.

Rees, D. I., and K. T. Schnepel (2009): “College Football Games and Crime,” Journal of
 Sports Economics, 10(1), 68.

Robins, L. N., D. H. Davis, and D. W. Goodwin (1974): “Drug Use By U.S. Army Enlisted
 Men in Vietnam: A Follow-Up On Their Return Home,” American Journal of Epidemiology,
 99(4), 235.

Rohlfs, C. (2006): “Essays Measuring Dollar-Fatality Tradeoffs and Other Human Costs of War
 in World War II and Vietnam,” University of Chicago Doctoral Dissertation.

Rohlfs, C. (2010): “Does Combat Exposure Make You a More Violent or Criminal Person?
 Evidence from the Vietnam Draft,” Journal of Human Resources, 45(2), 271–300.

Siminski, P. (forthcoming): “Employment Effects of Army Service and Veterans Compensation:
  Evidence from the Australian Vietnam-Era Conscription Lotteries,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics.

Siminski, P., and S. Ville (2011a): “I Was Only Nineteen, 45 Years Ago: What Can We Learn
  from Australia’s Conscription Lotteries,” Mimeo.

         (2011b): “Long-Run Mortality Effects of Vietnam-Era Army Service: Evidence from
  Australias Conscription Lotteries,” American Economic Review, 101(3), 345–349.


                                                24
Slone, L. B., and M. J. Friedman (2008): After the War Zone: A Practical Guide for Returning
  Troops and Their Families. Da Capo Press.

Stahl, S. M. (2009): “Crisis in Army Psychopharmacology and Mental Health Care at Fort
  Hood,” CNS Spectrums, 14(12), 677–684.

Turner, S., and J. Bound (2003): “Closing the Gap or Widening the Divide: The Effects of
 the GI Bill and World War II On the Educational Outcomes of Black Americans,” The Journal
 of Economic History, 63(01), 145–177.

Yang, D. (2008): “Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context of Customs
  Reform in the Philippines,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1), 1–14.




                                            25
                                     Figure 1
Probability of Incarceration for a Violent Crime by Draft Eligibility, White Males

                               Panel A: 1979 Data




                               Panel B: 1986 Data




                               Panel C: 1991 Data




                                       26
                                      Figure 2
Probability of Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime by Draft Eligibility, White Males

                                 Panel A: 1979 Data




                                 Panel B: 1986 Data




                                 Panel C: 1991 Data




                                         27
                                       Figure 3
Probability of Incarceration for a Violent Crime by Draft Eligibility, Nonwhite Males

                                 Panel A: 1979 Data




                                 Panel B: 1986 Data




                                 Panel C: 1991 Data




                                         28
                                        Figure 4
Probability of Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime by Draft Eligibility, Nonwhite Males

                                  Panel A: 1979 Data




                                  Panel B: 1986 Data




                                  Panel C: 1991 Data




                                          29
                                                                       Table 1
                                         Estimated First-Stage Effects of Draft Eligibility on Military Service

     Cohort:                     1944        1945        1946        1947        1948        1949        1950         1951        1952          1948-52
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)            (10)

     Panel A: Whites
     Draft-eligibility effect   -0.0047*     0.0021    0.0145***   0.0344***   0.0577***   0.0743***   0.1332***   0.1384***    0.1685***   0.1134***
                                (0.0027)    (0.0028)    (0.0026)    (0.0026)    (0.0023)    (0.0027)    (0.0028)    (0.0028)     (0.0030)    (0.0018)
     Observations               174,222     172,160     207,805     234,219     220,891     224,130     223,984     232,348      240,198        1,141,551
     F-statistic                   3           1          31         179         616         753         2213         2522        3146            3869
     Panel B: Nonwhites
     Draft-eligibility effect    0.0031      -0.0028    0.0056     0.0212***   0.0327***   0.0492***   0.0893***   0.0959***    0.0964***   0.0734***
                                (0.0076)    (0.0075)   (0.0077)     (0.0072)    (0.0067)    (0.0067)    (0.0059)    (0.0060)     (0.0064)    (0.0028)
     Observations               20,500      21,405      23,454      27,008      28,272      30,321      31,942       31,162      33,113         154,810
     F-statistic                   0           0          1           9           24          54         230          256          228            707




30
          Notes: Results are based on restricted-use U.S. Census data from 2000. Estimates show the impact of draft eligibility on military
          service by birth cohort and race. Specifications are at the individual level, include month-by-year of birth fixed effects, cluster
          standard error estimates on lottery numbers, and are weighted using Census sampling weights.
          * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                    Table 2
           Estimated Incarceration Probabilities, Males Born 1948-1952

              Race:                         White                  Nonwhite
              Draft Eligibility:     Eligible   Ineligible   Eligible   Ineligible

              Panel A: Aggregated Survey Waves
              All Crime               0.00601     0.00601     0.0337      0.0323
                                      (0.0102)    (0.0101)   (0.0543)    (0.0521)
              Violent Crime           0.00240     0.00209     0.0174      0.0161
                                     (0.00548)   (0.00512)   (0.0376)    (0.0352)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00362     0.00392     0.0163      0.0162
                                     (0.00840)   (0.00845)   (0.0382)    (0.0383)
              Drug Crime              0.00202     0.00211    0.00637     0.00638
                                     (0.00678)   (0.00683)   (0.0276)    (0.0277)
              Property Crime          0.00333     0.00323     0.0200      0.0192
                                     (0.00764)   (0.00739)   (0.0420)    (0.0410)
              Public Order Crime     0.000769    0.000798    0.00429     0.00350
                                     (0.00348)   (0.00358)   (0.0204)    (0.0184)

              Panel B: 1979 Survey
              All Crime               0.00318     0.00328      0.0254      0.0257
                                     (0.00454)   (0.00469)    (0.0322)    (0.0330)
              Violent Crime           0.00150     0.00124      0.0123      0.0130
                                     (0.00314)   (0.00288)    (0.0221)    (0.0234)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00168     0.00204      0.0131      0.0128
                                     (0.00316)   (0.00370)    (0.0226)    (0.0227)
              Drug Crime             0.000309    0.000304     0.00182     0.00137
                                     (0.00140)   (0.00138)   (0.00855)   (0.00752)
              Property Crime          0.00143     0.00133      0.0129      0.0133
                                     (0.00300)   (0.00298)    (0.0237)    (0.0242)
              Public Order Crime     0.000249    0.000177     0.00158     0.00127
                                     (0.00127)   (0.00115)   (0.00850)   (0.00724)

              Panel C: 1986 Survey
              All Crime               0.00364     0.00383     0.0256      0.0282
                                     (0.00584)   (0.00598)   (0.0391)    (0.0418)
              Violent Crime           0.00225     0.00197     0.0161      0.0175
                                     (0.00463)   (0.00423)   (0.0315)    (0.0329)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00139     0.00185    0.00957      0.0106
                                     (0.00369)   (0.00427)   (0.0246)    (0.0265)
              Drug Crime             0.000362    0.000576    0.00208     0.00238
                                     (0.00174)   (0.00236)   (0.0117)    (0.0125)
              Property Crime          0.00196     0.00211     0.0158      0.0175
                                     (0.00429)   (0.00439)   (0.0312)    (0.0334)
              Public Order Crime     0.000561    0.000590    0.00302     0.00296
                                     (0.00234)   (0.00236)   (0.0145)    (0.0140)

              Panel D: 1991 Survey
              All Crime                0.0112      0.0109     0.0501      0.0429
                                      (0.0148)    (0.0146)   (0.0767)    (0.0717)
              Violent Crime           0.00344     0.00305     0.0238      0.0178
                                     (0.00755)   (0.00712)   (0.0519)    (0.0455)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00778     0.00786     0.0263      0.0251
                                      (0.0127)    (0.0126)   (0.0557)    (0.0554)
              Drug Crime              0.00538     0.00546     0.0152      0.0154
                                      (0.0108)    (0.0108)   (0.0443)    (0.0444)
              Property Crime          0.00658     0.00626     0.0314      0.0267
                                      (0.0115)    (0.0110)   (0.0597)    (0.0570)
              Public Order Crime      0.00150     0.00163    0.00827     0.00626
                                     (0.00533)   (0.00553)   (0.0306)    (0.0275)




Notes: Observations are at the exact day of birth by survey year level. Incarcer-
ation data are from the 1979, 1986, and 31 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and
Federal Correctional Facilities and birth data are from the Vital Statistics of the
United States.
                                            Table 3
Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility and Military Service on the Probability of Incarceration,
                                 White Males Born 1948–1952

  Survey Years:                                         All         1979        1986         1991
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)

  Panel A: Incarceration for a Violent Crime
  Estimated effect of eligibility                    0.00030*    0.00038**     0.00016      0.00036
                                                     (0.00016)   (0.00016)    (0.00023)    (0.00036)
  TSIV estimated of effect of service                0.00269*    0.00340**     0.00145      0.00323
                                                     (0.00142)   (0.00144)    (0.00204)    (0.00322)
  Observations                                         5481         1827        1827         1827

  Panel B: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime
  Estimated effect of eligibility                     -0.00026   -0.00033*   -0.00053***    0.00009
                                                     (0.00024)   (0.00018)    (0.00019)    (0.00064)
  TSIV estimated of effect of service                 -0.00228   -0.00299*   -0.00469***    0.00084
                                                     (0.00211)   (0.00164)    (0.00172)    (0.00568)
  Observations                                         5481         1827        1827         1827

  Panel C: Incarceration for Any Crime
  Estimated effect of eligibility                     0.00005     0.00005      -0.00036     0.00046
                                                     (0.00028)   (0.00025)    (0.00030)    (0.00072)
  TSIV estimated of effect of service                 0.00041     0.00041      -0.00324     0.00407
                                                     (0.00252)   (0.00226)    (0.00264)    (0.00641)
  Observations                                         5481         1827        1827         1827



    Notes: Reduced-form estimates use observations at the exact day of birth by survey year level.
    Incarceration data are from the 1979, 1986, and 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and Federal
    Correctional Facilities and birth data are from the Vital Statistics of the United States. All
    specifications include month-by-year of birth fixed effects and survey year fixed effects and
    weight by the number of individuals represented by the cell. All drafted cohorts include birth
    years ranging from 1944 to 1952. Estimated standard errors, clustered on lottery number, are
    shown in parentheses. The two-sample instrumental-variable estimates of the effect of military
    service on incarceration use the first-stage estimates shown in Table 1.
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  32
                                            Table 4
Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility and Military Service on the Probability of Incarceration,
                               Nonwhite Males Born 1948–1952

   Survey Years:                                           All        1979        1986        1991
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

   Panel A: Incarceration for a Violent Crime
   Estimated effect of eligibility                      0.00183*     -0.00058    -0.00093   0.00698***
                                                        (0.00097)   (0.00114)   (0.00150)    (0.00247)
   TSIV estimated of effect of service                  0.02537*     -0.00799    -0.01288   0.09697***
                                                        (0.01354)   (0.01582)   (0.02085)    (0.03434)
   Observations                                           5481        1827        1827        1827

   Panel B: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime
   Estimated effect of eligibility                       0.00024     0.00047     -0.00029    0.00055
                                                        (0.00115)   (0.00118)   (0.00134)   (0.00293)
   TSIV estimated of effect of service                   0.00335     0.00647     -0.00400    0.00759
                                                        (0.01601)   (0.01638)   (0.01867)   (0.04068)
   Observations                                           5481        1827        1827        1827

   Panel C: Incarceration for Any Crime
   Estimated effect of eligibility                       0.00207     -0.00011    -0.00121   0.00753*
                                                        (0.00156)   (0.00172)   (0.00191)   (0.00388)
   TSIV estimated of effect of service                   0.02872     -0.00152    -0.01687   0.10456*
                                                        (0.02161)   (0.02387)   (0.02657)   (0.05389)
   Observations                                           5481        1827        1827        1827



    Notes: See Table 3.
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                   33
                                        Table 5
Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility on the Probability of Incarceration (per 10,000),
                            White Males Born 1948–1952,
                              Narrow Crime Definitions

              Survey Years:                 All          1979        1986        1991
                                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)

              Panel A: Violent Crimes
              Sex Crime                    0.03374      -0.13205     0.03552    0.19774
                                         (0.31716)     (0.22670)   (0.51963)   (0.76831)
              Murder                      0.40634        0.17080    0.41639      0.63181
                                         (0.34170)     (0.34953)   (0.50867)   (0.84605)
              Manslaughter                 0.13382      0.21524     -0.10981    0.29604
                                         (0.13928)     (0.19748)   (0.28355)   (0.24733)
              Kidnapping                 0.45351**     0.48381**   0.56226*      0.31447
                                         (0.19080)     (0.21809)   (0.29373)   (0.38196)
              Extortion                   0.01105       -0.04555    0.07837      0.00034
                                         (0.06992)     (0.03297)   (0.05609)   (0.20128)
              Robbery                     0.85441*      0.81421*    0.63964      1.10938
                                         (0.45519)     (0.43910)   (0.56057)   (1.09291)
              Assault                     0.10965      0.67652**    -0.23495    -0.11262
                                         (0.26486)     (0.31373)   (0.42690)   (0.61535)
              Panel B: Property Crimes
              Burglary                     -0.07211     0.08748    -0.97245*    0.66864
                                          (0.31622)    (0.40238)   (0.57465)   (0.67238)
              Auto Theft                    0.04796     0.10163     -0.10132    0.14358
                                          (0.12995)    (0.13440)   (0.14794)   (0.33755)
              Arson                         0.06069      0.06986    -0.05977    0.17199
                                          (0.15979)    (0.10230)   (0.20011)   (0.41651)
              Fraud                         0.07990     0.13674     0.06775     0.03521
                                          (0.19691)    (0.23200)   (0.26385)   (0.45214)
              Larcency                     -0.11887      0.17309   -0.61080*     0.08111
                                          (0.19405)    (0.21484)   (0.34528)   (0.47256)
              Stolen Property Offense       0.00665    0.26884*     -0.43651     0.18762
                                          (0.13211)    (0.16185)   (0.26825)   (0.23332)
              Property Damage              -0.06099     0.01960     -0.21908    0.01649
                                          (0.05184)    (0.04740)   (0.13522)   (0.06973)
              Illegal Entry              -0.08197**     -0.00436   -0.11659*    -0.12495
                                          (0.04055)    (0.04258)   (0.06728)   (0.09374)
              Panel C: Drug Crimes
              Drug Trafficking            0.39876       0.07963     -0.34441    1.46104
                                         (0.75063)     (0.25094)   (0.36512)   (2.18537)
              Drug Possession             -0.03203      0.03931    -0.51008*    0.37467
                                         (0.43720)     (0.20912)   (0.29064)   (1.27514)




Notes: See Table 3.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  34
                                        Table 6
Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility on the Probability of Incarceration (per 10,000),
                          Nonwhite Males Born 1948–1952,
                              Narrow Crime Definitions

            Survey Years:                 All          1979         1986         1991
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

            Panel A: Violent Crimes
            Sex Crime                    0.17018       0.38616     -0.51407      0.63844
                                       (0.26033)     (0.31434)    (0.44293)     (0.57886)
            Murder                      0.17532       -0.12156     -0.20916      0.85668
                                       (0.31573)     (0.39409)    (0.55667)     (0.75920)
            Manslaughter                 0.06989      -0.07122     -0.01048      0.29136
                                       (0.15359)     (0.12900)    (0.27544)     (0.35614)
            Kidnapping                  0.17064        0.07405     -0.04711      0.48497
                                       (0.18084)     (0.15431)    (0.21741)     (0.48335)
            Extortion                   -0.00447       0.06481     -0.08023      0.00200
                                       (0.05761)     (0.04665)    (0.05642)     (0.15825)
            Robbery                      0.78956      -0.66841     -0.60538    3.64246***
                                       (0.52098)     (0.57406)    (0.70337)     (1.33056)
            Assault                     -0.02074      -0.07555      0.49501      -0.48168
                                       (0.26517)     (0.30925)    (0.46501)     (0.57096)
            Panel B: Property Crimes
            Burglary                   0.84968**     0.87866*      1.04852*      0.62186
                                       (0.33497)     (0.46072)    (0.61290)    (0.61581)
            Auto Theft                   0.06487      0.07476       0.06209      0.05776
                                       (0.13398)     (0.11717)    (0.11602)    (0.37490)
            Arson                        0.00660      -0.02283      0.11411     -0.07148
                                       (0.13530)     (0.07513)    (0.12706)    (0.38480)
            Fraud                       -0.18897      -0.19071   -0.77946***    0.40326
                                       (0.19793)     (0.18708)    (0.28498)    (0.49588)
            Larcency                    -0.18514      0.04169      -0.23127     -0.36585
                                       (0.23576)     (0.28554)    (0.45778)    (0.48803)
            Stolen Property Offense    0.25446*       0.10392       0.02929    0.63017*
                                       (0.14225)     (0.14835)    (0.22070)    (0.34554)
            Property Damage             -0.02929      -0.02694      0.02904     -0.08998
                                       (0.05190)     (0.03873)    (0.07813)    (0.13224)
            Illegal Entry               0.03374        0.07862     -0.04960      0.07222
                                       (0.07518)     (0.09159)    (0.20067)    (0.07176)
            Panel C: Drug Crimes
            Drug Trafficking            0.04325       0.07496       0.20255     -0.14777
                                       (0.45920)     (0.25159)    (0.33590)    (1.37148)
            Drug Possession             0.12018       0.19166      -0.14244      0.31132
                                       (0.28846)     (0.17275)    (0.24559)    (0.81631)




Notes: See Table 3.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                35
                                                                         Table 7
                                            Robustness Check Applying Lotteries to Unaffected Cohorts
                                   Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility Placebo on the Probability of Incarceration

     Cohort’s Lottery Applied:                      1944–1950                                           1951                                            1952
     Cohorts Used In Analysis:                1942, 1943, 1951–1959                             1942–1950, 1952–1959                            1942–1951, 1953–1959

     Survey Years:                   All         1979         1986        1991         All        1979        1986        1991         All        1979        1986        1991
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)

     Panel A: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, White Males
     Est. effect of eligibility     -0.00012    -0.00004     -0.00001    -0.00031    0.00000     -0.00001    -0.00012    0.00014     0.00008     -0.00000    0.00020     0.00004
                                   (0.00011)   (0.00011)    (0.00015)   (0.00025)   (0.00008)   (0.00008)   (0.00013)   (0.00021)   (0.00010)   (0.00009)   (0.00015)   (0.00024)

     Observations                  12051         4017         4017        4017       18615        6205        6205        6205       18624        6208        6208        6208

     Panel B: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, White Males
     Est. effect of eligibility     -0.00005     -0.00009   -0.00005     -0.00001    -0.00001    -0.00001    0.00019     -0.00022    -0.00004    -0.00009    0.00005     -0.00009
                                   (0.00015)    (0.00013)  (0.00016)    (0.00042)   (0.00012)   (0.00010)   (0.00012)   (0.00034)   (0.00014)   (0.00011)   (0.00014)   (0.00038)

     Observations                  12051         4017         4017        4017       18615        6205        6205        6205       18624        6208        6208        6208

     Panel C: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, Nonwhite Males
     Est. effect of eligibility     -0.00045     0.00048    0.00104     -0.00288*    0.00047     0.00061     0.00013     0.00066     -0.00051    -0.00014    0.00019     -0.00157
                                   (0.00066)   (0.00069)   (0.00114)    (0.00155)   (0.00059)   (0.00067)   (0.00092)   (0.00130)   (0.00060)   (0.00061)   (0.00097)   (0.00131)

     Observations                  12051         4017         4017        4017       18615        6205        6205        6205       18624        6208        6208        6208

     Panel D: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, Nonwhite Males




36
     Est. effect of eligibility     -0.00011    -0.00037    0.00052      -0.00049    -0.00100    -0.00028    0.00006    -0.00278*    0.00050     -0.00033    0.00027     0.00155
                                   (0.00074)   (0.00070)   (0.00087)    (0.00190)   (0.00061)   (0.00061)   (0.00069)   (0.00156)   (0.00070)   (0.00064)   (0.00074)   (0.00185)

     Observations                  12051         4017         4017        4017       18615        6205        6205        6205       18624        6208        6208        6208




        Notes: See Table 3.
        * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                          Table 8
                                         Robustness Check Using Nonbinding Lotteries for 1953-56 Birth Cohorts
                                         Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility on the Probability of Incarceration

     Highest APN Applied:                             95                                                  125                                                195

     Survey Years:                All          1979         1986        1991         All        1979              1986        1991         All        1979           1986        1991
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)               (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)           (11)        (12)

     Panel A: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, White Males
     Est. effect of eligibility   -0.00002    0.00014     0.00005      -0.00025    -0.00022    -0.00000          0.00002    -0.00068*    0.00008     0.00008        0.00017     0.00001
                                 (0.00020)   (0.00018)   (0.00031)    (0.00043)   (0.00018)   (0.00017)         (0.00028)   (0.00040)   (0.00017)   (0.00016)      (0.00025)   (0.00040)

     Observations                 4383         1461         1461        1461        4383        1461              1461        1461        4383        1461           1461        1461

     Panel B: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, White Males
     Est. effect of eligibility   0.00033     -0.00022     0.00043     0.00079     0.00041     -0.00019          0.00042     0.00100    0.00049**    0.00009        0.00028    0.00109*
                                 (0.00031)   (0.00023)    (0.00031)   (0.00080)   (0.00027)   (0.00021)         (0.00027)   (0.00071)   (0.00025)   (0.00020)      (0.00024)   (0.00066)

     Observations                 4383         1461         1461        1461        4383        1461              1461        1461        4383        1461           1461        1461

     Panel C: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, Nonwhite Males
     Est. effect of eligibility   0.00142     -0.00088     0.00130     0.00386     0.00094     -0.00040          0.00164     0.00157     -0.00075    -0.00087       0.00140     -0.00276
                                 (0.00132)   (0.00145)    (0.00197)   (0.00306)   (0.00119)   (0.00139)         (0.00179)   (0.00272)   (0.00107)   (0.00129)      (0.00172)   (0.00244)

     Observations                 4383         1461         1461        1461        4383        1461              1461        1461        4383        1461           1461        1461

     Panel D: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, Nonwhite Males
     Est. effect of eligibility   0.00067     0.00214     -0.00103     0.00090     0.00105     0.00134           -0.00099    0.00280     0.00000     0.00168        0.00082     -0.00249




37
                                 (0.00129)   (0.00154)   (0.00149)    (0.00328)   (0.00122)   (0.00134)         (0.00139)   (0.00328)   (0.00116)   (0.00118)      (0.00138)   (0.00296)

     Observations                 4383         1461         1461        1461        4383        1461              1461        1461        4383        1461           1461        1461




       Notes: See Table 3.
       * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                Table 9
                                           Analysis Using NCRP Prison Admissions Data
                              Estimated Effects of Draft Eligibility and Military Service on Incarceration

               Years:                              1983      1984      1985      1986      1987      1988      1989       1990      1991
                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)

               Panel A: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, White Males
               Est. effect of eligibility per 10,000  0.150   -0.034   0.144     -0.142    -0.017    -0.092   -0.304**    0.024     0.144
                                                     (0.134) (0.138)  (0.140)   (0.140)   (0.129)   (0.147)    (0.147)   (0.138)   (0.134)
               Observations                        1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827       1827      1827

               Panel B: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, White Males
               Est. effect of eligibility per 10,000  0.003   0.266   0.237      0.158    -0.390*    -0.304    -0.067     0.010     -0.092
                                                     (0.191) (0.176) (0.193)    (0.236)   (0.235)   (0.252)   (0.232)    (0.272)   (0.240)
               Observations                        1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827       1827      1827




38
               Panel C: Incarceration for a Violent Crime, Nonwhite Males
               Est. effect of eligibility per 10,000  -0.258  -0.520  -0.259     -1.287    -1.269    0.618     -0.708     -0.611    1.277
                                                     (0.779) (0.851) (0.975)    (0.934)   (0.893)   (1.034)   (0.835)    (0.879)   (0.862)
               Observations                        1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827       1827      1827

               Panel D: Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime, Nonwhite Males
               Est. effect of eligibility per 10,000  -1.459  1.161    0.523     0.315     -1.468    -0.195    -0.138     2.181     0.867
                                                     (1.122) (1.222)  (1.382)   (1.446)   (1.461)   (1.818)   (1.613)    (1.791)   (1.595)
               Observations                        1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827      1827       1827      1827




     Notes: NCRP prison admissions data is restricted to individuals who are admitted due to a court commitment. The analysis is
     conducted in the manner described in Table 3.
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Appendix 1: Additional Figures and Tables

                              Figure A1
             Lottery Numbers Draft Eligible By Birth Month

                             1969 Lottery




                             1970 Lottery




                             1971 Lottery




                                  39
                                    Figure A2
Probability of Incarceration for a Violent Crime by Draft Eligibility, White Males

                               Panel A: 1979 Data




                               Panel B: 1986 Data




                               Panel C: 1991 Data




                                       40
                                      Figure A3
Probability of Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime by Draft Eligibility, White Males

                                 Panel A: 1979 Data




                                 Panel B: 1986 Data




                                 Panel C: 1991 Data




                                         41
                                      Figure A4
Probability of Incarceration for a Violent Crime by Draft Eligibility, Nonwhite Males

                                 Panel A: 1979 Data




                                 Panel B: 1986 Data




                                 Panel C: 1991 Data




                                         42
                                       Figure A5
Probability of Incarceration for a Nonviolent Crime by Draft Eligibility, Nonwhite Males

                                  Panel A: 1979 Data




                                  Panel B: 1986 Data




                                  Panel C: 1991 Data




                                          43
                                    Table A1
           Mean Incarceration Rates (Per 10,000), Males Born 1948-1950

              Race:                         White                  Nonwhite
              Draft Eligibility:     Eligible   Ineligible   Eligible   Ineligible

              Panel A: Aggregated Survey Waves
              All Crime               0.00581     0.00605     0.0319      0.0301
                                      (0.0102)    (0.0104)   (0.0534)    (0.0512)
              Violent Crime           0.00237     0.00205     0.0167      0.0139
                                     (0.00552)   (0.00529)   (0.0378)    (0.0337)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00344     0.00400     0.0152      0.0162
                                     (0.00838)   (0.00893)   (0.0370)    (0.0398)
              Drug Crime              0.00181     0.00223    0.00601     0.00680
                                     (0.00669)   (0.00726)   (0.0268)    (0.0294)
              Property Crime          0.00312     0.00315     0.0187      0.0174
                                     (0.00751)   (0.00772)   (0.0411)    (0.0408)
              Public Order Crime     0.000729    0.000819    0.00419     0.00299
                                     (0.00338)   (0.00378)   (0.0205)    (0.0181)

              Panel B: 1979 Survey
              All Crime               0.00281     0.00281      0.0239      0.0237
                                     (0.00417)   (0.00445)    (0.0318)    (0.0331)
              Violent Crime           0.00132    0.000936      0.0116      0.0111
                                     (0.00290)   (0.00250)    (0.0219)    (0.0232)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00149     0.00188      0.0123      0.0126
                                     (0.00296)   (0.00358)    (0.0222)    (0.0232)
              Drug Crime             0.000277    0.000290     0.00192     0.00166
                                     (0.00132)   (0.00139)   (0.00885)   (0.00837)
              Property Crime          0.00124    0.000888      0.0115      0.0116
                                     (0.00278)   (0.00232)    (0.0234)    (0.0239)
              Public Order Crime     0.000235    0.000154     0.00145    0.000882
                                     (0.00121)   (0.00113)   (0.00840)   (0.00619)

              Panel C: 1986 Survey
              All Crime               0.00385     0.00392     0.0243      0.0259
                                     (0.00608)   (0.00609)   (0.0388)    (0.0425)
              Violent Crime           0.00241     0.00217     0.0157      0.0161
                                     (0.00492)   (0.00443)   (0.0315)    (0.0339)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00144     0.00175    0.00854     0.00984
                                     (0.00371)   (0.00420)   (0.0232)    (0.0255)
              Drug Crime             0.000316    0.000530    0.00178     0.00212
                                     (0.00165)   (0.00238)   (0.0104)    (0.0119)
              Property Crime          0.00205     0.00201     0.0150      0.0156
                                     (0.00438)   (0.00446)   (0.0310)    (0.0332)
              Public Order Crime     0.000573    0.000670    0.00252     0.00250
                                     (0.00230)   (0.00264)   (0.0134)    (0.0122)

              Panel D: 1991 Survey
              All Crime                0.0108      0.0114     0.0477      0.0406
                                      (0.0149)    (0.0151)   (0.0754)    (0.0694)
              Violent Crime           0.00337     0.00304     0.0228      0.0144
                                     (0.00755)   (0.00747)   (0.0524)    (0.0413)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00740     0.00838     0.0249      0.0262
                                      (0.0128)    (0.0134)   (0.0540)    (0.0584)
              Drug Crime              0.00485     0.00587     0.0143      0.0166
                                      (0.0108)    (0.0114)   (0.0432)    (0.0474)
              Property Crime          0.00606     0.00656     0.0296      0.0249
                                      (0.0114)    (0.0117)   (0.0582)    (0.0569)
              Public Order Crime      0.00138     0.00163    0.00860     0.00558
                                     (0.00518)   (0.00579)   (0.0314)    (0.0281)




Notes: Observations are at the exact day of birth by survey year level. Incarcer-
ation data are from the 1979, 1986, and 44 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and
Federal Correctional Facilities and birth data are from the Vital Statistics of the
United States.
                                   Table A2
             Mean Incarceration Rates (Per 10,000), Males Born 1951

              Race:                         White                  Nonwhite
              Draft Eligibility:     Eligible   Ineligible   Eligible   Ineligible

              Panel A: Aggregated Survey Waves
              All Crime               0.00623     0.00545     0.0346      0.0320
                                      (0.0102)   (0.00933)   (0.0568)    (0.0515)
              Violent Crime           0.00211     0.00187     0.0188      0.0172
                                     (0.00482)   (0.00467)   (0.0391)    (0.0358)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00412     0.00358     0.0157      0.0148
                                     (0.00851)   (0.00757)   (0.0379)    (0.0360)
              Drug Crime              0.00260     0.00165    0.00624     0.00599
                                     (0.00685)   (0.00554)   (0.0259)    (0.0265)
              Property Crime          0.00367     0.00291     0.0195      0.0199
                                     (0.00748)   (0.00671)   (0.0415)    (0.0417)
              Public Order Crime     0.000697    0.000585    0.00516     0.00364
                                     (0.00314)   (0.00296)   (0.0228)    (0.0180)

              Panel B: 1979 Survey
              All Crime               0.00383     0.00385      0.0244      0.0236
                                     (0.00484)   (0.00524)    (0.0309)    (0.0302)
              Violent Crime           0.00186     0.00159      0.0123      0.0136
                                     (0.00342)   (0.00330)    (0.0227)    (0.0229)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00197     0.00226      0.0121     0.00996
                                     (0.00347)   (0.00410)    (0.0209)    (0.0190)
              Drug Crime             0.000250    0.000389     0.00186     0.00116
                                     (0.00122)   (0.00152)   (0.00846)   (0.00671)
              Property Crime          0.00187     0.00162      0.0139      0.0129
                                     (0.00322)   (0.00338)    (0.0240)    (0.0233)
              Public Order Crime     0.000263    0.000249     0.00140     0.00104
                                     (0.00129)   (0.00139)   (0.00781)   (0.00654)

              Panel C: 1986 Survey
              All Crime               0.00308     0.00310     0.0250      0.0289
                                     (0.00516)   (0.00557)   (0.0353)    (0.0400)
              Violent Crime           0.00175     0.00149     0.0167      0.0178
                                     (0.00361)   (0.00351)   (0.0320)    (0.0304)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00133     0.00161    0.00832      0.0111
                                     (0.00354)   (0.00411)   (0.0201)    (0.0302)
              Drug Crime             0.000535    0.000474    0.00248     0.00261
                                     (0.00209)   (0.00193)   (0.0112)    (0.0146)
              Property Crime          0.00191     0.00166     0.0138      0.0198
                                     (0.00443)   (0.00387)   (0.0246)    (0.0343)
              Public Order Crime     0.000440    0.000330    0.00387     0.00346
                                     (0.00229)   (0.00169)   (0.0174)    (0.0174)

              Panel D: 1991 Survey
              All Crime                0.0118     0.00940     0.0543      0.0435
                                      (0.0146)    (0.0134)   (0.0834)    (0.0726)
              Violent Crime           0.00273     0.00254     0.0275      0.0202
                                     (0.00669)   (0.00647)   (0.0542)    (0.0488)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00907     0.00687     0.0268      0.0233
                                      (0.0125)    (0.0111)   (0.0574)    (0.0502)
              Drug Crime              0.00703     0.00409     0.0144      0.0142
                                      (0.0103)   (0.00880)   (0.0416)    (0.0419)
              Property Crime          0.00722     0.00544     0.0306      0.0270
                                      (0.0110)   (0.00998)   (0.0617)    (0.0584)
              Public Order Crime      0.00139     0.00118     0.0102     0.00641
                                     (0.00469)   (0.00459)   (0.0342)    (0.0248)




Notes: Observations are at the exact day of birth by survey year level. Incarcer-
ation data are from the 1979, 1986, and 45 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and
Federal Correctional Facilities and birth data are from the Vital Statistics of the
United States.
                                   Table A3
             Mean Incarceration Rates (Per 10,000), Males Born 1952

              Race:                          White                  Nonwhite
              Draft Eligibility:     Eligible    Ineligible   Eligible   Ineligible

              Panel A: Aggregated Survey Waves
              All Crime               0.00690     0.00641      0.0427      0.0362
                                      (0.0104)    (0.0102)    (0.0552)    (0.0539)
              Violent Crime           0.00294     0.00234      0.0193      0.0190
                                     (0.00599)   (0.00517)    (0.0347)    (0.0368)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00395     0.00407      0.0233      0.0172
                                     (0.00839)   (0.00832)    (0.0442)    (0.0378)
              Drug Crime              0.00244     0.00232     0.00863     0.00601
                                     (0.00715)   (0.00707)    (0.0338)    (0.0256)
              Property Crime          0.00407     0.00365      0.0284      0.0216
                                     (0.00848)   (0.00736)    (0.0467)    (0.0406)
              Public Order Crime      0.00109    0.000946     0.00372     0.00425
                                     (0.00435)   (0.00371)    (0.0154)    (0.0193)

              Panel B: 1979 Survey
              All Crime               0.00445      0.00360      0.0350      0.0310
                                     (0.00579)    (0.00454)    (0.0347)    (0.0347)
              Violent Crime           0.00207      0.00147      0.0162      0.0156
                                     (0.00394)    (0.00306)    (0.0219)    (0.0241)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00238      0.00213      0.0188      0.0154
                                     (0.00373)    (0.00355)    (0.0260)    (0.0245)
              Drug Crime             0.000566     0.000254     0.00124     0.00107
                                     (0.00198)    (0.00123)   (0.00688)   (0.00664)
              Property Crime          0.00195      0.00184      0.0190      0.0164
                                     (0.00373)    (0.00349)    (0.0241)    (0.0251)
              Public Order Crime     0.000310     0.000156     0.00255     0.00214
                                     (0.00153)   (0.000944)   (0.00984)   (0.00917)

              Panel C: 1986 Survey
              All Crime               0.00316     0.00430      0.0341      0.0314
                                     (0.00521)   (0.00609)    (0.0446)    (0.0421)
              Violent Crime           0.00198     0.00204      0.0171      0.0198
                                     (0.00400)   (0.00442)    (0.0313)    (0.0331)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00118     0.00225      0.0170      0.0116
                                     (0.00382)   (0.00450)    (0.0347)    (0.0249)
              Drug Crime             0.000406    0.000744     0.00328     0.00260
                                     (0.00175)   (0.00266)    (0.0181)    (0.0115)
              Property Crime          0.00154     0.00267      0.0232      0.0189
                                     (0.00349)   (0.00464)    (0.0389)    (0.0327)
              Public Order Crime     0.000649    0.000675     0.00474     0.00333
                                     (0.00261)   (0.00232)    (0.0160)    (0.0136)

              Panel D: 1991 Survey
              All Crime                0.0131      0.0113      0.0588      0.0463
                                      (0.0144)    (0.0147)    (0.0749)    (0.0750)
              Violent Crime           0.00478     0.00352      0.0247      0.0216
                                     (0.00846)   (0.00703)    (0.0463)    (0.0487)
              All Nonviolent Crime    0.00830     0.00782      0.0341      0.0247
                                      (0.0124)    (0.0124)    (0.0620)    (0.0546)
              Drug Crime              0.00634     0.00595      0.0214      0.0144
                                      (0.0112)    (0.0110)    (0.0533)    (0.0412)
              Property Crime          0.00873     0.00644      0.0430      0.0294
                                      (0.0126)    (0.0108)    (0.0646)    (0.0561)
              Public Order Crime      0.00232     0.00201     0.00387     0.00730
                                     (0.00675)   (0.00578)    (0.0191)    (0.0289)




Notes: Observations are at the exact day of birth by survey year level. Incarcer-
ation data are from the 1979, 1986, and 46 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and
Federal Correctional Facilities and birth data are from the Vital Statistics of the
United States.
Appendix 2: Alternative Strategies for Calculating Births

per Day
As we describe in the main text, in order to calculate incarceration rates for exact dates of birth, we

must construct the number of births per day based on the Vital Statistics of the United States, which

only reports births per month for the cohorts we consider. The results we show throughout the

paper apportion the number of births in each month evenly across the days in each month. In this

section, we describe two alternative strategies that give nearly identical results. The first alternative

that we have considered accounts for differing birth patterns across weekdays and weekends. It has

been documented that in recent periods more cesarean sections and birth inductions take place

on each weekday than on each weekend day (Dickert-Conlin and Chandra 1999), possibly because

doctors want to schedule these procedures on days when the hospital is more heavily staffed. To

account for this weekday-weekend variation, we match each day of the week in the data for our

cohorts of interest to the same day of the week in the 1969 data for which we have daily birth

counts. The percentage of births in the month that occurred on that day in the later data is

used to apportion the total monthly births in the earlier data across days. Consider January 1st ,

1950 which was a Sunday. The first Sunday in 1969 was January 5th . In 1969 2.7% of January

births occurred on the first Sunday. So 2.7% of the births in January 1950 are assigned to January

1st , 1950. This procedure is repeated for each day and the percentages of birth in each month are

normalized to 100. For some years the days in the first or last week of the year are matched forward

or backward to find a match. For instance, in 1944 the 53rd week contains a Friday, Saturday, and

Sunday. In 1969 the 53rd week only contains a Tuesday and a Wednesday. So for 1944 the last

three days are assigned the birth percentages on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday that occurred in

the 52nd week instead of the 53rd . Another alternative strategy we have considered recognizes that

birth technology has changed over the 25 years that elapse between the first year of interest and

1969 (the first year for which we have births at the day level, as used in the first alternative strategy

above). We can obtain an estimate of the weekend effect that uses only data from the period of



                                                   47
interest by exploiting the different number of weekend days that fall on a given month across years.

We estimate:

                     Birthsym = α + β ∗ W eekendDaysym + vy + δm + ym .                         (6)


This is a regression of the number of births in each month-year on the number of Saturdays and

Sundays in the month with fixed effects for month and year. The coefficient β gives the decrease in

the number of births when a month has one additional weekend day. January 1948 had one more

Sunday than January 1947. The number of white births in January 1948 was less than the number

of white births in January 1947. Some of the decrease in the number of births in January 1948 was

due to the weekend effect. Since January had 31 days in both years, some of the decrease in births

was due to births being shifted from the extra weekend day at the end of the month into February.

The number of births in each month are then apportioned out where each weekend day gets a

fewer number of births than each weekday. All weekdays are treated alike and all weekend days are

treated alike. The advantage of this strategy is that it does not impose the weekend effect from a

later era on the monthly birth data from 25 years earlier. We have also explored a variation of this

strategy where the weekend effect is a percentage change in the total monthly births rather than a

fixed decrease in the number of births. These strategies likely improve the accuracy of our measures

of births per day and, hence, the accuracy of our measures of incarceration rates. However, because

they do not change the results, we adopt the simpler and more transparent method described in

the main text.




                                                48
