NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION CONSTRAINTS AND FINANCIAL AID POLICY
Judith Scott-Clayton
Working Paper 17811
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17811

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Judith Scott-Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Information Constraints and Financial Aid Policy
Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 17811
February 2012
JEL No. I22,I23,I24,I28
ABSTRACT
One justification for public support of higher education is that prospective students, particularly those
from underprivileged groups, lack complete information about the costs and benefits of a college degree.
Beyond financial considerations, students may also lack information about what they need to do academically
to prepare for and successfully complete college. Yet until recently, college aid programs have typically
paid little attention to students' information constraints, and the complexity of some programs can
exacerbate the problem. This chapter describes the information problems facing prospective students
as well as their consequences, drawing upon economic theory and empirical evidence.

Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu

INTRODUCTION
The economic rationale for public intervention in higher education finance rests on three
potential market failures (Barr 2004). First, the social returns to higher education may exceed the
private returns, thus justifying broad-based public subsidies. Second, private credit markets may
not enable individuals to sufficiently borrow against future income to finance optimal
educational investments, thus justifying public provision of (or at least public backing of) student
loans. Finally, young people – particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds – may have
incomplete information leading them to underestimate the benefits (or overestimate the cost) of
higher education, thus justifying the provision of targeted grants to improve access.

This third type of market failure has arguably increased in importance in recent years, as the net
price of college (listed tuition minus grants) has become increasingly individualized. For
example, in the United States, trends in list prices and net prices have diverged since 2007 as
more institutions adopt high-tuition, high-aid policies; only about one-third of full-time US
students now pay the published list price (College Board 2011). Similarly, as other nations
dramatically expand access to higher education, budgetary pressures push them towards an
“Anglo-American” model of higher education with prices that vary both across institutions and
across students (Barr 2004; Turner 2009). At the same time, post-college earnings are also
becoming more variable: studies in the United States have found that while the returns to a
college degree have increased dramatically since 1980, wage dispersion within demographic and
educational categories increased simultaneously (Autor, Katz & Kearney 2008; Lemieux 2006).

The evidence discussed below suggests that while many students appear well aware of the
benefits of postsecondary education—in some cases even overestimating expected earnings
gains—they persistently overestimate costs and are uninformed about sources of potential aid.
Beyond costs and benefits generally, students face an even larger informational challenge when
it comes to comparing the costs and benefits of specific institutions—which can lead to a
haphazard postsecondary choice process. Students, particularly those from disadvantaged groups,
also receive mixed informational signals regarding academic expectations both prior to and after
college enrollment.

2

Ironically, the design of financial aid policy in many cases seems to assume away these
information constraints. Complex aid formulae, poor marketing, and cumbersome application
procedures can make it difficult for students to ascertain their eligibility well in advance of the
college-going decision; in many countries (including the United States) students typically cannot
obtain concrete information about financial aid until after they have applied for and been
accepted at a postsecondary institution. As stated by Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006),
“potential college students cannot respond to a price subsidy if they do not know it exists” (p.
320). And if information barriers are particularly acute among the disadvantaged, the
effectiveness of financial aid policy can be undermined substantially.

In recent years, however, researchers and policymakers have approached a consensus regarding
the importance of accounting for informational barriers in the design of financial aid policy
(though reforms have in many cases fallen short of ideals): at a minimum, such policies should
not exacerbate students’ confusion about costs. More ambitiously (and sometimes
controversially), financial aid policy has also been leveraged to promote informed institutional
choice and positive academic behaviors.

This chapter proceeds as follows: first, I review the evidence regarding the nature and extent of
students’ underlying information constraints; second, I discuss the role of financial aid policy in
alleviating or aggravating these constraints; third, I discuss the implications for financial aid
policy design. While this review draws primarily upon the US experience, evidence from other
countries is included where available and applicable. I conclude with a discussion of caveats.

STUDENTS’ UNDERLYING INFORMATION CONSTRAINTS
This section will examine the types of underlying informational constraints students face that
might be addressed via financial aid policies. First, how well informed are students with respect
to the cost and benefits of postsecondary education generally? Second, how well informed are
students with respect to the variation in costs and benefits across institutions and/or programs?
Third, how well informed are students regarding what actions they need to take in order to
prepare for and successfully navigate college?

3

Information about the benefits and costs of postsecondary education
While econometricians have established the large returns to postsecondary schooling, students’
human capital investment decisions are driven by subjective perceptions rather than actual
returns (Manski 1993). While only a handful of studies have examined students’ perceived
benefits from postsecondary education, what evidence is available suggests that at least in the
US, undergraduates are aware of the substantial payoff to a college degree (Smith & Powell
1990; Betts 1996; Dominitz & Manski 1996). For example, Betts (1996) surveyed 1,269
undergraduates at the University of California, San Diego and found that while students’ beliefs
about future wages were noisy (with median absolute errors of about 20 percent), their estimated
wages were on average about 94 percent of actual wages.

A survey of undergraduates, however, cannot address the concern that students with poor
information will not attend in the first place. The data on high school students’ earnings
expectations is even more sparse, but suggests they are no less aware of the benefits to college.
Avery & Kane (2004) find that high school seniors accurately estimate or even overestimate the
returns to college, though their sample includes only about 400 students from two high schools;
Dominitz & Manski (1996) also find relatively accurate estimates among a convenience sample
of 71 high school students.

In contrast to students’ awareness of the benefits of postsecondary education, survey data
consistently indicates widespread confusion about college costs. For example, a 1998 survey of
the general public indicated that while 56 percent of respondents reported knowing “a lot or a
good amount” about college costs, on average they overestimated tuition prices at public fouryear institutions by 212 percent and the total costs of attendance by 99 percent (Ikenberry &
Hartle 1998). Average tuition and total costs at public two-year institutions were overestimated
by 180 and 193 percent, respectively.

Horn, Chen & Chapman (2003) confirm these findings with data from the National Household
Education Survey: 1999, which surveyed a nationally representative sample of 7,910 adolescents
and their parents about college costs. Results indicated that among 11th and 12th graders who
planned to pursue postsecondary education, only 52 percent had obtained any information about

4

tuition fees, as had only 54 percent of their parents. Among those who either had obtained cost
information or were willing to make an estimate (approximately 63 percent of students and 71
percent of parents), students and parents overestimated the tuition costs of public four-year
institutions by 65 and 80 percent respectively, and overestimated the tuition costs of two-year
institutions by 240 and 153 percent, respectively.

It is worth considering why it is that perceived prices are systematically too high, rather than
merely noisy estimates of true prices. One hypothesis is that media reports on college costs may
distort public perceptions by focusing on the highest-priced elite private institutions (Advisory
Committee on Student Financial Assistance, 2005).1 This hypothesis is supported by evidence
that the public overestimates prices at private four-year institutions by “only” 30 to 40 percent
(Ikenberry & Hartle 1998), while Horn, Chen & Chapman (2003) find estimates within one to 12
percent of actual averages for 11th and 12th graders (and their parents) who plan to attend such
schools.

The evidence also suggests that socioeconomically disadvantaged families face greater
information barriers regarding college costs and benefits. Ikenberry & Hartle (1998) found that
low-income individuals and minorities were the most uninformed about the costs of college and
the most likely to believe they could not afford to attend. Betts (1996) found that college students
from low-income families tended to estimate lower payoffs to a college degree than did other
students.2 Horn, Chen, & Chapman (2003) found that both self-reported cost awareness and the
ability to accurately estimate costs were positively and significantly related to parental education
and household income. Grodsky & Jones (2007) confirm that disadvantaged families are less
likely to be cost-aware and have noisier estimates of college costs, when they are willing to
provide them (though they find that the average overestimate is fairly uniform by socioeconomic
status). Finally, in a small survey of roughly 400 high school seniors, Avery & Kane (2004)
found that students at high- and low-SES high schools similarly overestimated both the costs and

1

See, for example, “Those Scary College Costs,” by Tom Morganthau and Seema Nayyar, Newsweek, April 29,
1996, p. 52, or “Most Expensive Colleges 2011: College Costs Reach New Highs,” BusinessWeek, October 25,
2011, http://images.businessweek.com/slideshows/20111025/most-expensive-colleges-2011/.
2
Students were explicitly asked to estimate national averages for graduates in various fields, rather than to report
their own personal wage expectations.

5

benefits of attending college, but that students at low-SES high schools were only half as likely
to believe they “definitely” would be able to afford college (37 percent versus 76 percent).

Evidence from other countries
There is no reason why the pattern of findings from the US – that students have good
information about benefits, but dramatically overestimate costs – should necessarily extrapolate
to other contexts. Evidence from a recent survey of 1,055 randomly selected adult Canadians
finds similar overestimates of average tuition (with mean estimates 107 percent above actual
prices), but also finds that respondents also underestimate the return to a university degree by a
factor of five (Usher 2005). In the developing world context, Jensen (2010) finds that eighthgrade boys in the Dominican Republic substantially underestimate the returns to secondary
school. On the other hand, Nguyen (2008) finds that among parents of fourth-graders in
Madagascar, perceptions of returns are noisy but centered around observed averages, and
Attanasio & Kaufman (2009) find that Mexican youth either accurately estimate or overestimate
returns to high school and college depending on how earnings expectations are elicited.

Information about particular institutions
Classical economic theory implies that an abundance of choice can never be a bad thing, and in
the US, “[n]o nation in the world offers as much choice to potential undergraduates” (Goldin &
Katz 2008: 254). Recent work in psychology, marketing and behavioral economics, however,
presents compelling evidence that there can be a “dark side of choice” (Botti & Iyengar 2006)
that can lead to decision mistakes, procrastination, and regret (for a review of these concepts
applied to higher education, see Scott-Clayton 2011a).

Indeed, if estimating the individual returns to postsecondary education is challenging, trying to
figure out which particular institution offers the best return can be overwhelming. Boundedly
rational individuals faced with a plethora of options may be unduly influenced by seemingly
minor variations in how choices are structured and framed (Tversky & Simonson 1993; Bertrand,
Karlan, Mullainathan, Shafir & Zinman 2005). For example, when a major testing company
made a minor change to the process of sending admissions test scores to institutions – increasing
the number of free “score reports” to four from three – it resulted in a disproportionately large

6

increase in the number of colleges to which students applied (Pallais 2009a).3 Even academically
elite students appear to be irrationally sensitive to the way in which admission and financial aid
offers are framed: one study found that such students are more responsive to aid packages that
include “scholarships” rather than “grants” of an equal size (Avery & Hoxby 2004).

One adverse consequence of college choice confusion that is of particular concern to
policymakers is the issue of “undermatching;” that is, that some low- and middle-income
students may not attend the most selective institutions for which they academically qualify.
Selectivity is often used as a proxy for college quality, and research indicates that it is associated
with graduation rates, time to degree, and post-college earnings even after controlling for
incoming student characteristics (Bowen, Chingos & McPherson 2009; Bound, Lovenheim &
Turner 2009; Zhang & Thomas 2005).

In the US, academically talented low-income students may face similar or even lower net costs at
highly selective private (and public) institutions than at less selective ones (Avery & Turner
2009).4 Yet a recent study by Bowen, Chingos & McPherson (2009) using administrative data
from North Carolina finds that nearly 60 percent of highly-qualified students in the bottom
quartile of family income failed to attend the most selective institution for which they were
eligible (as did 64 percent of those whose parents had no college education). Similarly, a study
of Chicago Public School students by Roderick, Nagaoka, Coca & Moeller (2009) found that
fewer than half of students in academically advanced high school programs attended the most
selective institution they could attend – and 20 percent of these students never even applied to a
four-year college.

Both qualitative and quantitative evidence suggests that this apparent undermatching is due to
inadequate information and support throughout the college decision and financial aid application
process (Roderick et al. 2009; Avery & Turner 2009). Students who severely overpredict net
3

Additional score reports cost just $5.00 before and after the change, too small an amount to explain the large
observed change in application behavior.
4
For example, Hill, Winston & Boyd (2005) find that low‐income students faced an average net cost (tuition, fees,
and living expenses minus grants) of $7,552 at a sample of highly selective private institutions in 2001‐02 (with an
average list price of $33,831), a year in which the average net cost at a public four‐year institution was $6,294.
Because of substantial variation at these elite institutions, many low‐income students paid less.

7

costs (or report not knowing net costs at all) are significantly less likely to apply to selective
colleges and universities (Avery & Turner 2009).

Students who are not well-informed about the costs and benefits of different types of institutions
also may be vulnerable to misleading advertising or even outright fraud on the part of some
institutions. For example, qualitative evidence suggests that the marginal college students
targeted by community colleges and for-profit colleges often make their institutional selection
haphazardly and fail to investigate more than one option (Rosenbaum, Deil-Amen & Person
2006). It thus may be no coincidence that an undercover investigation of 15 for-profit colleges by
the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that all 15 made “deceptive or
questionable” statements to prospective applicants regarding program duration, costs, or
graduation rates (US GAO 2010, p. 9).

Information about academic preparation and expectations
Finally, students may be poorly informed regarding what they need to do both before and during
college in order to successfully complete a degree. Adelman (2006) finds that the academic
intensity of a student’s high school coursework “counts more than anything else in precollegiate
history in providing momentum toward completing a bachelor’s degree” (p. xviii). Yet high
school graduation requirements are generally poorly aligned with requirements for college-level
coursework (National Commission on the High School Senior Year 2001). Combine this
misalignment with the limited availability of high school counselors and a reluctance of these
counselors to “cool out” individuals’ college aspirations, and the result is that many students may
never receive concrete, realistic guidance about the specific courses and grades they need to
obtain in order not just to enter, but to do well in college (Rosenbaum, Deil-Amen, & Person
2006). Moreover, low-income and minority students may have both fewer opportunities to obtain
the academic preparation required for college and less “college knowledge” regarding what is
expected in the first place (see review by Goldrick-Rab, 2010).

This ambiguity about expectations may continue after college entry. For example, a primary
reason why students fail to graduate on time is that they fail to take enough course credits
beginning in the first term of enrollment (Scott-Clayton 2011b). Yet despite concerns about

8

students’ lengthening time-to-degree (Bound, Lovenheim & Turner 2010), students may receive
mixed messages about their expected course load. For example, while a bachelor’s degree
typically requires 120 credits to graduate in the US, financial aid regulations define a “full-time”
student as one that takes 12 credits per semester, and a five-year degree plan has become
standard at many “four-year” institutions (Scott-Clayton 2011c).

THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN FINANCIAL AID POLICY
What is the role of financial aid policy in this informational context? The primary goal of
financial aid policy is to lower the cost of college at the point of entry – whether to address the
presence of social externalities, credit constraints, or information failures. A first principle of
financial aid policy design might then be, “do no harm.” Otherwise, even in the absence of any
underlying information failures, lack of information about the availability of aid can become a
problem on its own that may undermine the equity and effectiveness of financial aid policy. The
role of information in financial aid policy as will be discussed below, using examples of grant
and loan programs from the US and UK.

Information and the effectiveness of grant aid
Over thirty years of research in the US context demonstrates that large and transparent student
grant programs can increase college enrollments (Long 2008). The best quasi-experimental
evidence suggests that an additional $1000 of grant aid may increase college enrollment by 4
percentage points (Deming & Dynarski 2009). Key studies showing positive effects include
Dynarski’s (2003) study of the Social Security Student Benefit (SSSB) program, studies of the
GI Bills (Stanley 2003; Bound & Turner, 2002), Kane’s (2007) study of the Washington, DC,
Tuition Assistance Program, and several studies of state merit aid programs (Kane 2003;
Dynarski 2004, 2008; Cornwell, Mustard, & Sridhar 2006; Scott-Clayton 2011b).

An important and puzzling anomaly to the lesson above – which has been noted in prior reviews
(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton 2006; Long 2008; Deming & Dynarski 2009) – is the relatively weak
evidence regarding the Pell Grant program, which is the largest grant program in the US and
which has provided need-based aid to low-income students since 1965. The broadest studies of
the Pell Grant program, including an early study by Hansen (1983) and a subsequent study by

9

Kane (1996), find no detectable effect of the introduction of Pell Grants on college enrollments
for eligible (low-income) populations.

One hypothesis for the lack of overall impacts has been that the complexity of the Pell eligibility
and application process obscures its benefits and prevents the program from reaching the
individuals who need it most—those who are on the fence about college for financial reasons. In
order to obtain a Pell Grant (or indeed any type of federal student aid, including work-study and
student loans), students must complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), a
process that remains daunting even after multiple attempts at simplification in recent years
(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton 2006; Dynarski & Wiederspan 2012). Students must assemble
information about their own income and savings, their parents’ income and savings, their receipt
of various other types of governmental assistance, and the amounts of various other types of
income and liabilities (such as education tax credits claimed, child support paid or received, and
other “money received or paid on your behalf”).5 This information is based upon the prior tax
year (e.g., 2011 for students entering college during the 2012-2013 academic year), and thus
cannot be finalized until the spring of students’ last year of high school.

This information, or some subset thereof, is then processed under one of eight different eligibility
formulae, the choice of which depends upon family income, whether a student is classified as
dependent or independent, whether or not he/she has children, whether anyone in the household
received benefits from another federal means-tested program, and what type of federal income
tax form the family is required to use.6 At the end of this process, out comes an “expected
family contribution” or EFC, which is described as “not the amount of money that your family
must provide…[but rather] an index that colleges use to determine how much financial aid you
would receive if you were to attend their school.”7 Students must then wait for schools to
contact them with details of their aid package.

5

See the 2012‐2013 version of the FAFSA On The Web Worksheet,
http://www.fafsa.ed.gov/fotw1213/pdf/fafsaws13c.pdf.
6
The choice of formula and the formulae themselves are not computed by the student for obvious reasons, nor
are they made accessible to students and their families. But enterprising individuals can find copies of the 36‐page
formula guide online at http://www.ifap.ed.gov/efcformulaguide/attachments/082511EFCFormulaGuide1213.pdf.
7
Emphasis in original. A sample Student Aid Report can be found at
http://edicsweb.ed.gov/edics_files_web/04703/Att_2012‐2013%20Student%20Aid%20Report.pdf.

10

The consequences of this system include not just the compliance costs of assembling
information, filling out forms, and following up with inquiries. The complexity of the process
and lack of transparency in the eligibility determination process means that students and their
families have little idea how much aid they will receive until far along in the college decision
process. The so-called “marginal student” who is the primary target of need-based financial aid
may passively decide against college before ever learning about their aid eligibility. As described
in Dynarski & Scott-Clayton (2006), it is difficult for students to respond to a subsidy they do
not know about. The lack of information about available aid is acute: a recent national survey of
600 young Americans aged 26 to 34 found that fewer than 3 in 10 individuals without a college
degree had any idea what a FAFSA is (Johnson, Rochkind & Ott 2011).

In contrast to the Pell Grant program, the programs that have demonstrated positive impacts tend
to have simple, easy-to-understand eligibility rules and application procedures. This includes the
SSSB program, GI Bills, and state merit aid programs. For example, in the case of the SSSB
program, students were already receiving the benefits in high school, so they were aware of the
value of the benefit. They then would receive a letter indicating that they would need to enroll in
college full-time in order to continue receiving the benefit after they turned 18 (Dynarski 2003).
In the case of US state merit aid programs, the scholarships simply cover “tuition and fees” at instate public institutions, or provide a fixed dollar amount of grant aid, for students with a grade
point average (GPA) and/or college admissions test score above a certain cutoff (Dynarski 2004).
Applications for these state programs are often one page in length or less, collecting primarily
demographic information.

Perhaps because of their simple design, students appear to be well-informed about state merit aid
programs well in advance. For example, nearly half of Georgia middle-school students and
nearly seventy percent of high school students could without prompting name that state’s
program, the HOPE scholarship, as a source of college aid (Brackett, Gordon & Henry 1999).
About half of students and two-thirds of their parents could name the primary benefit (free
tuition) and requirement (3.0 GPA) of the program.

11

Note that two studies that have found evidence of positive effects of Pell Grants examined
populations that may be less information-constrained than other prospective students. Seftor and
Turner (2002) find positive effects of Pell Grants for older “nontraditional” students and
Bettinger (2004) finds weak suggestive evidence of positive effects on college persistence for
those already enrolled. Both findings are consistent with a story in which information and
experience with bureaucracy is important: older individuals may have learned about the Pell
program over time, and continuing students may learn about the program once they enroll in
school. Those who have recently graduated from high school but not yet enrolled may be the
least informed and least equipped to figure out the process.

A recent experimental study by Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, & Sanbonmatsu (2009) provides
dramatic evidence that the complexity of financial aid applications can itself become a
significant barrier to college access. In the experiment, low-income families who visited a taxpreparation center were randomly assigned to one of three groups: 1) a “full treatment” group
who received both personalized information about eligibility for financial aid as well as personal
assistance with completing and submitting the FAFSA; 2) an “information-only” group that
received personalized information about financial aid eligibility but no application assistance;
and 3) a control group that received a brochure with general information about college costs,
financial aid, and the value of going to college.

The full treatment, which took less than 10 minutes and cost less than $100 per participant,
increased immediate college entry rates by 8 percentage points (24 percent) for high school
seniors and 1.5 percentage points (16 percent) among independent participants with no prior
college experience. After three years, participants in the full treatment group had accumulated
significantly more time in college than the control group. Impacts on actual financial aid receipt
were even larger.

Information and the effectiveness of loan aid
If complexity is a barrier to the effectiveness of grant programs, it is almost surely an even
greater obstacle when it comes to student loans. In the US, federal student loan eligibility is
processed under the same system as for Pell Grants, utilizing the same FAFSA application and

12

overlapping eligibility formulae. But unlike Pell Grants, students are not automatically offered
the full federal loan for which they are eligible; individual institutions have discretion on whether
and how federal loans are incorporated into aid packages. Some institutions choose not to offer
any students federal loans or downplay their availability, a practice that appears more common at
community colleges (Burdman 2005). Thus, students cannot know for sure what loan assistance
will be offered until after they have been accepted and received financial aid award letters from
each institution.

Even once offered a student loan, students may struggle to digest all of the information required
simply to describe the terms of the loan, let alone to evaluate whether and how much they should
optimally borrow. Students need to know not just the size of the loan, but the interest rate,
whether that rate is fixed or variable, whether interest accrues while the student is enrolled, when
repayments begin, how repayments are calculated, and what protections are available should the
student earn less than expected after graduating or otherwise leaving college. In the US, several
of these loan features can vary across students depending upon income and family size (both at
the time of loan origination, and during repayment), loan size, field of study and/or career, and
the year in which the loan was originated.8 Moreover, in the US, students have multiple
repayment options including a standard ten-year mortgage-style repayment plan, an extended
repayment plan, a graduated repayment plan, an income-contingent repayment (ICR) plan, and a
new income-based repayment (IBR) plan initiated in 2009.9

Combine this with uncertainty regarding how much students expect to earn after finishing their
schooling, and it can be extremely difficult to estimate in advance the repayment burden and risk
associated with a given loan amount. Moreover, many prospective students will have little if any
experience with such complicated financial contracts; because of this inexperience young people,
particularly those from low-income families, are prone to making financial mistakes (Agarwal,
Driscoll, Gabaix, & Laibson 2008; Lusardi, Mitchell, & Curto 2010).
8

Until recently, federal loans also varied depending upon whether they were provided by private lenders and
guaranteed by the government, or provided directly by the government. Since 2009, all new federal student loans
originate directly from the government.
9
The IBR plan is a new option and has a similar structure to the ICR plan, but is only available to borrowers whose
income‐based repayment amount would be less than the standard repayment amount, and its terms are typically
more generous.

13

Debt aversion – the reluctance to borrow even when doing so would enable an investment with
high expected returns – may result in part from confusion about loan terms. Debt-averse students
may simply follow a quasi-rational rule-of-thumb to avoid financial transactions that they do not
understand. Qualitative evidence from the US and UK suggests that low-income, minority, and
first-generation students may be particularly wary about debt (Callender & Jackson 2005;
Burdman 2005).

Confusion may also help explain why only about 8 percent of borrowers opt into the ICR/IBR
plans.10 While these plans may offer significantly lower monthly payments, their calculation is
more complex compared to a fixed standard repayment amount and necessitates an annual
documentation of income and family size.11 Students also must proactively opt into such plans;
the default is the 10-year fixed repayment schedule. Materials provided to help students evaluate
their repayment options emphasize that cumulative payments will be much larger when payment
periods are extended, essentially assuming a zero discount rate (Chapman 2006). Overall, studies
of the older ICR plan conclude that the low take-up is due to poor explanation and marketing,
with less than a third of students aware the plan existed and an even lower proportion of financial
aid advisors reporting that they understood the option well (Chapman 2006; Schrag 2001).

Unlike with grants, there are not enough studies of the effectiveness of student loans to
determine how simplicity and transparency may mediate their impact. Dynarski (2005) finds
suggestive evidence of positive effects of student loan expansions in the U.S. in the early 1990s
on college attendance, but the estimates are not highly robust to specification checks. Findings
from the non-experimental literature “can at best be described as mixed” (Heller 2008, p. 46),
perhaps because studies are inconsistent in whether they compare loans to grants, other types of
aid, or to no aid at all. Based on the non-experimental evidence, Heller (2008) concludes that

10

This estimate is based upon the distribution of borrowers who consolidated their loans (not from default), which
indicates the loans had entered repayment. The standard repayment plan is the default plan for borrowers who
have not yet entered repayment. See The Budget for Fiscal Year 2012, p. 372:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2012/assets/edu.pdf
11
For example, under the IBR plan payments are calculated as 15 percent of the difference between adjusted gross
income and 150 percent of the poverty line (determined by family size and state of residence), divided by 12.

14

college enrollments are not as sensitive to loans as to grants. But since they also cost less, it
remains unclear whether loans may still be cost-effective compared to grants.

What is clear is that students do not like holding loans. An experiment by Field (2009) finds
strong evidence of a pure distaste for loans among law school students. Admitted students at one
school were randomly assigned to receive either (1) a public service scholarship which would
convert to a loan if students did not pursue public service after graduation, or (2) a loan which
would be forgiven if students decided to pursue public service after graduation. The two
treatments were financially equivalent, yet framing the program as a loan which could be
forgiven was much less effective in inducing students to public service than a grant which might
convert to a loan.

While government-backed student loans have long been a standard component of higher
education finance in the US, they are comparatively new in the UK but growing rapidly. First
introduced in 1990, student loans expanded after major policy changes in 1998 and 2004
(Callender & Jackson 2005). This expansion is expected to continue as tuition fees continue to
rise; for 2012-13 some institutions will be able to charge as much as £9,000, up from £3,375 for
2011-12, and students will be able to borrow the full amount of tuition if needed as well as
additional amounts for maintenance.12

Given the issues discussed above, it is no surprise that the increasing reliance on student loans
has raised concerns in the UK. Callender & Jackson (2005) find that disadvantaged students are
more likely to be debt averse (as measured by survey questions about debt attitudes) than other
students, and that debt aversion was predictive of students’ decision not to attend university even
after controlling for other factors.

The new system of student financing in the UK, while certainly more complicated than the
previous tuition-free system, would appear to have several advantages over the US system in
terms of simplicity and transparency. First, while tuition charges and the mix of student aid may
vary across institutions and individuals, no student is required to pay tuition charges up front
12

See “Student Finance: University and higher education” at www.direct.gov.uk.

15

regardless of their financial situation because loan limits are pegged to tuition fees (in the US,
federal loans for dependent undergraduates are limited to $5,500 to $7,500 per year, with a
cumulative cap of $31,000, regardless of actual tuition charges).13 Second, all loan repayments
are determined under a simple income-contingent formula (currently 9 percent of income above
£21,000). Finally, the student loan system is integrated with the tax system so repayments are
calculated and deducted automatically.

Yet the UK system far from eliminates the problem of information failures. Given the relatively
new reliance on loan financing, students and their families (particularly those from low-income
backgrounds) appear to be wary about how the loan system works and whether the debt will be
manageable (Callender & Jackson 2005). Moreover, a study by Adnett & Tlupova (2008) found
that higher education entrants were much less informed about tuition fees and available aid than
they believed they were. Over a third of entrants did not know whether they would qualify for a
bursary (institutional grant). Moreover, entrants from non-white ethnicities were more than twice
as likely to report feeling poorly informed about student finance.

Given the increasing reliance on student loans in both the UK and US, a critical question for
future research is how sensitive students are to the specifics of how loans are structured and
framed. Are there ways to make loans more attractive and less risky for students, without
drastically increasing costs? For example, the cost of a loan program is greatly affected by the
interest rate that is charged and whether interest accrues while students are still enrolled in
school, yet there is evidence from other contexts that individuals do not give such details as
much weight as they should when making savings and borrowing decisions (Benartzi & Thaler
2007). Similarly, with income-contingent repayment schemes, it is unclear how students weight
either the income disregard or the income assessment rate in their decisions about borrowing. If
loan schemes cannot be made more comprehensible to students, any subsidies incorporated into
loan programs may be ineffectual. Students may be more responsive to an aid package that
includes an upfront grant and an unsubsidized loan, rather than to a package with the same
present discounted value but including only subsidized loans.

13

Note that there are no limits to the amount that private institutions in the UK may charge, and student loans are
not guaranteed to cover the full amount of private tuition. However,

16

IMPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL AID POLICY DESIGN
Identifying and addressing informational barriers can, at a minimum, help ensure that the
impacts of government grant and loan policies are not watered down by confusion and
uncertainty. There is widespread agreement among researchers and policymakers in the US
regarding the need for simplicity, transparency, and predictability in financial aid (ACSFA 2005;
Dynarksi & Scott-Clayton 2006; Long 2008; Rethinking Student Aid Group 2008). These
principles have also been emphasized by the Office for Fair Access in the UK when providing
guidance to institutions on best practices relating to student financial assistance (OFFA 2009). In
this section, I briefly summarize the key informational principles that support financial aid
effectiveness. I then discuss how financial aid policy can be leveraged further to address
additional underlying information constraints – for example, by incorporating incentives to
promote positive student (or institutional) actions. Finally, I evaluate whether purely
informational interventions might achieve the same goals.

The basics: simplicity, transparency, and predictability
The body of evidence described above suggests that the most effective grant programs are the
ones that are simple, both in terms of eligibility determination and application logistics.
Simplicity is easier to attain if the aid schedule is pegged to meaningful amounts (such as
“tuition and fees”), and if eligibility is based on a limited number of criteria. While policymakers
and financial aid professionals often worry that simplifying eligibility criteria will lead to
inaccurate identification of needy students, Dynarski & Scott-Clayton (2006) show that this
concern is unwarranted in the case of US Pell Grants because only a handful of financial factors
drive the need calculation.

Although almost no one opposes simplification in theory, simplification in practice can be
surprisingly difficult. For example, recent efforts to simplify the FAFSA in the US led to the
removal of about two dozen application questions, but another dozen have been added; also, a
new option to electronically import financial information directly into the FAFSA from the tax
system can only be used by a small subset of applicants (Dynarski & Wiederspan 2012). Political
realities also suggest that it is harder to simplify an existing program than it is to design a simple

17

one in the first place, because simplification necessarily creates some perceived winners and
losers (Dynarski & Scott-Clayton 2007).

Transparency means that students can easily understand what they need to do to qualify and what
they will get if they do. Simplicity also facilitates transparency, but the two are not necessarily
equivalent. For example, the FAFSA experiment described above (Bettinger et al. 2009)
dramatically simplified the aid application process for those in the full treatment group, but
underlying this simplified process remained an enormously complex eligibility calculation. Even
after learning their aid eligibility, students may have no idea what made them eligible (and thus
what might make them eligible or ineligible in subsequent years). Similarly, an aid system that
comprises many simple niche programs may lack transparency overall regarding who is eligible
for what.

The concept of transparency might further be extended to include the concept of salience: what
does the program mean to students and their families? Salience can be an important factor in
program participation (Bertrand, Mullainathan & Shafir 2006). Programs that lack transparency
may have little salience, such that even when information is conveyed it fails to “stick.” Further,
programs that trigger positive student identities of merit and achievement may have greater
salience (and thus greater public support) than those triggering negative identities of poverty and
need (Dynarski 2004). This is one reason why institutions in the UK have been advised to “avoid
dwelling too much on ‘financial hardship’ when describing bursaries as some students may
find this off-putting” (OFFA 2009: 6).

Finally, a critical component in the design of effective aid policy relates to early notification and
predictability. Students and their families should be able to predict their college costs several
years in advance, rather than making them wait until after admission to learn their eligibility.
Students who are unsure of their ability to afford college may not take adequate steps to prepare
academically while they are still in middle and high school. Without early notification and
predictability, there are thus limits to the impact of simplifications that occur only at the margin
of college application (such as the application assistance that occurred in the FAFSA
experiment). One factor that has presented a barrier to early notification in the US is the reliance

18

on the prior year’s tax information in eligibility calculations: for example, in order to apply for
aid for the 2012-13 academic year, a student needs 2011 tax information that may not be
finalized until April 2012. Using tax information from the prior-prior year (e.g. 2010 in this
example), however, would enable aid to be calculated a full year earlier and would result in very
few changes to individuals’ eligibility status (Dynarski & Wiederspan 2012).

What else can be done via financial aid policy?
Leveraging financial aid policy to promote institutional accountability and informed choice
In the US, federal financial aid policy has long been used as a lever to require institutions to
provide more information about costs of attendance, available aid, and application procedures to
prospective students (see 20 USC Sec. 1092). The Student Right to Know Act of 1990 further
required all institutions participating in federal financial aid programs (known as Title IV
funding) to calculate and disclose graduation rates among full-time degree-seeking students.

But just because institutions must disclose this information does not mean that students or their
families can easily find it, or that they know what to do with it. Indeed, many of these
informational requirements predate the studies, described above, finding informational barriers to
be a significant problem. This should temper expectations regarding the likely impact of more
recent disclosure requirements (e.g., in October 2011 all Title IV-participating institutions were
required to post net price calculators on their websites). In the UK, the Office for Fair Access
(OFFA) has advised institutions that financial aid information should be actively promoted
among potential students, in light of survey evidence that many students do not seek this
information out because they do not know where to look (OFFA 2009).

Leveraging financial aid policy to promote academic achievement
Financial aid programs can be designed to address information problems on multiple levels. For
example, a number of state-level programs in the US tie college scholarships to high school
achievement, thus sending students early signals of what is expected of them beyond simply
earning a diploma. In Tennessee, where students could receive up to $3,000 per year in aid if
they met GPA and test score requirements, students’ test scores rose significantly after the

19

introduction of the program (Pallais 2009b).14 A few states have so-called “early commitment”
programs in which financial aid is committed to prospective students early in high school or even
middle school, on the condition that students also commit to follow through on specified
academic and behavioral requirements such as taking a certain set of courses, earning a certain
GPA, and staying out of legal trouble (Heller 2006). While there have been no experimental or
quasi-experimental studies of these programs, one carefully controlled study of Indiana’s
Twenty-First Century Scholars Program suggests that they significantly improve both students’
aspirations and actual enrollment (St. John, Musoba, Simmons, Chung, Schmit & Peng 2004).

Similarly, financial aid programs that incorporate incentives for college achievement appear to
be particularly effective, though the impact may be driven by motivational mechanisms rather
than by improved information per se. For example, Brock and Richburg-Hayes (2006) find
strong evidence that performance-based scholarships increase GPAs and persistence in
community colleges, while Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos (2009) find weaker evidence at a
large college in Canada (both studies were randomized experiments).15 A quasi-experimental
study by Scott-Clayton (2011b) of West Virginia’s PROMISE scholarship, which includes
stringent requirements for annual renewal, finds that the program significantly increased
graduation rates. The scholarship increased GPAs and credits completed in the first three years
of college, but in the last year of the scholarship—while students are still receiving the money
but no longer facing the minimum requirements—the program’s effect disappears. This suggests
that while merit-based aid may convey important information about expectations, they may need
to provide students with concrete motivation, not just information, in order to be effective.

Can purely informational interventions achieve the same goals?
To the extent informational constraints are a barrier, it is conceivable that purely informational
interventions might impact postsecondary access without requiring an overhaul of financial aid
policy. The evidence on this proposition is somewhat mixed, however. The Bettinger et al.
(2009) experiment described above also finds that the personal application assistance included in
the full treatment was instrumental to the overall impact: they find no impact of only providing
14

The study finds that the increases in test scores are too large to be explained simply by increases in re‐testing.
They find significant effects of a performance-based scholarship, but only for females who received additional
services in addition to the financial incentive. There were no significant effects for the full sample.

15

20

participants with individualized information about aid eligibility. This important finding suggests
that there are limits to the impact of providing information alone. Nonetheless, it does not rule
out the potential for purely informational interventions to work in other contexts. For example,
is possible that informational interventions may have a greater impact when targeted to students
earlier in high school, when delivered by counselors (or teachers or even peers) with whom
students have an existing relationship, or when accompanied by additional information about
how to apply for aid or where to turn with questions (rather than only information about potential
eligibility). Finally, it is worth noting that the control group in the Bettinger et al. (2009) also
received some information about college costs and financial aid that they may not have had
before; it is possible that this may have had an independent impact and that personalizing the
information simply provided no additional impact.

A small experiment conducted by Oreopoulos & Dunn (2011) in low-income Canadian high
schools finds some evidence that information alone can change educational aspirations when
presented in an interactive, engaging manner. Study participants filled out a survey on
educational aspirations and financial aid awareness. Half were then randomly assigned to view a
multi-media web page, including a short video and a financial aid calculator. The video, which
was professionally designed and targeted to a youth audience, provided information about the
benefits of postsecondary education and how financial aid could help defray the costs. Students
could print out the results of the financial aid calculator along with information about how to
apply.

Three weeks later, both groups were surveyed again. The treatment group had significantly
increased their educational expectations and were significantly more likely to believe they would
qualify for a grant. The pattern of impacts was most consistent amongst the students with the
lowest baseline educational expectations. The study did not examine actual postsecondary
outcomes; however, for the low-expectations group the treatment did increase the proportion
who requested additional information about specific institutions at the end of the second survey.

Evidence indicates that purely informational interventions may be particularly impactful in the
developing world, where information barriers among the disadvantaged may be particularly

21

acute. For example, in a field experiment by Jensen (2010) in the Dominican Republic, eighth
grade boys in randomly selected schools were given information on average earnings for middleaged men with different levels of education. Six months later, these students had significantly
increased their perceptions of the returns to schooling, and over the next four years, these
students completed 0.20 more years of school than their randomly-selected counterparts in the
control group. Similarly, a field experiment conducted by Nguyen (2008) in primary schools in
Madagascar found that providing parents with accurate information about returns to education
led to a significant increase in their children’s test scores.16

CONCLUDING CAVEATS:
LIMITATIONS ON THE ROLE OF INFORMATION CONSTRAINTS
Two caveats to the discussion above are warranted. First, work in psychology and behavioral
economics has illuminated a realm of constraints on optimal decision-making that go beyond the
purely informational, including bounded rationality as well as bounded self-control (see ScottClayton [2011a] for a more in-depth application of behavioral economic concepts to higher
education policy). Even with perfect information, individuals may struggle to make good use of
it if their own preferences are unstable (Tversky & Simonson 1993) or if the complexity of the
analysis required induces cognitive overload (Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, & Laibson 2008). And
even if individuals know what they want to do, they may delay or avoid taking action because
they think it will be easier in the future (Laibson 1997), they want to avoid the regret associated
with closing off alternatives (O’Donoghue & Rabin 2001), or they want to avoid “hassle factors”
(Bertrand, Mullainathan, & Shafir 2004). Thus, while poor information may exacerbate many of
these problems, perfect information does not necessarily eliminate them. Indeed, there is
evidence that few individuals actively decided against going to college; instead, they have high
aspirations but simply fall off the path to college by failing to take the specific actions required
to attend (Avery & Kane 2004). This may help explain the failure of the purely informational
treatment in the FAFSA experiment (Bettinger et al. 2009).

16

As predicted by theory, the impacts were heterogeneous, with decreased test scores among students whose
parents had originally overestimated the returns to schooling. Also note that because the post‐test was
administered just a few months following the informational intervention, it is possible that the increase in scores
reflects an increase in effort rather than an increase in underlying human capital.

22

Second, while students’ information constraints appear to present a serious obstacle to optimal
educational decision-making, they are far from the only barrier to postsecondary access. Credit
constraints appear to have increased in importance in the US over the past thirty years as costs
have risen and aid has stagnated (see Lochner & Monge-Naranjo [2011] for a recent review of
the evidence regarding credit constraints). Inadequate academic preparation is also a critical
barrier (Greene & Foster 2003). More broadly, it can be difficult to identify the separate effects
of informational constraints because individuals who are financially or academically constrained
may rationally devote less time and effort to learning about college costs, benefits, and
requirements (Grodsky & Jones 2007).

Notwithstanding these caveats, information constraints remain an important consideration for
policymaking for at least two reasons. First, they can potentially be addressed at low cost,
particularly if they are acknowledged early in the policy design process rather than after the fact.
Second, if unaddressed, they can potentially undermine the effectiveness of even very large
investments in financial aid.

23

REFERENCES
Barr, N. (2004) “Higher education funding,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 20(2): 264-283.
Adelman, C. (2006) The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree completion from high school through
college, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Adnett, N. & Tlupova, D. (2008) “Informed choice? The new English student funding system
and widening participation,” London Review of Education, 6(3): 243-54.
Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance (2005) The student aid gauntlet: Making
access to college simple and certain [Final report of the Special Study of Simplification of Need
Analysis and Application for Title IV Aid], Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Agarwal, Sumit, Driscoll, J. C., Gabaix, X. & Laibson, D. (2008) “The age of reason: financial
decisions over the lifecycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13191, Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Angrist, J. D., Lang, D. & Oreopoulos, P. (2009) “Incentives and services for college
achievement: Evidence from a randomized trial,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1(1): 136-163.
Attanasio, O. & Kaufman, K. (2009) “Educational choices, subjective expectations, and credit
constraints,” NBER Working Paper No. 15087, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Autor, D., Katz, L.F., and Kearney, M.K. (2008) “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the
Revisionists,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2): 300-323.
Avery, C. & Hoxby, C. (2004) "Do and should financial aid packages affect students’ college
choices?" in C. M. Hoxby (ed.), College choices: The economics of where to go, when to go, and
how to pay for it, 239–302, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Avery, C. & Kane, T.J. (2004) “Student Perceptions of College Opportunities: The Boston
COACH Program.” In C. M. Hoxby (ed.), College choices: The economics of where to go, when
to go, and how to pay for it, 355–94, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Avery, C. & Turner, S.E. (2009) “Playing the college application game: critical moves and the
link to socioeconomic circumstances,” unpublished mimeo, Charlottesville, VA: University of
Virginia.
Benartzi, S. & Thaler, R.H. (2007) “Heuristics and biases in retirement savings behavior,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3): 81-104.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2004) “A behavioral-economics view of poverty,”
American Economic Review, 94(2), Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred Sixteenth

24

Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, San Diego, CA, January 3–5, 2004,
419–423.
Bettinger, E. (2004) “How financial aid affects persistence,” in C.M. Hoxby (ed.), College
choices: The economics of where to go, when to go, and how to pay for it, 207-238, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2009) “The role of
simplification and information in college decisions: Results and implications from the H&R
Block FAFSA experiment,” NBER Working Paper No. 15361, Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Betts, J.R. (1996) “What do students know about wages? Evidence from a survey of
undergraduates,” Journal of Human Resources, 31(1): 27-56.
Bound, J., Lovenheim, M.F. & Turner, S.E. (2010) “Increasing time to baccalaureate degree in
the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 15892, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Bound, J., & Turner, S. (2002) “Going to war and going to college: Did World War II and the
G.I. Bill increase educational attainment for returning veterans?” Journal of Labor Economics,
20(4): 784-815.
Bowen, W., Chingos, M. & McPherson, M. (2009) Crossing the finish line: completing college
at America’s public universities, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Brackett, M.H.H., Gordon, C.S. & Henry, G.T. (1999) HOPE longitudinal study: year 2 results,
Atlanta, GA: Council for School Performance/Georgia State University.
Brock, T., & Richburg-Hayes, L. (2006) Paying for persistence: Early results of a Louisiana
scholarship program for low-income parents attending community college, New York, NY:
MDRC.
Burdman, P. (2005) The student debt dilemma: Debt aversion as a barrier to college access,
Berkeley: University of California, Center for Studies in Higher Education.
Callender, C., & Jackson, J. (2005) “Does the fear of debt deter students from higher education?”
Journal of Social Policy, 34(2): 39-58.
Chapman, B. (2006) “Income contingent loans for higher education: international reforms,” in
Hanushek, E.A. & Welch, F. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, 14361503.
College Board (2011) Trends in College Pricing 2011, New York: The College Board.

25

Cornwell, C., Mustard, D., & Sridhar, D. (2006) “The enrollment effects of merit-based financial
aid: Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE scholarship,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24: 761-786.
Deming, D., & Dynarski, S. (2009) “Into college, out of poverty? Policies to increase the
postsecondary attainment of the poor,” NBER Working Paper 15387, Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Dominitz, J. & Manski, C.F. (1996) “Eliciting student expectations of the returns to schooling,”
Journal of Human Resources, 31(1): 1-26.
Dynarski, S. (2003) “Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college attendance
and completion,” American Economic Review, 93(1): 279-288.
Dynarski, S. (2004) “The new merit aid,” in C. Hoxby (ed.), College choices: The economics of
where to go, when to go, and how to pay for it, 63-100, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dynarski, S. (2005) “Loans, liquidity and schooling decisions,” unpublished mimeo, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government.
Dynarski, S. (2008) “Building the stock of college-educated labor,” Journal of Human
Resources, 43(3): 576-610.
Dynarski, S. M., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2006) “The cost of complexity in federal student aid:
Lessons from optimal tax theory and behavioral economics,” National Tax Journal, 59(2): 319–
356.
Dynarski, S.M. & Wiederspan, M. (2012) “Student aid simplification: looking back and looking
ahead,” National Tax Journal (forthcoming).
Field, E. (2009) “Educational debt burden and career choice: Evidence from a financial aid
experiment at NYU law school,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 1-21.
Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2008) The race between education and technology, Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Goldrick-Rab, S. (2010) “Challenges and opportunities for improving community college student
success,” Review of Educational Research, 80(3): 437-69.
Greene, J. P., & Foster, G. (2003) "Public high school graduation and college readiness rates in
the United States," New York: The Manhattan Institute for Policy Research.
Grodsky, E., & Jones, M. T. (2007) “Real and imagined barriers to college entry: perceptions of
cost,” Social Science Research 36: 745-66.
Hansen, W. L. (1983) “Impact of student financial aid on access,” in J. Froomkin (ed.), The
crisis in higher education (pp. 84-96), New York: The Academy of Political Science.
26

Heller, D.E. (2006) “Early commitment of financial aid eligibility,” American Behavioral
Scientist, 49: 1719-38.
Heller, D.E. (2008) “The impact of loans on student access,” in Baum, S, McPherson, M., &
Steele, P. (eds.), The effectiveness of student aid policies: What the research tells us (pp. 39-68),
New York: The College Board.
Horn, L. J., Xianglei C., & Chapman, C. (2003) Getting ready to pay for college: What students
and their parents know about the cost of college tuition and what they are doing to find out,
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Ikenberry, S. O., & Hartle, T. W. (1998) Too little knowledge is a dangerous thing: What the
public thinks about paying for college, Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
Jensen, R. (2010) “The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2):515-48.
Johnson, J., Rochkind, J. & Ott, A. (2011) One Degree of Separation: How Young Americans
Who Don’t Finish College See Their Chances for Success, San Francisco: Public Agenda.
Kane, T. J. (1996) “Lessons from the largest school voucher program ever: Two decades of
experience with Pell Grants,” in B. Fuller, R. Elmore, & G. Orfield (eds.), Who chooses? Who
loses? Culture, institutions and the unequal effects of school choice, New York: Teachers
College Press.
Kane, T.J. (2003) “A quasi-experimental estimate of the impact of financial aid on collegegoing,” NBER Working Paper No. 9703, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Kane, T. J. (2007) “Evaluating the impact of the DC Tuition Assistance Grant program,” Journal
of Human Resources, 42(3): 555-582.
Laibson, D. (1997) “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(2): 443–477.
Lemieux, T. (2006) “Association Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects,
Noisy Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?” The American Economic Review, 96(3): 461-498.
Lochner, L.J. & Monge-Naranjo, A. (2011) “Credit Constraints in Education,” NBER Working
Paper No. 17435, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Long, B.T. (2008). What is known about the impact of financial aid? Implications for policy
(NCPR Working Paper), New York: National Center for Postsecondary Research.

27

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O. S., & Curto, V. (2010). Financial literacy among the young: Evidence
and implications for consumer policy (NBER Working Paper No. 15352). Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Manski, C. (1993) “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to
Education?” in Clotfelter, C.T. and Rothschild, M. (eds.), Studies of Supply and Demand
inHigher Education, 43-60, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
National Commission on the High School Senior Year (2001), Raising our sights: No high
school senior left behind, Princeton, NJ: The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation.
Nguyen, T. (2008) “Information, role models and perceived returns to education: experimental
evidence from Madagascar,” MIT working paper, Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
O’Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (2001) “Choice and procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 116(1), 121–160.
Office for Fair Access [OFFA] (2009) Good practice guide for institutions: how to increase
awareness, knowledge and take-up of bursaries and scholarships, Bristol, UK: OFFA.
Oreopoulos, P. & Dunn, R. (2011) “Information and college access: evidence from a randomized
field experiment,” unpublished mimeo, Toronto: University of Toronto.
Pallais, A. (2009a) “Small differences that matter: mistakes in applying to college,” unpublished
mimeo, Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Available online
http://scholar.harvard.edu/sites/scholar.iq.harvard.edu/files/apallais/files/4030.pdf.
Pallais, A. (2009b) “Taking a chance on college: Is the Tennessee Education Lottery Scholarship
a winner?” Journal of Human Resources, 44(1): 199-222.
Roderick, M., Nagaoka, J., Coca, V. & Moeller, E. (2009) From high school to the future:
making hard work pay off, Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Rosenbaum, J. E., Deil-Amen, R., & Person, A. E. (2006) After admission: From college access
to college success, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Schrag, P.G. (2001) “The federal income-contingent repayment option for law student loans,”
Hofstra Law Review, 29: 733–862.
Scott-Clayton, J. (2011a), “The Shapeless River: Does a Lack of Structure Inhibit Students'
Progress at Community Colleges?” CCRC Working Paper No. 25 (Assessment of Evidence
Series), New York: Community College Research Center.
Scott-Clayton, J. (2011b), “On money and motivation: A quasi-experimental analysis of financial
incentives for college achievement,” Journal of Human Resources, 46(3): 614-646.

28

Scott-Clayton, J. (2011c), “The rise of the five-year four-year degree,” NYTimes.com (May 20,
2011), New York: NYTimes.com. Available online:
http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/05/20/the-rise-of-the-five-year-four-year-degree/.
Seftor, N., & Turner, S. (2002). Back to school: Federal student aid policy and adult college
enrollment. Journal of Human Resources, 37(2), 336-352.
Smith, H.L. & Powell, B. (1990) “Great Expectations: Variations in Income Expectations among
College Seniors,” Sociology of Education, 63: 194–207.
St. John, E.P., Musoba, G.D., Simmons, A.B., Chung, C.G., Schmit, J. & Peng, C.J. (2004),
“Meeting the access challenge: an examination of Indiana’s Twenty-First Century Scholars
Program,” Research in Higher Education, 45(8): 829-71.
Stanley, M. (2003) “College Education and the Mid-Century GI bills,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(2): 671-708.
Turner, S.E. (2009) “Common across the Atlantic: The underrepresentation of low-income
students in higher education in the US and the UK,” in Social mobility and education: academic
papers presented at a high level summit sponsored by the Carnegie Corporation of New York
and the Sutton Trust, 137-174, New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York and Sutton Trust.
Tversky, A., & Simonson, I. (1993) “Context-dependent preferences” Management Science,
39(10): 1179–1189.
US Government Accountability Office [GAO] (2010) For-profit colleges: undercover testing
finds colleges encouraged fraud and engaged in deceptive and questionable marketing practices,
Washington, DC: US GAO.
Usher, A. (2005) A little knowledge is a dangerous thing: how perceptions of costs and benefits
affect access to education, Toronto: Educational Policy Institute.
Zhang, L. and Thomas, S. (2005) “Investment in human capital: Sources of variation in the
return of college quality,” in Smart, J. (ed.), Higher education: handbook of theory and research,
vol. 20, 241-306, The Netherlands: Springer.

29

