NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE EXTENSIONS
ON EMPLOYMENT
Johannes F. Schmieder
Till M. von Wachter
Stefan Bender
Working Paper 17814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17814

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We would like to thank our discussant Bruce Meyer for many useful comments. Johannes Schmieder
gratefully acknowledges funding from the 2011 Scholars Program of the Department of Labor. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Johannes F. Schmieder, Till M. von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Long-Term Effects of Unemployment Insurance Extensions on Employment
Johannes F. Schmieder, Till M. von Wachter, and Stefan Bender
NBER Working Paper No. 17814
February 2012
JEL No. J64,J65
ABSTRACT
The majority of papers analyzing the employment effects of unemployment insurance (UI) benefit
durations focuses on the duration of the first unemployment spell. In this paper, we make two contributions.
First, we use a regression discontinuity design to analyze the long-term effects of extensions in UI
durations. These estimates differ from standard estimates that they incorporate differences in UI benefit
receipt and employment due to recurrent unemployment spells. Second, we derive a welfare formula
of UI extensions that incorporates recurrent nonemployment spells. We find that accounting for nonemployment
beyond the initial spell leads to a significant reduction in estimates of the nonemployment effect of
UI extensions by about 25 percent. We show this effect is only partly explained by a mechanical effect
due to finite follow-up durations, and mainly arises from a lower probability of days in nonemployment
in months after end of the initial nonemployment spell.

Johannes F. Schmieder
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
johannes.schmieder@gmail.com
Till M. von Wachter
Department of Economics
Columbia University
601 West 115th Str. Apt. 101
New York, NY 10025
and NBER
vw2112@columbia.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17814

Stefan Bender
Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
Regensburger Str. 104
90478 Nuremberg
Germany
stefan.bender@iab.de

The Long-term Effects of Unemployment Insurance
Extensions on Employment
Johannes F. Schmieder, Till von Wachter and Stefan Bender∗
February 9, 2012
The effect of extending the duration of unemployment insurance (UI) benefits on nonemployment duration is a hotly debated question. The vast majority of the literature (e.g., Katz
and Meyer 1990, Schmieder, von Wachter, and Bender 2012) [henceforth SVB]) analyzes the
effect of extensions in UI durations or increases in UI benefits on the initial nonemployment
spell. This may lead to an understatement of the cost of UI extensions, if such extensions
increase the incidence of nonemployment beyond the initial spell, as would be predicted by
models of stigma, skill depreciation, or supply-side hysteresis (e.g., Blanchard and Diamond
1994, Lemieux and MacLeod 2000). On the other hand, these estimates may overstate employment effects if longer initial spells tend to reduce future incidence of nonemployment.
This might arise because of an increase in individual labor supply, for example due to lower
income. In addition, with a finite lifetime (or a finite follow-up period) the nonemployment
effect can also decline mechanically. This can arise since at a given, say, monthly probability
of being unemployed, individuals with longer initial spells accumulate less time in nonemployment due to a shorter remaining lifetime. Despite these alternative hypotheses, little is
known about the longer-term effect of UI extensions on employment.
In this paper, we make two contributions. First, we use a regression discontinuity design to analyze the long-term effects of extensions in UI durations. These estimates differ
from standard estimates that they incorporate differences in UI benefit receipt and employment due to recurrent unemployment spells. Second, we extend the welfare formula of UI
extensions from SVB to incorporate recurrent nonemployment spells.

1

Welfare Formula with Long-Term Effects of UI Extensions

In this section we extend the welfare effect of UI extensions derived in SVB to incorporate
long-term effects of UI benefit durations on nonemployment. The key difference is that
∗

Schmieder: Boston University, 270 Bay State Rd, 02215 Boston, MA, johannes@bu.edu. von Wachter:
Columbia University, 420 W 118th St., New York, NY 10025, vw2112@columbia.edu. Bender: Institute for
Employment Research (IAB), Regensburger Str. 104, 90478 Nuremberg, Germany, stefan.bender@iab.de.
We would like to thank our discussant Bruce Meyer for many useful comments. Johannes Schmieder gratefully
acknowledges funding from the 2011 Scholars Program of the Department of Labor. All errors are our own.

1

instead of modeling the individual job seeker’s choice of reservation wages, we generalize the
model to a choice of reservation match-quality, and hence of expected job duration.
Our model is closely based on SVB (2012), which in turn draws on Chetty (2008). As in
SVB, unemployed job seekers choose how intensely to search for a job, while receiving a fixed
UI benefit at a fixed duration. In contrast to SVB and related papers, instead of receiving a
job at a given wage and accepting based on a reservation wage strategy, we assume workers
receive a job at a fixed wage, but at a variable probability of layoff that is drawn from
a stationary stochastic job offer distribution. In this case, we show that under common
assumptions job search behavior is described by a reservation layoff probability. Jobs with
layoff probabilities above the reservation values are accepted. As in the basic model, workers
face a liquidity constraint, and the policy maker chooses the duration of UI benefits at a
constant level.
Our decision to model job search as a choice of a reservation layoff probability rather than
a reservation wage can be interpreted in several ways. On the one hand, wages may vary
little within a job class defined by occupation, industry, and previous job seniority; hence,
individuals have less of a choice over wages but look for jobs that provide a good fit and
hence last longer. This is not a bad assumption in Germany, were wages in many jobs are
traditionally set by collective bargaining. On the other hand, one can interpret our model
more generally as a choice of reservation match quality, which may be related to multiple
possible job attributes, such as job duration, wages, commuting times, or work environment.
In this context, our approach provides a convenient short cut relative to explicitly considering
job search over multiple job attributes. It is also sensible because job duration is frequently
used as an index of job quality, given that wages can incorporate compensating differentials
and hence do not fully represent a job’s attractiveness.
After some algebra, which is summarized in our companion Web Appendix, the effect on
social welfare W0 of an extension of potential UI durations P can be expressed as
dB
dW0
=
dP
dP
−

h

b E0,T −1 u0 (cut,P ) − E0,T −1 v 0 (cet )

i

1

dB
dP

B dD
+
T − D dP
2

!

b E0,T −1 v 0 (cet )

where E0,T −1 u0 (cut,P ) and E0,T −1 v 0 (cet ) are the expected marginal utilities at benefit exhaustion
and upon reemployment, respectively; T , B, and D represent total remaining life time, total
benefit duration, and total nonemployment duration; dB/dP |1 is the average exhaustion
rate, and dB/dP |2 is the effect of potential UI benefit duration on duration of UI benefit
receipt prior to benefit exhaustion (such that the effect of a extension in UI duration on total
benefit duration is dB/dP = dB/dP |1 +dB/dP |2 ); and dD/dP is the corresponding effect on
total nonemployment duration. The formula has the same structure as that derived in SVB;
i.e., the welfare gain of UI extensions depends on the exhaustion rate, and is proportional
to the difference in marginal utility of a worker exhausting UI benefits relative to her utility
at reemployment. The welfare cost is the increase in taxes due to UI extensions, which
results from a rise in total payouts without corresponding welfare benefits and a decline in
the number of individuals paying taxes.
2

10

15

20

25

30

The key difference with respect to the formula in SVB is that here B and D represent
total duration of UI benefits and nonemployment after the start of the initial spell. I.e.,
they depend both on the duration of the initial UI and nonemployment spell, as well as
the incidence and duration of recurring UI and nonemployment spells. How this difference
affects estimates of the effect of UI extensions is subject of our empirical analysis.
A noteworthy feature of the welfare equation we derived here is that any effect of UI
extensions on job durations or match quality other than what affects the incidence and
duration of UI and nonemployment spells does not affect welfare directly. As noted by Chetty
(2008), this results from an application of the envelope theorem. This welfare equation does
not take into account potentially important channels through which UI extension can affect
nonemployment and welfare, such as general equilibrium effects of UI extensions. Below, we
will nevertheless use the welfare
equation
to calibrate
the welfare
effects of UI extensions
Days
per month
nonemployed
by Month
with and without accounting for longer-term effects.

0

20

40

60

Month since UI claim
12 Months Potential UI Duration

18 Months Potential UI Duration
Number P=12: 258413, Number P=18: 252683

Figure 1: Days nonemployed per month
The difference between the lines is estimated using a regression discontinuity design.
Vertical bars indicate statistical significance.

2

Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Dynamic Effects of UI Extensions

In this section, we present regression discontinuity (RD) estimates using the same research
design as in SVB, with three differences. First, our main outcome variables are the total
days receiving UI benefits and the total days in nonemployment in the first five years after
the start of the initial UI spell, irrespective of whether the initial spell has ended or not.
Hence, in contrast to previous estimates this captures nonemployment effects from recurring
3

spells. Second, we replicate the RD estimate for UI and nonemployment duration in each
month since the start of the initial spell, again irrespective of whether the initial spell has
ended. We use these estimates to construct dynamic figures capturing the long-term impact
of UI extensions. Finally, we provide preliminary estimates decomposing the effect on the
total nonemployment duration into a change in the incidence of nonemployment in any given
month after the initial spell has ended and a mechanical effect arising from a shorter remaining time horizon over which individuals with higher potential UI durations can accumulate
time spent in nonemployment.
In Germany, after having worked at least 12 months to be covered, in the period from
1987 to 1999 unemployed workers were eligible to receive UI benefits at a fixed replacement
rate for a fixed number of months (See SVB for details). The duration was a function of
exact age at application for benefit receipt and the amount of labor force experience. Here,
we focus on the discontinuity at age 42 for workers that worked at least three out of the last
seven years without UI spell, for whom maximum duration of UI benefits rose from 12 to
18 months. We focus on the earliest cutoff point available to maximize our sample size and
follow up duration.
Table 1: The Effect of UI Benefit Extensions on Long-term Employment
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sum of days
Sum of days
UI Benefit
Nonemp.
on UI benefits nonemployed
Duration in
Duration
over 5 years
over 5 years 1st Nonemp spell until 1st job
D(Age≥42)

68.2
[1.28]**
dy
11.4
dP
[0.21]**
Observations
489275
Mean of Dep. Var.
341.3
Coefficients from RD regressions. Local
cutoff. Standard errors clustered on day

28.1
54.3
37.9
[4.07]**
[1.10]**
[4.27]**
4.68
9.15
6.32
[0.68]**
[0.71]**
[0.71]**
489275
489275
489275
892.9
237.9
626.1
linear regressions (different slopes) on each side of
level (* P<.05, ** P<.01)).

We implement a straightforward regression-based RD analysis using a two-year bandwidth around the age cutoff and allowing for a differential linear impact of claiming age
on each side of the age cutoff.1 We use administrative records from Germany covering the
period from 1975 to 2004, which provide us with information on exact day of birth, basic
demographic and job characteristics, as well as day-to-day UI and employment spells for the
universe of employees covered by social security. We extract individuals age 40 to 43 that
satisfy the labor force experience criterion who became unemployed between 1987 and 1999.
Our main outcome measures are days receiving UI benefits and days in nonemployment at
any time within five years after the start of the initial UI spell.
1

In SVB, we discuss the possibility that workers might selectively apply for benefit durations before and
after the age thresholds, and conclude that any impact of selection is likely to be small in our context.
Similarly, we examined the sensitivity of our estimates to modelling choices.

4

Figure 1 displays the average number of days in nonemployment in each month after start
of benefit receipt for the group of workers with 12 months and with 18 months UI duration.
The vertical bars represent RD estimates based on information on nonemployment duration
in the respective month for workers above and below the 42 age cutoff. The structure
of the estimates is analogous to that of a classic event study and differs from standard
hazard functions, which only follows individuals until the exit from their first unemployment
spell. The figure makes three points. First, nonemployment durations are higher for workers
eligible for higher benefits even in the months before there is a difference in eligibility. Hence,
workers appear to be forward looking in their labor supply choices. Second, there is a slightly
larger difference in nonemployment 12 to 18 months after the start of the initial spell, when
eligibility for benefits differs. Thus, an important part of the effect of UI extensions indeed
works through an extension of the first spell, as captured by standard estimates. Finally,
the figure shows that the differences in nonemployment last well beyond exhaustion at 18
months. Nonemployment is significantly higher for workers with higher initial UI duration
up to five years after the start of the initial spell. Although the differences appear to have
essentially faded after five years, they are economically significant at least up to three years
after the initial start of unemployment.
Table 2: Decomposing the Long-term Employment Effects of UI Extensions
(1)
(2)
Prob of unemp Covariance bw
after reemp
D1 and pu
pu
Cov(D1 , pu )
D(Age≥42)

-0.0046
-2.32
[0.0016]**
[0.86]**
dy
-0.00076
-0.39
dP
[0.00027]**
[0.14]**
Observations
489275
489275
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.18
-49.4
Coefficients from RD regressions. Local linear regressions (different slopes) on each side of
cutoff. Standard errors clustered on day level (* P<.05, ** P<.01)).
Figure 1 represents the combined effect from the initial nonemployment spell and differences in the incidence and duration of additional nonemployment spells. To show directly
how differentiating between the first and additional spells makes a difference, in Table 1 we
present various estimates of the effect of UI extensions on the sum of days spent receiving UI
benefits and in nonemployment over five years after the initial spell. When we incorporate
all nonemployment spells into our estimate, an extension of six months in potential durations
of UI benefits leads to an increase in 28.1 days in nonemployment (column 2). To gauge the
difference that accounting for recurring UI and nonemployment spells does, in column 4 of
Table 1 we show the corresponding result when we only measure the effect of UI extensions
on the duration of the initial UI and nonemployment spell.2 At an increase of 37.9 days for a
2

Note that these estimates are expressed in days and show the effect for five years. The estimates in

5

six month UI extension, this estimate is substantially larger than the estimate in column 2.
This implies that allowing for added nonemployment spells lowers the effect of UI extensions
on days of nonemployment by about 10 days, a decline of about 26% relative to the standard
estimate. Note that in contrast to this reduction, comparing column 1 and 3 of Table 1,
the sum of days receiving UI benefits increases if we include additional spells. This is partly
mechanical, since the German UI system allows individuals finding a job before exhaustion of
UI benefits to carry over their remaining benefit duration to the next spell. This carry-over
effect is larger for those with higher UI durations, a finding that we discuss further when
considering welfare effects of UI extensions in Section III.
To better understand the sources of the substantial decline in the effect of UI extensions
on nonemployment durations due to incorporation of recurring spells we find, consider the
following decomposition. Let D1 be the duration of the first nonemployment spell. Let pu
be the probability of being nonemployed in a given month after the first nonemployment
spell (this is a combination of the probability of being laid off again the the duration of
the later unemployment spells). Then the total amount spent in nonemployment (until
retirement or the 5 year horizon we consider here) of a given individual i can be expressed
as Di = Di1 + (T − Di1 )piu . To obtain a marginal effect of UI extensions on D for the
population, take expectations of this expression and differentiate both sides with respect to
potential UI duration P . This yields an expression for the difference between the the effect
of UI extensions on total nonemployment (D) and unemployment in the first spell (D1 ),
dD1
dpu dCov (D1 , pu )
dD
=
(1 − pu ) + (T − D1 )
−
dP
dP
dP
dP
The difference arises from three sources. First, at a given propensity to spent time in
nonemployment pu , a rise in the duration of the first spell reduces the total time spent
in nonemployment in the remaining period (call this the ’mechanical’ effect). Second, the
propensity of nonemployment in any given month may change; as mentioned at the outset,
the sign of this effect is ambiguous. Third, the covariance between the duration of the first
spell and the propensity to become nonemployed in the population may either rise or fall.
The fact that the results in Table 1 indicate that the difference is negative, the decomposition
suggests that either the ’mechanical’ effects dominates the two other components, or that
it is reinforced by a decline in the propensity to become unemployed (or a change in the
covariance term).
To learn more about the three sources of the difference between the standard and more
inclusive estimates of the nonemployment effect of UI durations, we calculated the effect of
UI extensions on the monthly propensity to become nonemployed (pu ) and its covariance
with the duration of the initial spell. These results are shown in Table 2. The mean of pu
is 0.18, and the covariance term is negative, suggesting that those individuals with longer
initial spells have a lower subsequent probability to be nonemployed. The findings of the
effect of UI extensions are quite striking. The propensity of being nonemployed declines for
individuals with higher potential UI durations. To assess the magnitude of this effect, one
has to multiply the change with (T − D1 ), the number of days outstanding in our five year
SVB, Table 2 are expressed in months and show the effect over three years. To express the results in terms
of months, divide the estimates in Table 1 by 30.5.

6

window after the initial spell; the result suggests that the decline in pu contributes with a
decline in 5.5 to the differences in the estimates in columns 2 and 3 in Table 1. I.e., a bit
more than half of the decline in the nonemployment effect of UI extensions when we consider
all spells instead of just the first nonemployment spell is due to a decline in the propensity
to be unemployed. The mechanical effect and a further decline in the covariance explain
each about half of the remaining difference.
The increase in the effect of UI extensions on UI benefit receipt and nonemployment
durations may be due to a decline in the number of recurring nonemployment spells, as well
as an reduction in the duration of such spells. A preliminary examination of this question
suggested that the duration of future nonemployment spells is unaffected by UI extensions
and that instead the incidence of new nonemployment spells declined slightly. Pursuing this
decomposition is a useful goal for future work.

3

Discussion and Conclusion

We can use the modified welfare formula we derived to gauge the potential magnitude of
positive and negative welfare changes due to the presence of persistent effects of UI extensions. As discussed in more detail in SVB, these results should be treated as illustrative and
approximate rather than exact. To implement the welfare formula, we expressed it in terms
of sufficient statistics (see our Web Appendix) and rescaled it by the marginal utility of the
employed, so that welfare is expressed in monetary terms rather than utility. We require
two additional inputs with respect to the results of the paper. First, we need an estimate
of the ratio of income and substitution effects, which we take from Chetty (2008). Second,
to implement the welfare formula we need to obtain estimates of dB/dP |1 and dB/dP |2 .
However, we can use the fact that UI extensions do not increase the duration of additional
spells to infer that the added time spent on UI due to a reduction in search (dB/dP |2 ) for
the added spells is zero. Hence, all of the portion of dB/dP beyond the dB/dP |2 for the
initial spell must be due to an increase in coverage and hence is welfare increasing.
Using these assumptions and the estimates for the benefit and nonemployment effect of
UI extensions in columns (1) and (2) of Table 1, we obtain that the welfare gain from UI
extensions is 281 Euros per month of UI extension and per unemployed worker. If instead
we use the estimates of the effect of UI extensions on the first spell in columns (3) and (4)
of Table 1, the welfare gain is 192 Euro per month of UI extension. Given the increase in
outlays in the former case, the difference in the welfare gain per Euro spent is smaller, 0.97 vs.
0.83, but still substantial in percentage terms. These numbers highlight that incorporating
persistent effects of UI extensions on nonemployment durations can substantially change
the welfare effect of UI extensions. The magnitude of the welfare gain depends crucially
on how we decompose the total benefit increase into the exhaustion rate (dB/dP |1 ) and
the component due to reduction in search effort (dB/dP |2 ). The reason is that dB/dP |1
is weighted by the ratio (here a value of 1.5) and dB/dP |2 enters the welfare equation as
it is. On the other hand, the nonemployment effect, which has been the focus of a large
literature, is multiplied by the unemployment rate (B/(T − D)) and hence changes in its
value have rather small impact in the welfare formula we derived. While when only looking
over a single spell we have that dD/dP is roughly proportional to dB/dP |2 and is thus a
7

reasonable statistic to approximate the costs of UI extensions, in the recurring spell case the
relationship is more complex and care has to be taken to estimate the different components
accurately.

References
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Peter Diamond. 1994. “Ranking, Unemployment
Duration, and Wages.” The Review of Economic Studies, 61(3): 417.
Chetty, Raj. 2008. “Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance.”
Journal of Political Economy, 116(2): 173–234.
Katz, Lawrence, and Bruce D. Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of Potential Duration of
Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment Outcomes.” Journal of
Public Economics, 45–71.
Lemieux, Thomas, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2000. “Supply side hysteresis: the case
of the Canadian unemployment insurance system.” Journal of Public Economics,
78(1-2): 139–170.
Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012. “The Effects
of Extended Unemployment Insurance Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from
Regression Discontinuity Estimates over Twenty Years.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127:2, forthcoming.

8

