                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ACCOUNTING FOR REAL EXCHANGE RATES USING MICRO-DATA

                                             Mario J. Crucini
                                             Anthony Landry

                                          Working Paper 17812
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17812


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012




This paper was written while Mario Crucini was a visiting senior fellow at the Globalization and Monetary
Policy Institute at the Federal Research Bank of Dallas. Mario Crucini gratefully acknowledges the
financial support of the National Science Foundation. We are grateful to participants at the 2011 Econometric
Society Winter Meetings, the 2011 Canadian Macroeconomic Study Group Meetings, the 2011 Midwest
Macroeconomics Meetings, the 2010 Society for Economic Dynamics, the University of Melbourne,
Université Laval, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System and Vanderbilt University. We particularly thank Dean Corbae, Mick Devereux, Rebecca Hellerstein,
Karen Lewis, John Rogers, and Robert Vigfusson for their detailed comments. The views in this paper
are our responsibility and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Mario J. Crucini and Anthony Landry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Real Exchange Rates Using Micro-data
Mario J. Crucini and Anthony Landry
NBER Working Paper No. 17812
February 2012
JEL No. F0,F2,F3,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

The classical dichotomy predicts that all of the time series variance in the aggregate real exchange
rate is accounted for by non-traded goods in the CPI basket because traded goods obey the Law of
One Price. In stark contrast, Engel (1999) found that traded goods had comparable volatility to the
aggregate real exchange rate. Our work reconciles these two views by successfully applying the classical
dichotomy at the level of intermediate inputs into the production of final goods using highly disaggregated
retail price data. Since the typical good found in the CPI basket is about equal parts traded and non-traded
inputs, we conclude that the classical dichotomy applied to intermediate inputs restores its conceptual
value.


Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu

Anthony Landry
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
2200 North Pearl Street
Dallas, TX 75204
and The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
anthony.landry@dal.frb.org
1     Introduction
One of the most stable empirical relationships in international macroeconomics
is the comparable volatility of nominal and real exchange rates. This relation-
ship was …rst documented by Mussa (1986) using a short panel of data follow-
ing the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of …xed nominal exchange
rates. Subsequent research has shown that this relationship is robust to longer
time spans of data and broader cross-sections of countries. Understandably,
these observations have been interpreted as evidence that goods markets are
nationally segmented.
    An enduring explanation for real exchange rate variability is the classical
dichotomy of Salter (1959) and Swan (1960). This is the notion that the
consumption basket consists of items which are imported, items which are
exported and items which are produced only for domestic consumption. The
literature refers to items in the …rst two categories as traded goods and items in
the last category as non-traded goods. The use of the term goods is misleading
in the sense that some services are traded and some goods are not traded: to
avoid confusion with conventional usage, the term goods will refer to all items
in the consumption basket. According to the classical dichotomy, traded goods
satisfy the Law of One Price (LOP) up to a constant iceberg trade cost and
thus the real exchange rate of traded goods is constant over time, leaving the
real exchange rate of non-traded goods to account for all of the time series
variation in the CPI-based real exchange rate.
    In a highly in‡uential paper, Engel (1999) constructs traded and non-
traded real exchange rates using sub-indices of the CPIs of the United States
and its largest trading partners and conducts a variance decomposition of
bilateral aggregate real exchange rates into the contributions of the two sub-
indices. In stark contrast to the predictions of the classical dichotomy, he
…nds that real exchange rates of traded and non-traded goods contribute a
comparable amount to aggregate real exchange rate variability. His results
have shifted the consensus among economists from the classical dichotomy
view to the view that all …nal goods markets are equally segmented. And yet
the sources of market segmentation have been di¢ cult to pin down.
    A voluminous literature on exchange rate pass-through shows that move-


                                        1
ments in nominal exchange rates are not fully re‡ected in subsequent move-
ments in destination prices (see Campa and Goldberg (2005) for a compre-
hensive treatment). Thus even the prices of highly traded goods are unlikely
to satisfy the LOP at the retail level since they fail to do so at the border.
The question then becomes not simply whether one can or should distinguish
goods and services in the stark manner suggested by the classical dichotomy,
but also whether it is productive to make more subtle distinctions in crafting
the architecture of modern international macroeconomic models.
   The goal of this paper is to reassess the usefulness of distinguishing items
in the consumption basket by the variation in their real exchange rates. Two
complementary elements of novelty are introduced. The …rst is the use of
microeconomic retail price data in the variance decomposition of the aggregate
real exchange rate. The second is the application of the classical dichotomy to
intermediate inputs into the production of individual …nal goods, rather than
dichotomizing the …nal goods themselves.
   To achieve the …rst step the aggregate real exchange rate for a typical
bilateral pair (i.e., suppressing bilateral location indices) is built from the
ground up using Law of One Price deviations, qit ,
                                  X
                             qt =     ! i qit ,                               (1)
                                         i

where ! i is an item-level consumption expenditure weight. Due to the very
large number of terms on the right-hand-side of this equation a conventional
variance decomposition is not feasible. Instead, the covariance of each of the
LOP deviations is taken with respect to the aggregate bilateral real exchange
rate qt ; dividing all terms on each side of the equation by the variance of qt
gives the desired result:
                     cov(qt ; qt ) X cov(qit ; qt ) X
                1=                =   !i           =   !i      i   .          (2)
                      var(qt )      i
                                         var(qt )    i

The use of the notation     i   is deliberate. It reminds the reader of the betas
used in portfolio analysis. In this application, the return on the portfolio is
replaced with the relative price of the same basket across two locations; the
portfolio weights are the expenditure shares and the LOP deviations take the
role of the returns on individual stocks in the portfolio. As a concrete example,

                                         2
values of      greater than unity indicate items in the consumption basket that
contribute more than their expenditure share to the variability of the aggregate
real exchange rate.
      Engel’s two-index decomposition is easily constructed by aggregating the
LOP deviations into sub-indices for traded goods and non-traded goods:

                                      qt = (1    !)qtT + !qtN ,                            (3)

where ! and 1           ! are the aggregate consumption expenditure shares of goods
deemed to be either traded or non-traded. The variance decomposition be-
comes:
                                                      T        N
                                      1 = (1     !)       +!       .                       (4)
These      ’s are simply expenditure-weighted averages of their microeconomic
counterparts       i.   The restrictions of the classical dichotomy applied to these
                        T               N
aggregates are:             = 0 and         = ! 1 . The …rst restriction is the notion that
the LOP is assumed to hold for all traded goods and thus also for the aggregate
traded real exchange rate index. The second restriction is an implication of
the …rst along with the de…nition of a variance decomposition. It is important
to note that in the aggregate version, the assumption about LOP only needs
to hold on average across traded goods. Given that roughly 0.6 of expenditure
is attributed to non-traded goods based on the dichotomous classi…cation,
 N
      = 1:7 is predicted by the classical dichotomy when applied to …nal goods.
      Using Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) retail price data and U.S. expen-
                                                                                    N
diture weights for the ! i , the average                  for non-traded goods is       = 1:03
                                                  T
and the average for traded goods is                   = 0:81. In words: non-traded goods
contribute 22% more to the variability of the aggregate real exchange rate
than do traded goods. While this di¤erence is substantial and consistent in
direction with the classical dichotomy, the fact remains that the contribution
of traded goods to the variance is much closer to that of non-traded goods than
it is to zero. It is on this basis that a consensus has emerged that most items
found in the consumption basket are exchanged in markets that are nationally
segmented. And at this level of aggregation, the EIU data broadly support
this conclusion and are therefore consistent with Engel’s …ndings using o¢ cial
CPI data.1
  1
      The aggregation used here corresponds closely to Engel’s results using CPI indices. He

                                                  3
    There are two problems with this interpretation of the evidence. First, the
level of aggregation of the CPI typically available to researchers is not designed
to achieve a partition of goods into traded and non-traded items. For example,
food includes both food away from home and groceries, housing includes both
rent and utilities –if forced to make a choice, the food away from home and
rent would be placed on the non-traded side of the ledger while groceries and
utilities would be placed on the traded side of the ledger. Since much of the
data is aggregated to the level of food and housing, the categories becomes
less sharp at distinguishing traded and non-traded goods. However, the use
of micro-price data in this study completely avoids categorization bias due to
aggregation so either the problem is not acute or something else is making the
two macroeconomic and microeconomic approaches appear more comparable.
    This brings us to the second di¢ culty, the fact that …nal goods involve
both traded and non-traded inputs in their production. This violates the basic
premise of the classical dichotomy as applied to …nal goods except for carefully
chosen anecdotes. In the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) retail price survey
of 301 goods and services, there are only a handful of items purchased by
consumers with no obvious role for traded inputs (e.g., baby-sitting services
and monthly salary of a maid) and there are no items that could be reasonably
described as purely traded in the sense of the consumer paying shipping costs
and purchasing directly from the manufacturer or wholesaler (as would be
true of some online purchases, for example). The modal good in virtually all
national retail price surveys, including the EIU sample, is a food product sold
in a grocery store, which, according to the U.S. NIPA data, has a non-traded
input share of 0.41.
    Any hope of resuscitating the classical dichotomy therefore seems to re-
quire that the distinction between traded and non-traded goods be pushed
to the level of intermediate inputs used in the production of goods and ser-
vices appearing in the consumption basket. The share of these non-traded
inputs in marginal cost have been dubbed distribution margins by Burstein,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) and are measured as the di¤erence between
classi…ed services and housing as non-traded and all other sub-indices of the CPI (referrred
to as commodities) as traded. We achieve basically the same classi…cation when we label
goods with a distribution cost share of 0.6 or higher as non-traded goods.


                                             4
the price paid by the …nal consumer and the price received by the manufac-
turer at the factory gate. Strictly speaking this measure applies only to goods
and not to services because the NIPA data treat the market for services as an
arms-length transaction between the service provider and the end consumer.
That is, a medical bill paid by a consumer or health insurance company would
be recorded as having no distribution margin (or non-traded inputs) by this
measure. This study uses the input-output tables of the United States to
measure the traded and non-traded cost shares of services, following Crucini,
Telmer and Zacharadis (2005). It should also be noted that these measures
also include any markups over marginal cost at the wholesale and retail levels.
   If the cost share of non-traded inputs took on two values, zero and unity,
a researcher with measures of the shares could create a dichotomous variable
and formally test the validity of the theory using either microeconomic data or
aggregate indices. Such a test is infeasible because there are almost no items
in the consumption basket at either of these two extremes. According to U.S.
NIPA data, the non-traded input share for food products is approximately
one-third, the median share in the EIU cross-section is 0.41 and the average is
0.50. The average is particularly telling since such goods should be viewed as
equally weighted in traded and non-traded inputs completely obscuring any
tendency for the classical dichotomy to hold at the level of intermediate inputs.
   By way of example, and to illustrate our variance decomposition method-
ology, consider the dichotomy of the CPI employed by Engel: commodities
and shelter. An example of a commodity in the EIU micro-sample is a gallon
of unleaded gasoline and an example of shelter is an unfurnished two-bedroom
apartment.    We have chosen these two items because they capture extreme
values of the non-traded cost share: 0.19 and 0.93, respectively. The betas for
these two items are 0.61 and 1.43, respectively. Notice the much greater de-
gree of separation between these two betas than the averages reported above:
if non-traded good inputs are proxied by an apartment rental and traded goods
by a gallon of unleaded fuel, the di¤erence in the betas is now 82% –twice the
value estimated using the traded and non-traded aggregates.
   This represents real progress for the classical dichotomy, particularly when
one realizes that this di¤erence is likely to be an underestimate of the dif-
ferences in the underlying input betas because even for this carefully chosen

                                       5
anecdote the cost shares of non-traded inputs are not 0 and 1, but rather 0.19
and 0.93. Assuming traded inputs and non-traded inputs are di¤erent from
one another, but the same for a gallon of unleaded gasoline and an unfur-
nished two-bedroom apartment, they may estimated by solving two equations
in two unknowns. Using the betas for unleaded fuel and apartments, the values
for the traded and non-traded input betas that solve the two equations are:
 T                N
     = 0:40 and       = 1:51. Note that the estimated non-traded beta is close
to the beta for apartments, 1.51 versus 1.43, due to the fact that 0.93 is close
to 1, whereas the estimated traded beta is much lower than that of unleaded
fuel, 0.40 versus 0.61, due to the fact that 0.19 is a considerable distance from
0. These indirect estimates of the underlying input betas for non-traded and
traded inputs di¤er by 111%.
     To summarize, when we use two sub-indices of the CPI to construct a real
exchange rate for traded and non-traded goods, non-traded goods contribute
about 27% more to aggregate real exchange rates than do traded goods. When
we use individual goods and services that most closely resemble traded and
non-traded items the gap widens to 82% and when we adjust the estimates to
account for the distribution margins for each good, the gap widens further to
111%. These calculations are representative of the broader cross-section and
suggest that the classical dichotomy is a very useful description of LOP devi-
ations. Our interpretation of the invalidation of the classical dichotomy at the
level of aggregate CPI indices is a combination of not distinguishing intermedi-
ate inputs from …nal goods and of using data too highly aggregated to preserve
interesting di¤erences in the traded factor content of …nal consumption goods.
Consistent with the pass-through literature on prices at the dock, signi…cant
LOP deviations remain even after controlling for non-traded inputs indicating
the existence of market segmentation where the classical dichotomy assumes
none exists: a purely traded input. The conclusion drawn from these vari-
ance decompositions is that a hybrid model with some market segmentation
in traded goods and a good-speci…c distribution margin is a fruitful avenue for
future theoretical and empirical research.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follow. In Section 2, we present the
data. In Section 3, we describe our methodology and compute individual
contributions of LOP deviations to aggregate RER volatility. In Section 4,

                                        6
we document a striking positive relationship between the magnitude of the
contribution of a LOP deviation to aggregate RER volatility and the cost-
share of inputs used to produce that good. Then, we develop and estimate
a two-factor model, and aggregate these factors to measure the contribution
of intermediate inputs to aggregate RER volatility. In Section 5, we show
that our microeconomic decompositions, when aggregated, look very similar
to earlier studies using aggregate CPI data, but that the economic implications
are very di¤erent. Section 6 concludes.


2     The Data
The source of retail price data is the Economist Intelligence Unit Worldwide
Survey of Retail Prices. The EIU survey collects prices of 301 comparable
goods and services across 123 cities of the world. The number of prices over-
states the number of items because many items are priced in two di¤erent
types of retail outlets. For example, all food items are priced in both su-
permarkets and mid-priced stores. Clothing items are priced in chain stores
and mid-price/branded store. The prices are collected from the same physical
outlet over time, thus the prices are not averages across outlets. The panel
used in this study is annual and spans the years 1990 to 2005. The local cur-
rency prices are converted to common currency using the prevailing nominal
exchange rates at the time the survey was conducted.
    The data are supplemented with two additional sources from the U.S. Bu-
reau of Economic Analysis: the National Income and Product Account and
the Industry Economic Accounts Input-Output tables. The …rst supplemen-
tary data series are consumption-expenditure weights. These data are more
aggregated than the EIU prices, leading us to allocate about 300 individual
retail prices to 73 unique expenditure categories. We divide the sectorial ex-
penditure weights by the number of prices surveyed in each sector so that each
category of goods in the EIU panel has the same expenditure weight as in the
U.S. CPI index. As some sectors are not represented in the EIU retail price
surveys, the expenditure weights are adjusted upward to sum to unity.
    The second supplementary source are the distribution shares, the fraction
of gross-output attributable to non-traded inputs. These include wholesale and

                                      7
retail services, marketing and advertisement, local transportation services and
markups. For goods, this is the di¤erence between what consumer pays and
what manufacturer receives divided by that the consumer pays. For example,
if …nal consumption expenditure on bread is $100 and manufacturers receive
$60, the distribution share is 0.40.
    For services, however, what consumers pay and what sellers receive would
be the same value by this accounting method. In reality, when a consumer (or
that consumer’s health insurance provider) receives a medical bill, the charge
includes wage compensation for their doctor and the cost of any goods or
other services included in the treatment, whether or not it is itemized on the
invoice. In these circumstances we use input-output data to measure non-
traded and traded inputs. Each retail item in the EIU panel is reconciled with
one of these sectors and assigned that sector’s distribution share, leading to 30
unique sectorial shares. The median good as a distribution share of 0.41. The
economy-wide average distribution share weighted by …nal expenditure is 0.48
for US cities, 0.49 for OECD cities and 0.53 for non-OECD cities. Overall,
our distribution shares are similar to those used in Burstein et al. (2003) and
Campa and Goldberg (2010).


3     Microeconomic Decomposition
The theoretical construction of the aggregate real exchange rate appeals to a
utility function and the derivation of a corresponding price index.       Let Cjt
denote consumption by individual j at time t consisting of a Cobb-Douglas
aggregate of this individual’s consumption of various goods (and services),
Cijt , with weights ! i . We have:
                                          Y
                             U (Cjt ) =       (Cijt )!i .                     (5)
                                          i

Note that the j index will also refer to the location where the individual
purchases the goods, which given the nature of our data will be a city. Note
also that the absence of an individual index on the ! i means that all individuals
have the same preferences.
    Solving an expenditure minimization problem produces an ideal price index
in the sense that it maps the prices of individual goods and services into a

                                          8
single consumption de‡ator with the property that aggregate consumption is
consistent with the utility concept de…ned by the structure of preferences. For
the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences, the price index Pjt , is a simple geometric
average of good-level prices Pijt with the consumption expenditure shares as
weights in the average:
                                                   Y
                                          Pjt =             (Pijt )!i .                                (6)
                                                    i
                                            P
This de‡ator satis…es Pjt Cjt =                i   Pijt Cijt , where the quantities of aggregate
consumption and consumption of individual goods and services are the optimal
levels chosen by consumers in city j, taking prices and income as given.
      Converting prices to common currency at the spot nominal exchange rate,
leads to the de…nition of the aggregate real exchange rate (RER) Qjk;t for
bilateral city pair j and k as a function of microeconomic relative prices:
                                        Sjkt Pjt Y
                                                                                !i
                                                                  Sjkt Pijt
                              Qjk;t   =         =                                    ,                 (7)
                                          Pkt     i
                                                                    Pikt

where Sjkt is the spot nominal exchange rate between city j and k. Taking log-
arithms leads to a relationship in which the RER is a consumption-expenditure
weighted average of Law of One Price (LOP) deviations2 :
                                    X
                            qjk;t =    ! i qijkt .                                                     (8)
                                                        i

      Our microeconomic variance decomposition is achieved by taking the co-
variance of the variables on each side of this expression with respect to qjk;t
and dividing all terms on each side of the equation by the variance of qjk;t :

                         cov(qjkt ; qjkt ) X cov(qijkt ; qjkt ) X
                 1=                       =   !i               =   !i                       ijk   ,    (9)
                           var(qjkt )       i
                                                 var(qjkt )      i

where
                             cov(qijkt ; qjkt )   std (qijkt )
                   ijk   =                      =                         corr (qijkt ; qjk;t ) .     (10)
                               var(qjkt )         std (qjkt )
The contribution of good i to the variance of the aggregate RER is given
by ! i   ijk .   It is increasing in that good’s weight in expenditure, the relative
standard deviation of its real exchange rate (relative to the aggregate) and its
  2
    Note this is also the de…nition for the aggregate real exchange rate for common CES
preferences, up to a …rst-order approximation.

                                                        9
correlation with the aggregate RER. Quite apart from economizing on degrees
of freedom in estimating a variance decomposition, the approach recognizes
that we are interested in the covariance of the LOP deviations with the aggre-
gate RER.
     To …x ideas, suppose all prices are …xed in local currency units during the
period and then adjusted to satisfy the LOP at the end of the period, with a
nominal exchange rate change occurring during the period. Every single good
in the distribution would contribute exactly the same amount to the variance of
the aggregate RER,      ijk   = 1. Suppose instead that all traded goods adjusted
instantaneously to the nominal exchange rate movement within the period
while non-traded goods took one period to adjust. Now non-traded goods
                                                                       N            1
account for all of the variance and traded goods for none,                  = !         and
 T
     = 0, where ! is the share of expenditure on non-traded goods.
     The …rst example characterizes the view that all goods markets are equally
segmented, that goods are all alike, at least for the issue of understanding
real exchange rates. The second example characterizes thrust of the classical
dichotomy, there are just two types of goods. The …rst view produces a de-
generate distribution of the microeconomic ’s at 1, the second produces two
                                                            T
degenerate distributions, one for traded goods at               = 0 and one for non-
                   N          1
traded goods at        =!         = 1:7 (using a non-traded expenditure share of 0.6,
appropriate for our micro-data).
     The obvious question to ask is: what does the distribution of         ijk   look like?
Figure 1 presents three kernel density estimates: one pools all goods (black
line), one pools traded goods (red line) and one pools non-traded goods (blue
line).   The vertical lines display their averages. This distribution has little
resemblance to either of the two views described above. There is far too much
variation in the ’s to be consistent with the broad-brushed view that goods
markets are equally segmented internationally, the support of the distribution
extends from -2 to +4. At the same time, the distribution exhibits too much
central tendency toward its mean of 0.81 to be consistent with a dichotomous
classi…cation of …nal goods. If the classical dichotomy were to hold in the
micro-data, the pooled density should be bimodal with a proportion of the
data corresponding to traded goods centered at zero (no deviations) and the
remaining proportion centered at 1.7. In fact, traded goods are centered at

                                            10
0.76 and non-traded goods are centered at 1.03.
    Table 1 reports summary statistics for the microeconomic variance decom-
position. The mean beta for non-traded goods does exceed the mean for traded
goods in most cases, ranging from a di¤erence of 0.27 (1.03-0.76) for all cities
pooled together (Figure 1) to a low of 0.04 (0.87-0.83) for U.S.-Canada city
pairs. The relative standard deviation of the LOP deviations average twice
that of the aggregate real exchange rate, indicative of considerable idiosyn-
cratic variation in LOP deviations. The mean correlation of LOP deviation
and PPP deviation is 0.45 in the pooled sample. As Crucini and Telmer (2011)
note, LOP deviations are not driven by a common factor such as the nominal
exchange rate, much of the variation is idiosyncratic to the good.
    In summary the contribution of individual goods to aggregate real exchange
rate variability shows a central tendency, but with considerable variation across
individual goods. Certainly the distribution is not the stark bimodality ex-
pected from the classical dichotomy applied to …nal goods.       Our goal is to
maintain the two-factor parsimony of the classical dichotomy, but with the
tradability applied at the level of inputs. To accomplish this we …rst elaborate
a simple two factor model that stands in for the two types of inputs. Impor-
tantly, the share of non-traded and traded inputs in the cost of the …nal good is
assumed to vary across individual …nal goods as measured by the distribution
margin.


4     The Intermediate Inputs Model
Many researchers have argued that the classical dichotomy is more appropriate
to apply at the level of inputs than at the level of …nal goods. Up until quite
recently the data has not been available to conduct a systematic investigation
of this hypothesis. We follow Engel and Rogers (1996) and Crucini, Telmer and
Zachariadis (2005), and assume that retail prices are Cobb-Douglas aggregates
of a non-traded input Wjt and a traded input inclusive of a transportation cost
from the source to the destination, Tijt :

                                             1
                               Pijt = Wjti Tijt   i
                                                      .                     (11)



                                       11
The LOP deviation (in logs) becomes,

                                 qijkt =      i wjkt   + (1        i ) ijk;t   ,                                 (12)

where each of the variables is now the logarithm of a relative price across a
bilateral pair of cities. Thus the LOP deviation for good i, across bilateral
city pair, j and k, depends on the deviation of non-traded and traded input
costs across that pair of cities, weighted by their respective cost shares.
      Elaborating on the cost structure of individual goods and services in this
way adds an additional layer to the original variance decomposition. The
betas for the individual retail prices of …nal goods may now be expressed as
a simple weighted average of the underlying betas for non-traded and traded
input prices:

            cov(qjkt ; qijkt )              cov(qjkt ; wjkt )                       cov(qjkt ; ijk;t )
                               =        i                     + (1             i)                                (13)
              var(qjkt )                      var(qjkt )                               var(qjkt )

                                          w
                           ijk   =      i jk    + (1          i ) ijk                                            (14)
                                                       w
                                 =      ijk   +    i ( jk        ijk )   .                                       (15)

      This equation leads to two important insights. First, the                            ijk   for …nal goods
are predicted to be increasing in the share of non-traded inputs                                        i,   provided
non-traded factor prices contribute more to RER volatility than do traded
                     w
factor prices, (     jk      jk )   > 0. Note that this is a much weaker condition than
the classical dichotomy where the relative prices of traded goods are assumed
not vary at all across locations (            jk   = 0), in which case the model would reduce
                  w
to    ijk   =   i jk .   Second, even if the classical dichotomy holds at the level of
                                                                                                           w
traded inputs, it will not hold at the level of …nal goods since,                                        i jk   > 0.
Ironically, the anecdotes that are often drawn into the debate are precisely
the ones that elucidate the role of traded and non-traded inputs. Namely
goods at the extremes of the distribution in terms of high and low values of
 i.   Of course anecdotes are misleading unless they help us explain the broader
patterns in the data and aggregate RER variability, which is our focus.
      Figure 2 presents a scatter-plot of the contribution of good i to the variance
of the bilateral RER averaged across international city pairs ( i ) against the
distribution share for that good (the non-traded input cost,                                     i ).   Two items

                                                       12
toward the extremes of the distribution share are explicitly labelled: 1 liter of
gasoline and a 2-bedroom apartment. Based on our reconciliation of the EIU
micro-data with the U.S. NIPA data on the distribution share, the distribution
share for gasoline is 0.19 while that of a 2-bedroom apartment is 0.93.
   Three observations are immediate. First, there is a positive relationship
between a …nal good’s contribution to RER variability and its distribution
share, the correlation of   i   and   i   is 0.69. Second, goods at the extremes such
as fuel and shelter, which are often used to provide anecdotal evidence of traded
and non-traded goods, …t the classical dichotomy more closely than goods
toward the middle of the distribution, goods with an average distribution share.
Third, averaging across goods obscures the role of tradability of intermediate
inputs because the median good has a distribution share of 0.41, implying close
to equal shares of traded and non-traded inputs in the cost of production. Put
di¤erently–through the lens of the intermediate input model–examining the
median good is analogous to taking a simple average of fuel and shelter. Doing
so averages away the di¤erences in the underlying cost structure of the two
goods. In the next section we develop a two-factor model to infer the role of
traded and non-traded inputs across the entire distribution of the micro-data.


4.1    Two-Factor Model
The objective of this section is to decompose the good-speci…c contributions
to aggregate RER variation into the role of traded and non-traded inputs used
in the production of each good. To accomplish this, we incorporate the fact
that the cost of producing …nal goods involves di¤erent shares of non-traded
and traded inputs, the      i   parameters measured along the horizontal axis of
Figure 2. This answers the question: if the contribution of LOP variation in
fuel to the aggregate RER is 5%, how much of this contribution to variance is
coming from the traded inputs (gasoline) and how much is coming from the
non-traded inputs (the other costs associated with operating a gas station). To
achieve this, we estimate a two-factor model of the         ijk   for each bilateral city
pair. These two factors, one for the non-traded input and one for the traded
input will later be aggregated back up to the level of the CPI to determine
how much of the variation in the aggregate RER is due to variation in RER


                                             13
for non-traded and traded input costs.
   To reduce the intermediate inputs model to a two-factor structure for each
bilateral city pair, the traded factor is assumed to be the sum of a component
common to all goods and an idiosyncratic component speci…c to the good:

                                              ijk   =       jk   +       ijk    .                                      (16)

The contribution of good i to the variation of the bilateral real exchange rate
across city pair j and k is now:

                                               w
                                ijk   =      i jk    + (1            i ) jk         +       ijk   ,                    (17)

                                                                                                      w
where   ijk   = (1     i ) ijk .      In the language factor models, the                              jk   and     jk   are
the two factors and         i   and (1              i ),   their respective factor-loadings.


4.2     Estimation
In the model of the previous section, the observables are the estimated betas,                                            ijk ,
and the distribution shares from the NIPA,                                 i;   the unobservables are the two
                       w
factors of interest,   jk       and    jk .   Consider the following linear regression model:

                                       ijk    = ajk + bjk            i   +      ijk     .                              (18)

Comparing this equation to the theoretical model, it is apparent that the
constant term and the slope parameter identify the two factors of interest:

                                              jk     = ajk                                                             (19)
                                              w
                                              jk     = ajk + bjk .                                                     (20)

   We perform this regression separately for each city pair using the                                            ijk   esti-
mated from the expenditure-weighted version of the aggregate RER to conform
with the existing macroeconomic literature. Note that since the distribution
shares are more aggregated than the betas, we take simple averages of the be-
tas across i for goods that fall into each sector for which we have distribution
shares. Following this aggregation, equation (18) is estimated by Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) to recover the non-traded and traded factors. We also
report results obtained by Weighted Least Squares where each observation is

                                                           14
weighted by the inverse of the number of goods falling into each distribution-
share sector (not shown), they are almost identical to the OLS estimates.
     Table 2 reports the estimated factors averaged across city pairs within dif-
ferent country groups. The standard deviations across city pairs are reported
in brackets. The di¤erences across groups of locations and individual city
pairs is discussed in a subsequent section. The …rst column pools all city
pairs. The traded-factor averages 0.54 while non-traded factor averages 1.03.
This implies that, on average, non-traded inputs contribute twice as much as
traded inputs to RER variations. Recall that the average traded and non-
traded goods have betas of 0.76 and 1.03. Notice that the traded input factor
is much lower than the average contribution of a traded good to aggregate real
exchange rate variability while the non-traded factor is coincidentally equal
to the average contribution of a non-traded good to aggregate real exchange
rate variability. This re‡ects two interacting e¤ects. First, the non-traded fac-
tor is the dominant source of variation. Second, the average traded good has
far more non-traded factor input content than the average non-traded good.
Thus, most of the bias in attributing non-traded factor content in the decom-
position is found in traded goods. To see this more clearly, it is productive to
examine the cross-sectional variance in the contribution of the non-traded and
traded factor at the microeconomic level rather than average across goods as
Table 2 does. We turn to this level of detail next.


4.3       The Role of Distribution Margins
Recall that after averaging the estimated equation (18) across jk pairs, we
arrive at a decomposition of our original good-level betas:

                            i   = 1:03   i   + 0:54(1             i)   +   i   (21)
                                = 0:54 + 0:50     i   +   i   .                (22)

Simply put, a purely traded good is one which involves no non-traded inputs,
 i   = 0. If such a good existed in the retail basket, it would be predicted to
contribute 0.54 times its expenditure share to aggregate RER variability. At
the other end of the continuum, a purely non-traded good involves no traded
inputs,    i   = 1. If such a good existed, it would be expected to contribute 1.04

                                             15
times its expenditure share to aggregate RER variability.
   Table 3 shows the entire cross-sectional distribution of the good-speci…c
contributions to real exchange rate variation,     i,   decomposed in this manner.
Goods are ordered from those with the lowest distribution share (0.17), an ex-
ample of which is a ‘compact car,’to goods with the highest distribution share
(1.00), an example of which is the ‘hourly rate for domestic cleaning help.’
Note that each row is an average across goods sharing the same distribution
share (the second column) and the …rst column is just an example of a good
found in that sector.
                                      w
   Since the non-traded input beta,   jk ,   average 1.03, the contribution of the
non-traded input is approximately equal to the distribution share,       i.   By our
metric a compact automobile looks a lot like 1 liter of unleaded gasoline, but
very distinct from a two-bedroom apartment or the hourly rate for domestic
cleaning help. The contribution of LOP variation in each of the former two
cases are about 70% traded inputs and 30% non-traded inputs whereas the
latter two are largely driven by the non-traded input factor. Another inter-
esting comparison is fresh …sh and a two-course meal at a restaurant. Both
are treated as traded goods when CPI data are used because they fall into the
same category, food. However, one is food at home (fresh …sh) and the other
is food away from home (two course meal at a restaurant). Should they be
treated similarly, as food items, or di¤erently as food at home and food away
from home? Consistent with the two factor intermediate input model, Table
3 provides a de…nitive answer: treat them di¤erently. Fresh …sh is indistin-
guishable from unleaded gasoline both in terms of the dominate role of traded
inputs and the relatively moderate contribution to aggregate real exchange
rate variation (0.65). A restaurant meal is dominated by the non-traded fac-
tor (85 percent) and contributes 35% more to aggregate real exchange rate
variability than does fresh …sh.
   A good with a median distribution share (0.41) is toothpaste. Despite the
fact that the cost of producing this good is skewed moderately toward traded
inputs (59% traded inputs), non-traded inputs still dominate in accounting for
the toothpaste beta, 0.40 versus 0.31 for traded inputs. This re‡ects the fact
that our estimated non-traded factor is twice as important as our estimated
traded factor in accounting for variation in the aggregate RER, 1.04 versus

                                      16
0.54. Stated di¤erently, for the traded input factor to dominate in contribution
to variance requires a distribution share of less than 0.34 (i.e. a traded input
share of more than 0.66).


4.4      The Role of Location
When focusing on the role of the distribution margin, it was productive to
average across bilateral pairs. Similarly, when focusing on the role of location,
it is useful to average across goods. Recall, however, that the two estimated
factors are location-speci…c and the group means of Table 2 suggested the pres-
ence of variation across location pairs in the two factors. To better visualize
the full extent of the variation without presuming a source of the variation
across city-pairs, Figure 3 presents kernel density estimates of the non-traded
and traded factors.
      The …gure e¤ectively convey three messages. The …rst, and central mes-
sage, is that there is a strong central tendency toward the means initially
reported in Table 2 (for both of the factors), supportive of the parsimony im-
posed by the two factor model. The second message is that the contributions
of traded and non-traded inputs to aggregate RER variability are much more
easily distinguished than was true of traded and non-traded goods. This is
evident in comparing the two distributions in Figure 3 with their counterparts
in Figure 1. Third, the dispersion across locations in the estimated factors is
signi…cant and greater for the estimated traded factor (red line) than the esti-
mated non-traded factor (blue line), consistent with the impression conveyed
by the group-mean coe¢ cients –reported in Table 2.3
      What is responsible for the variation across location pairs in these distrib-
utions? Figure 4 plots the non-traded and traded input betas for each bilateral
city pair against the standard deviation of the nominal exchange rate for that
bilateral city pair.   Two features are notable. First, there is a positive and
possibly concave relationship between the variability of the nominal exchange
rate and both the non-traded and traded input betas in the variance decom-
  3
     With regard to the classical dichotomy, we could not reject the hypothesis that the
traded-inputs beta is 0 for 56% of the sample. This statistics was computed using a two-
tailed t-distribution with 95% con…dence intervals.



                                          17
position. Second, the estimated non-traded input betas lie above the traded
input betas.
       The positive correlation between the estimated input betas and the volatil-
ity of the nominal exchange rate is more subtle. It is important to emphasize
that this correlation is not simply a re‡ection of the positive covariance of
nominal and real exchange rates documented in the existing macroeconomics
literature. Recall, the betas are components of a variance decomposition and
thus have already been normalized by the level of the variance of the bilateral
real exchange rate. What is happening as the nominal exchange rate vari-
ance increases is that the common source of LOP variation is rising relative to
the idiosyncratic sources of variation. This occurs because movements in the
nominal exchange rate are almost by de…nition a common source of variability
in LOP deviations.4 Since the non-traded factor is expected to exhibit less
pass-through of nominal exchange rates to local currency prices, at least in
the short run, it is also expected that the non-traded factor will lie uniformly
above the traded factor. This is evident, the blue dots lie mostly above the red
dots at each point along the x-axis (i.e. conditional on a value for the nominal
exchange rate variance). This is not to say that changes in nominal exchange
rates are causing real exchange rates to vary, to identify the underlying causes
of variation would require a richer model. For example, a monetary shock is
likely to alter both the distribution of local currency prices and the nominal
exchange rate whereas a crop failure in a particular country is unlikely to do
either of these things. The thrust of the …gure, however, is that real and
nominal sources of business cycle variation are likely to play di¤erent roles in
determining the traded and non-traded input betas we have estimated.
       To summarize, we have demonstrated that the classical dichotomy is a very
useful theory of the LOP when the theory is applied to inputs. What we do in
the next section is show that this is also true at the aggregate level. Moreover,
   4
     Crucini and Telmer (2011) decompose the variance of the LOP deviations into time
series variation and long-run price dispersion using the same data employed here. They
…nd, as Engel did, that the time series variability of real exchange rates of traded goods is
comparable to that of non-traded goods whereas the long-run price dispersion goes in the
direction of the classical dichotomy with more international price dispersion among non-
traded goods. Thus, our paper seeks to resolve the more puzzling feature of the data, its
time series properties.


                                             18
we also show that the EIU data are entirely consistent with the conclusions of
the existing literature using aggregative CPI data when the theory is applied
to …nal goods. Our interpretation, however, is very di¤erent.


5     Macroeconomic Decompositions
Macroeconomics is, of course, about aggregate variables. Our thesis is that if
given the choice, macroeconomists would want to aggregate …nal goods based
on their non-traded and traded factor content. Our methodology attempts to
provide that choice. Here, we demonstrate the importance of this choice.


5.1       Aggregation Based on Intermediate Inputs
Recall that the microeconomic variance decomposition of the aggregate real
exchange rate based on …nal goods is:
                              X
                      1 =           !i   ijk                                                                   (23)
                                i
                               cov(qijkt ; qjkt )   std (qijkt )
                 ijk    =                         =                        corr (qijkt ; qjk;t ) .             (24)
                                 var(qjkt )         std (qjkt )
                                                                                                      w
Substituting our two-factor model for the LOP deviation,                                  ijk   =   i jk     + (1
 i ) jk   +   ijk ,   into this equation gives the theoretically appropriate method of
aggregating the micro-data based on the model of intermediate inputs:
                                    X
                                                  w
                             1=          !i     i jk   + (1       i ) jk   +    ijk   .                        (25)
                                    i

Notice that since the two intermediate factors are assumed to be location-
speci…c, not good speci…c, the expression aggregates very simply to a two-
factor macroeconomic decomposition:

                                               w
                                    1=         jk   + (1      )   jk   +   jk   ,                              (26)

where the weights on the traded and non-traded input factors,                                       and (1          )
are consumption expenditure-weighted averages of the shares of non-traded
and traded inputs into each individual good in the consumption basket. The
residual term,          jk   is an expenditure-share weighted average of the                         ijk .


                                                        19
   In other words: the variance of the aggregate real exchange rate may be
expressed as a weighted average of the two factors estimated from the micro-
data. The weight on each factor depends on the relationship between taste
parameters and relative prices that determine consumption expenditure shares
and production parameters, and relative factor prices that determine distrib-
ution shares. Recall that the median distribution share in the micro-data is
0.41. The weight on the non-traded factor, , turns out to be much greater
than this average because consumption tends to be skewed toward services
which are intensive in distribution inputs. Using US NIPA data and the EIU
micro-sample,   = 0:69. The dominant weight on the non-traded input fac-
                                   w
tor, combined with the fact that   jk   is about twice the magnitude of   jk   is
the reason that non-traded inputs dominate the variance decomposition of the
aggregate real exchange rate by a very large margin.
   Table 4 shows just how large. The table reports the results using OLS esti-
mates (WLS results are very similar). Beginning with the averages across the
entire world sample, the non-traded factor accounts for about 81% (i.e.: 0.71/
(0.71+0.17)) of the variance of the aggregate real exchange rate, while traded
inputs account for the remaining 19%. The contribution of non-traded and
traded inputs is moderately more balanced in the U.S.-Canada sub-sample,
with non-traded inputs accounting for 73% and traded inputs accounting for
the remaining 27%. Consistent with our earlier microeconomic decomposi-
tions, the OECD looks more like the U.S.-Canada sub-sample than does the
non-OECD group.


5.2    Aggregation Based on Final Goods
An alternative two-factor macroeconomic model of the real exchange rate is
to apply the classical dichotomy at the level of …nal goods. To implement
this using the micro-data we must …rst decide on a de…nition of a non-traded
good. In theory, the micro-data provides an advantage because it allows us,
for example, to assign …sh to the traded category and restaurant meals to
the non-traded category, rather than placing all food in the traded category.
The rule we use to be consistent with the intermediate input concept of the
classical dichotomy is to categorize a good as a ‘non-traded good’if it has a


                                        20
distribution share exceeding 60 percent. This cuto¤ corresponds to a jump
in the value of the distribution shares across sectors from 0.59 to 0.75 (see
Table 3 or Figure 2). Coincidentally, this categorization matches up very well
with the categorical assignments used by Engel (1999) who used much more
aggregated data. The traded-goods category includes: cars, gasoline, magazine
and newspapers, and foods. The non-traded goods category includes: rents and
utilities, household services (such as dry cleaning and housekeeping), haircuts
and restaurant and hotel services.
          With the assignments of individual goods and services to these two cate-
gories, the aggregate real exchange rate is:

                                          N              T
                                qjk;t = !qjkt + (1    !)qjkt .                           (27)

       N        T
where qjkt and qjkt are the bilateral real exchange rates for non-traded …nal

goods and traded …nal goods built from the LOP deviations in the microeco-
nomic data, weighted by their individual expenditure shares.5
          The variance decomposition of the aggregate real exchange rate is con-
ducted using our beta method6 :

                                         N                T
                                 1=!     jk   + (1   !)   jk   .                         (28)

          Table 5 reports the outcome of the variance decomposition arising from this
macroeconomic approach. It is instructive to compare Table 5 to Table 1 since
they both use …nal goods as the working de…nition for traded and non-traded
goods. What is the consequence of aggregating the data before conducting the
variance decomposition? As it turns out, the betas are very similar across the
two approaches. The average beta for non-traded (traded) goods pooling all
location is 1.17 (0.78) using the two index construct (Table 5) compared to
1.03 (0.76) using the microeconomic decomposition. These are relatively small
     More precisely, the weights used earlier are renormalized to !!i ( 1!i! ) for non-traded
      5

(traded) goods so that the weights on the two sub-indices sum to unity.
   6
     The relationship between the microeconomic betas of our original decomposition and
                                                            X
this two-factor decomposition is straightforward: ! jk N
                                                       jk =    ! ijk ijk , and (1 ! jk ) Tjk =
                                                               i2N
X
      ! ijk   ijk .
i2T




                                               21
di¤erences. The underlying sources of the contribution to variance, however,
are di¤erent.
   When using the macroeconomic approach, the non-traded real exchange
rate contributes more to the variability of the aggregate RER for two reasons.
First, the non-traded real exchange rate is more highly correlated with the
aggregate real exchange rate than is the traded real exchange rate (0.96 versus
0.86). Reinforcing this e¤ect is the fact that the non-traded sub-index of the
CPI is more variable than the traded real exchange rate (1.22 versus 0.91). In
contrast, when the microeconomic approach is used, non-traded and traded
goods are not distinguished by the relative volatility of their LOP deviation (at
least for the median good). Both types of goods have standard deviations twice
that of the aggregate real exchange rate. Consistent with the macroeconomic
approach, the LOP deviations of the median non-traded good has a higher
correlation with the aggregate real exchange rate than does the median traded
goods (0.55 versus 0.42). Thus traded goods have more idioynscratic sources
of deviations from the LOP than do non-traded goods.


5.3    The Role of Location
Location also plays a role in determining the relative importance of traded
and non-traded goods in accounting for real exchange rate variability. Figure
5 presents the entire distribution of the   jk   for the case in which all locations
are averaged (the …rst column of Table 5). The means for all goods, non-
traded goods and traded goods from Table 5 are indicated with vertical lines at
0.97, 1.17 and 0.78, respectively. We see considerable variation in the relative
importance of non-traded and traded sub-indices of the CPI across bilateral
city-pairs, but the two distributions clearly have a di¤erent …rst moment, which
was not at all obvious in the microeconomic distributions of Figure 1.


5.4    The Compositional Bias
To further clarify the di¤erence between the implications of the classical di-
chotomy applied to intermediate inputs and …nal goods, this section estimates
the compositional bias arising from using …nal goods to infer the factor content
of trade at the level of the two sub-index deconstruction of the aggregate real

                                       22
exchange rate. Consider the traded and non-traded partition based on …nal
goods and how the variance decompositions relate across the two methods.
      The contribution of the non-traded aggregate real exchange rate to aggre-
gate RER variability is:
                                          X
                               N                                   w
                           !   jk   =             !i             i jk     + (1         i ) jk       ,                           (29)
                                          i2N

while the contribution of the traded aggregate real exchange rate to the ag-
gregate RER variability is:
                                                  X
                                     T                                  w
                      (1       !)    jk       =             !i        i jk   + (1              i ) jk    .                      (30)
                                                  i2T

Note that each contribution is written on the right-hand-side in terms of the
intermediate input model.
      Recall, the contribution of non-traded inputs to the variation in the aggre-
gate RER variance according to the intermediate inputs model is actually:
                                           !
                                  X
                           w                  w
                           jk =       !i i    jk ,                     (31)
                                                                 i
while the counterpart for the contribution of traded inputs is:
                                                   !
                                     X
                    (1     ) jk =       ! i (1   i)   jk .                                                                      (32)
                                                                 i
Using these four equations, the bias in the estimate of non-traded inputs to
aggregate RER variance arising from using the …nal goods de…nition is
                                  !
                        X                X
         w
         jk ! Njk =          !i i   w
                                    jk       !i i w jk + (1   i ) jk                                                            (33)
                                          i                                i2N
                                                            !                                           !
                                     X                                       X
                                                                     w
                           =                  !i        i            jk               ! i (1        i)       jk   .             (34)
                                     i2T                                     i2N

and likewise, the bias for traded goods is
                                                                                  !                                   !
                                                  X                                               X
                                T                                                                                         w
 (1       )   jk   (1 ! jk )    jk   =                      ! ijk (1         i)         jk               ! ijk    i       jk   . (35)
                                                  i2N                                              i2T

Table 6 reports the average share of non-traded goods together with the traded
and non-traded basket average contributions to RER volatility when all city
pairs are used in the comparison. The aggregate contribution of traded goods
using aggregation to …nal goods is about twice the their true underlying con-
tribution based on the intermediate inputs model, 0.34 versus 0.17.

                                                                 23
5.5       Relation with the Existing Literature
Engel (1999) and other researchers focus on whether RER ‡uctuations are
primarily associated with movement in the relative price of tradable goods
across countries or with movements in the relative price of non-tradable to
tradable goods. The equation Engel works with is

                           qt = qtT + (1        !)(qtN       qtT ) ,                          (36)

while we work with
                              qt = !qtT + (1        !)qtN .                                   (37)
      Simple algebra allows us to express Engel’s variance decomposition in terms
of betas for traded and non-traded baskets:
                                 T                  N          T
                           1=        + (1    !)(                   ).                         (38)

Engel’s variance decomposition split the RER volatility into two components.
The …rst component is the volatility in the traded basket RER. The second
component is the variance between non-traded and traded basket prices. The
approximate equality in the average betas for non-traded and traded baskets
explains why this decomposition attributes almost all of the variance in RER
                                             N           T
to traded goods: Since the baskets’                          is about 0.39 (using expendi-
                                                                                          T
ture weights, 0.13 using equal weights) and 1                 ! is less than one,             must
be close to 1 as Engel’s reports. This implies that the remaining volatility
                                                                        T
must be explained by the traded basket RER. Since                           is 0.78, 78 percent of
RER ‡uctuations are attributable to movements in the relative price of traded
goods.7
      As we saw in the previous sub-section, an important bias arise when one
use traded and non-traded baskets’contributions. Using our two factor model,
Engel’s decomposition becomes:
                                            w
                           1=        + (             ) + "jk .                                (39)

Since      is 0.54, this implies that 54 percent of RER ‡uctuations are attribut-
able to movements in the relative price of traded intermediates.8 From this
  7
     Using US-CA pairs, 88 percent of RER ‡uctuations are attributable to movements in
the relative price of traded goods compared to 95 percent as reported in Engel’s work.
   8
     For US-CA pairs, this number rises to 67 percent.

                                            24
point of view, a considerable amount of volatility is coming from the relative
price of non-tradable to tradable intermediates.
   A number of researchers modify Engel’s decomposition, but largely re-
inforce his conclusions about traded good prices. Out of concern about the
functional form of the Cobb-Douglas aggregates, Betts and Kehoe (2006) work
with:
                              qt = qtT + (qt    qtT ) ,                      (40)

where qtT is a producer price index which is not contaminated by non-traded
distribution services. This decomposition preserves the identity on the left
and right-hand-side of the equality as necessary for a variance decomposition
and has the desired attributes of using the producer price index, which is
arguably a better proxy for traded goods prices than is an aggregate of con-
sumer prices across highly traded goods. As is also apparent, there is no need
to assign expenditure weights in the decomposition. Again, using our variance
decomposition the beta-representation of the decomposition is:

                           1=      + (1        ) + "jk .                     (41)

The variance to be explained is the same as in Engel’s original contribution,
namely the variance of the aggregate CPI-based real exchange rate. However,
the variance of the traded goods prices is di¤erent, since producer prices replace
the traded-CPI component on the right-hand-side. As one might expect, the
variance of producer prices is higher than consumer prices, but the covariance
of producer prices with the aggregate CPI may be lower. Since the beta is rising
in relative variability and covariance, the implication of replacing a consumer
price index for traded goods with a producer price index is expected to be
ambiguous. These nuances notwithstanding, Betts and Kehoe …nd a modest
reduction in the contribution of traded goods relative to Engel.
   Parsley and Popper (2009) take a microeconomic approach using two in-
dependent retail surveys in the United States and Japan. the U.S. survey is
conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association
(ACCRA) and the Japanese survey is from the Japanese national statistical
agency publication: Annual Report on the Retail Price Survey. Both contain
average prices across outlets, at the city level. The Japanese survey is vastly


                                       25
more extensive in coverage of items than the ACCRA survey since it repre-
sents the core micro-data that goes into the Japanese CPI construction. Both
data panels are at the city level and thus is quite comparable in many ways to
the EIU data. Parsley and Popper restrict their sample to items that are as
comparable as possible across the two countries. This selection criteria leaves
them with a sample of highly traded goods.
      To elaborate our method when micro-data are employed, rather than two
sub-indices, consider applying item-speci…c weights, ! i to LOP deviations.
The aggregate real exchange rate becomes:

                                            X
                                  qt =              ! i qi;t ,                      (42)
                                                i

Parsley and Popper follow Engel’s approach by placing an individual good in
the lead position with a unit coe¢ cient as its weight. That is, for each good
i, they work with:                                                          !
                                            X
                                            M
                          qt = qi;t +               ! g qg;t        qi;t        .   (43)
                                                g

Parsley and Popper then compute the variance of the lead term, the LOP
variance and divide it by the total variance of the real exchange rate and
de…ne this ratio as the contribution of good i to the variance of the aggregate
real exchange rate.
      In terms of betas, their variance decomposition is:

                                1=      i   + (1               i)   .               (44)

This is because the expenditure weighted average of the betas must equal unity
by construction. However, the variance decomposition following our method
is:
                                                    X
                               1 = !i       i   +          !g       g   ,           (45)
                                                    g6=i

As is evident, the good-speci…c variance contributions of Parsley and Pop-
per’s are actually equal to our betas. However in following Engel’s approach
they give each good a unit weight. As our decomposition shows, these good-
speci…c betas need to be multiplied by expenditure shares in order to conduct
a legitimate variance decomposition.

                                                26
    Parsley and Popper end up reconciling 28 items across the U.S. and Japan,
2 of which are services. They compute the contribution to variance at di¤erent
horizons, including 5 quarters. At this horizon the good-speci…c contributions
range from just under 0.5 to about 0.86. Interpreted as betas, these estimates
certainly fall within the range we …nd, which spans negative values to values
exceeding 1. However, they are not contributions to aggregate real exchange
rate variance, to arrive at a legitimate variance decomposition each beta must
be multiplied by its consumption expenditure weight.


6     Conclusions
Using retail price data at the level of individual goods and services across many
countries of the world we have shown the classical dichotomy is a useful the-
ory of international price determination when applied to intermediate inputs.
Speci…cally, by parsing the role of non-traded and traded inputs at the retail
level a signi…cant source of compositional bias is removed from the micro-data
and di¤erences in the role of the two inputs is evident. Aggregate price indices
are not useful in uncovering this source of heterogeneity in LOP deviations
for two reasons. First, the dividing line between traded and non-traded goods
at the …nal goods stage is arbitrary and more under the control of o¢ cials at
statistical agencies whose goal is not to contrast the role of trade across CPI
categories of expenditure. Second, even at the lowest level of aggregate pos-
sible, most goods and services embody costs of both local inputs and traded
inputs. Consequently, the contribution of each LOP deviation to PPP devia-
tions is a linear combination of the two components with the weights on the
two components di¤ering substantially in the cross-section.
    Our results point to the usefulness of microeconomic theories that distin-
guish traded and local inputs and their composition in …nal goods as well as an
important role of LOP deviations at the level of trade. This points to the need
for a hybrid model with a distribution sector and segmentation at the level
of traded inputs. In arguing for one stripped down model or another, macro-
economists may unwittingly reject virtually all useful theories of international
price determination.



                                       27
References
 [1] Betts, Caroline and Timothy Kehoe. 2006. US Real Exchange Rate
    Fluctuations and Relative Price Fluctuations. Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 53(7): 1257-1326.

 [2] Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves and Sergio Rebelo. 2003. Distribution
    Costs and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics during Exchange-Rate Based
    Stabilizations. Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(6): 1189-1214.

 [3] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2005.
    Large Devaluation and the Real Exchange Rate. Journal of Political
    Economy, 113(4): 742-784.

 [4] Campa, José Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg. 2005. Exchange Rate
    Pass-through into Import Prices. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
    87(4): 679-690.

 [5] Campa, José Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg. 2010. The Sensitivity
    of the CPI to Exchange Rates: Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs,
    and Trade Exposure. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2):
    392-407.

 [6] Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer and Mario Zachariadis. 2005.
    Understanding European Real Exchange Rates. American Economic Re-
    view, 95(3): 724-738.

 [7] Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer. 2011. Microeconomic Sources of
    Real Exchange Rate Variability. Manuscript.

 [8] Engel, Charles and John Rogers. 1996. How Wide is the Border?
    American Economic Review, 86(5): 1112-1125.

 [9] Engel, Charles. 1999. Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rates. Journal
    of Political Economy, 107(3), 507-538.

[10] Mussa, Michael. 1986. Nominal Exchange Regimes and the Behavior
    of Real Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications. Carnegie-Rochester
    Conference on Public Policy, 25: 117-213.

                                    28
[11] Popper, Helen and David C. Parsley. 2006. Understanding Real
    Exchange Rate Movements with Trade in Intermediate Products. Paci…c
    Economic Review, 15(2): 171-188.

[12] Salter, W.E.G. 1959. Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price
    and Expenditure E¤ects. Economic Record, 35: 226-38.

[13] Swan, Trevor W. 1960. Economic Control in a Dependent Economy,
    36: 51-66.




                                   29
       Table 1: Variance decomposition of real exchange rates,
                        microeconomic approach


                       All pairs    OECD       Non-OECD   US-Canada
Std. dev. RER            0.14           0.13     0.13       0.10
Number of city pairs     4835           1543     856         52
Non-traded weight        0.57           0.56     0.58       0.55
Traded weight            0.43           0.44     0.42       0.45


All goods
Beta                     0.81           0.84     0.74       0.83
Correlation              0.45           0.43     0.42       0.38
Rel. std. dev. LOP       2.00           2.18     1.98       2.19


Non-traded goods
Beta                     1.03           0.95     1.11       0.87
Correlation              0.55           0.50     0.57       0.46
Rel. std. dev. LOP       2.00           2.10     2.07       1.89


Traded goods
Beta                     0.76           0.81     0.63       0.83
Correlation              0.42           0.42     0.37       0.36
Rel. std. dev. LOP       2.00           2.20     1.95       2.26




                                   30
   Table 2: Traded and non-traded inputs regressions,
                       international pairs


                    All pairs    OECD      Non-OECD      US-Canada
beta (traded)          0.54        0.65          0.34      0.67
                      (.49)       (.46)          (.52)     (.52)


beta (non-traded)      1.03        0.96          1.12      0.82
                      (.34)       (.32)          (.37)     (.26)


slope                  0.50        0.30          0.78      0.15
                      (.72)       (.64)          (.79)     (.64)


R-squared              0.08        0.05          0.12      0.04


Number of pairs       4835        1543           856        52
Note: Minimum of 4 observations per city pair.




                                 31
           Table 3: Variance decomposition using intermediate inputs betas
                                                           Contribution                 Non-traded
Example                                         i     Non-Traded    Traded   Residual   Cont. (%)
Compact car (1300-1799 cc)                    0.17        0.17       0.44      0.07        28%
Unleaded gasoline (1 liter)                   0.19        0.19       0.43     -0.02        30%
Fresh …sh (1 kg)                              0.22        0.21       0.44      0.07        32%
Time (news magazine)                          0.32        0.32       0.36      0.05        47%
Toilet tissue (two rolls)                     0.34        0.34       0.34      0.00        50%
Butter (500 g)                                0.36        0.36       0.33     -0.01        52%
Aspirin (100 tablets)                         0.37        0.36       0.34      0.01        51%
Marlboro cigarettes (pack of 20)              0.37        0.37       0.33      0.06        53%
Electric toaster                              0.39        0.38       0.33      0.02        54%
Toothpaste with ‡uoride (120 g)               0.41        0.40       0.31     -0.05        57%
Compact disc album                            0.41        0.41       0.30     -0.05        57%
Insect-killer spray (330g)                    0.45        0.45       0.27     -0.03        62%
Paperback novel                               0.49        0.47       0.27     -0.03        63%
Razor blades (5 pieces)                       0.49        0.49       0.27     -0.01        64%
Batteries (two, size D/LR20)                  0.50        0.49       0.27     -0.04        65%
Socks, wool mixture                           0.52        0.52       0.25      0.05        68%
Men’s shoes, business wear                    0.52        0.52       0.25      0.03        67%
Lettuce (one)                                 0.52        0.52       0.25      0.05        68%
Frying pan (Te‡on)                            0.53        0.53       0.25     -0.01        68%
Light bulbs (two, 60 watts)                   0.57        0.57       0.22     -0.18        72%
Child shoes, sportwear                        0.59        0.58       0.21     -0.03        73%
Tennis balls (Dunlop, Wilson or equivalent)   0.59        0.59       0.21     -0.11        74%
Two-course meal at a restaurant (average)     0.75        0.75       0.13      0.00        85%
Electricity, monthly bill (average)           0.76        0.75       0.13      0.04        86%
Man’s haircut (tips included)                 0.85        0.85       0.08     -0.04        91%
Taxi, airport to city center (average)        0.86        0.85       0.07     -0.01        92%
Telephone line, monthly bill (average)        0.92        0.90       0.04      0.03        96%
2-bedroom apartment                           0.93        0.91       0.04      0.24        96%
Annual premium for car insurance              0.94        0.93       0.03      0.01        97%
Hourly rate for domestic cleaning help        1.00        1.00       0.00     -0.08       100%



                                                     32
       Table 4: Macroeconomic variance decomposition,
                     intermediate input approach


                         All pairs        OECD    Non OECD   US-CA
Non-traded share ( )      0.69            0.69      0.69      0.68
                           (.02)          (.20)     (.02)    (.02)
Contribution of
 Traded inputs             0.17           0.20      0.10      0.21
                           (.15)          (.14)     (.16)    (.17)


 Non-traded inputs         0.71           0.66      0.78      0.56
                           (.23)          (.22)     (.25)    (.18)


 Error term                0.12           0.14      0.12      0.23
                           (.20)          (.22)     (.21)    (.21)


Number of city pairs       4835           1543      856       52




                                     33
       Table 5: Variance decomposition of real exchange rates,
                       macroeconomic approach


                             All        OECD    Non-OECD    US-Canada
Std. dev. RER               0.14         0.13        0.13        0.10
Number of city pairs       4835          1543        856           52
Non-traded weight           0.57         0.56        0.58        0.55
Traded weight               0.43         0.44        0.42        0.45


All goods
Beta                        0.97         0.98        0.96        0.99
Correlation                 0.91         0.92        0.89        0.94
Rel. std. dev. LOP          1.06         1.06        1.08        1.05


Non-traded goods
Beta                        1.17         1.14        1.23        1.10
Correlation                 0.96         0.96        0.96        0.96
Rel. std. dev. LOP          1.22         1.18        1.29        1.15


Traded goods
Beta                        0.78         0.82        0.69        0.88
Correlation                 0.86         0.88        0.82        0.92
Rel. std. dev. LOP          0.91         0.94        0.86        0.96




                                   34
           Table 6: Compositional bias


                   Aggregate using   Aggregation using
                     …nal goods      Intermediate inputs
Non-traded share        0.57                0.69


Contribution
  Traded             0.34 (34%)          0.17 (19%)
  Non-Traded         0.66 (66%)          0.71 (81%)




                          35
Figure 1: Density Distributions of Betas, Microeconomic Decomposition

            0.035
                         All goods
                         Traded goods
             0.03        Non-traded goods


            0.025


             0.02
  Density




            0.015


             0.01


            0.005


               0
                    -2            -1        0          1    2   3       4
                                                     Beta




                                                36
                       Figure 2: Sectoral Betas and Distribution Shares
                1.6


                1.4
Averaged Beta


                1.2


                 1


                0.8


                0.6


                0.4
                   0     0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4    0.5     0.6   0.7     0.8   0.9   1
                                             Distribution Share




                                             37
                  Figure 3: Density Distributions of Factor Betas
          0.045
                  Traded inputs
           0.04   Non-traded inputs

          0.035

           0.03
Density




          0.025

           0.02

          0.015

           0.01

          0.005

              0
             -1        -0.5           0    0.5           1   1.5    2   2.5
                                               Factor Beta




                                          38
Figure 4: Factor Betas and Nominal Exchange Rate Volatility
               4
                    Traded goods
                    Non-traded goods
               3


               2
Factor Beta




               1


               0


              -1


              -2


              -3
               -2    -1.5     -1       -0.5      0       0.5      1       1.5         2   2.5   3
                                   Nominal exchange rate growth std. dev . (log 10)




                                                39
Figure 5: Density Distributions of Betas, Macroeconomic Decomposition

            0.035
                     All goods
                     Traded goods
             0.03    Non-traded goods


            0.025


             0.02
  Density




            0.015


             0.01


            0.005


                0
              -0.2     0      0.2       0.4   0.6        0.8      1   1.2   1.4   1.6   1.8
                                                           Beta




                                                    40
