NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHINA’S FINANCIAL SYSTEM:
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Franklin Allen
Jun “QJ” Qian
Chenying Zhang
Mengxin Zhao
Working Paper 17828
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17828
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We wish to thank Joseph Fan, Randall Morck, our discussant Chenggang Xu and participants at the
NBER’s “Capitalizing China” Conference for helpful comments, Bibo Liu and Zhenrui Tang for excellent
research assistance, Yingxue Cao and Lynn Yin for sharing data and information on China’s real estate
markets, and Boston College and the Wharton Financial Institutions Center for financial support. The
authors are responsible for all the remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Franklin Allen, Jun “QJ” Qian, Chenying Zhang, and Mengxin Zhao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

China’s Financial System: Opportunities and Challenges
Franklin Allen, Jun “QJ” Qian, Chenying Zhang, and Mengxin Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 17828
February 2012, Revised April 2012
JEL No. J2,K0,O5
ABSTRACT
We provide a comprehensive review of China’s financial system, and explore directions of future development.
First, the financial system has been dominated by a large banking sector. In recent years banks have
made considerable progress in reducing the amount of non-performing loans and improving their efficiency.
Second, the role of the stock market in allocating resources in the economy has been limited and ineffective.
We discuss issues related to the further development of China’s stock market and other financial markets.
Third, the most successful part of the financial system, in terms of supporting the growth of the overall
economy, is a non-standard sector that consists of alternative financing channels, governance mechanisms,
and institutions. The co-existence of this sector with banks and markets can continue to support the
growth of the Hybrid Sector (non-state, non-listed firms). Finally, among the policies that will help
to sustain stable economic growth in China are those that reduce the likelihood of damaging financial
crises, including a banking sector crisis, a real estate or stock market crash, and a “twin crisis” in the
currency marketand banking sector.
Franklin Allen
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
allenf@wharton.upenn.edu
Jun “QJ” Qian
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Ave
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
qianju@bc.edu

Chenying Zhang
University of Pennsylvania
chezhang@wharton.upenn.edu
Mengxin Zhao
University of Alberta
mengxin.zhao@ualberta.ca

I. Introduction
In this paper we provide a comprehensive review of China’s financial system and extensive
comparisons with other countries. Almost every functioning financial system includes financial
markets and intermediaries (e.g., a banking sector), but how these two standard financial sectors
contribute to the entire financial system and economy differs significantly across different countries.
In this regard, we discuss what has worked and what has not within the two sectors, and consider the
effects of further development on the entire economy. We also examine a non-standard financial
sector, which operates outside the markets and banking sectors and consists of alternative financing
channels, governance mechanisms, and institutions. Finally, we provide guidelines for future
research on several unresolved issues, including how China’s financial system can integrate into the
world’s markets and economy without being interrupted by damaging financial crises. Although
there is no consensus regarding the prospects for China’s future economic growth, a prevailing view
on China’s financial system speculates that it is one of the weakest links in the economy and it will
hamper future economic growth.
We draw four main conclusions about China’s financial system and its future development.
First, when we examine and compare China’s banking system and financial markets with those of
both developed and emerging countries, we find China’s financial system has been dominated by a
large banking system. Even with the entrance and growth of many domestic and foreign banks and
financial institutions in recent years, China’s banking system is still mainly controlled by the four
largest state-owned banks. All of these ‘Big Four’ banks have become publicly listed and traded
companies in recent years, with the government being the largest shareholder and retaining control.
This ownership structure has served these banks well in terms of avoiding major problems
encountered by major financial institutions in developed countries that are at the center of the 20072009 global financial crisis. Moreover, the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) over GDP has been
steadily decreasing after reaching its peak during 2000- 2001. Continuing improvement of the
banking system, including further development of financial institutions outside the Big Four banks
and extending more credit to productive firms and projects, can help stabilize China’s financial
system in the short run, given the uncertainties in the Chinese and global economies.
Our second conclusion concerns China’s financial markets. Two domestic stock exchanges,
the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SHSE hereafter) and Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) were
established in 1990. Their scale and importance are not comparable to the banking sector; and they
have not been effective in allocating resources in the economy, in that they remain speculative and

2

driven by insider trading. In recent years the stock market has witnessed significant development.
Going forward, financial markets are likely to play an increasingly significant role in the economy.
We discuss several issues and potential problems related to increasing the size and scope and
improving the efficiency of the stock and other financial markets.
Third, in an earlier paper, Allen, Qian and Qian (2005, AQQ hereafter) find that the most
successful part of the financial system, in terms of supporting the growth of the overall economy, is
not the banking sector or financial markets, but rather a sector of alternative financing channels, such
as informal financial intermediaries, internal financing and trade credits, and coalitions of various
forms among firms, investors, and local governments. Many of these financing channels rely on
alternative governance mechanisms, such as competition in product and input markets, and trust,
reputation and relationships. Together this alternative financial sector has supported the growth of a
“Hybrid Sector” with various types of ownership structures. Our definition of the Hybrid Sector
includes all non-state, non-listed firms, including privately or individually owned firms, and firms
that are partially owned by local governments (e.g., Township Village Enterprises or TVEs). 1 The
growth of the Hybrid Sector has been much higher than that of the State Sector (state-owned
enterprises or SOEs, and all firms where the central government has ultimate control) and the Listed
Sector (publicly listed and traded firms with most of them converted from the State Sector). The
Hybrid Sector contributes most of China’s economic growth, and employs the majority of the labor
force. The co-existence of the alternative financial sector with banks and markets can continue to
fuel the growth of the Hybrid Sector.
Finally, a significant challenge for China’s financial system is to avoid damaging financial
crises that can severely disrupt the economy and social stability. These crises include traditional
financial crises: a banking sector crisis stemming from an accumulation of NPLs and a sudden drop
in banks’ profits; or a crisis/crash resulting from speculative asset bubbles in the real estate market or
stock market. There are also other types of financial crises, such as a “twin crisis” (simultaneous
foreign exchange and banking/stock market crises) that struck many Asian economies in the late
1990s. Since its entrance to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, the integration of China’s
financial system and overall economy with the rest of the world has significantly sped up. This
process introduces cheap foreign capital and technology, but large scale and sudden capital flows and

1

We include firms partially owned by local governments in the Hybrid Sector for two reasons. First, despite the
ownership stake of local governments and the sometimes ambiguous ownership structure and property rights, the
operation of these firms resembles more closely that of a for-profit, privately-owned firm than that of a state-owned firm.
Second, the ownership stake of local governments in many of these firms has been privatized.
3

foreign speculation increase the likelihood of a twin crisis. At the end of 2007, China’s foreign
currency reserves surpassed US$1.5 trillion, overtaking Japan to become the largest in the world;
they increased to about US$3.2 trillion as of June 2011 with a large fraction invested in U.S. dollar
denominated assets such as T-bills and notes. 2 The rapid increase in China’s foreign exchange
reserves suggests that there is a large amount of speculative, “hot” money in China in anticipation of
a continuing appreciation of the RMB, China’s currency, relative to all other major currencies,
especially the US dollar. Depending on how the government and the central bank handle the process
of revaluation, especially when there is a large amount of capital outflow, there could be a classic
currency crisis as the government and central bank try to defend the partial currency peg, which in
turn may trigger a banking crisis if there are large withdrawals from banks.
The remaining sections are organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly review the history
of China’s financial system development, present aggregate evidence on China’s financial system,
and compare them to those of developed and other developing countries. In Section III, we examine
China’s banking system and changes over time. In Section IV, we briefly examine the growth and
irregularities of financial markets, including the stock market, real estate market, and listed firms, and
consider the effects of several initiatives to develop new markets and further develop existing
markets, as well as changes in corporate governance among listed firms. In Section V, we examine
the non-standard financial sector, including alternative financial channels and governance
mechanisms. Motivated by the success of this financial sector and firms in the Hybrid Sector, we
also compare the advantages and disadvantages of using the law as the basis of finance and
commerce. We then examine different types of financial crises and their potential effects on China’s
financial system in Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. In terms of converting
RMB into US dollar, we use the exchange rate of US$1 = RMB 8.28 (yuan) for transactions and
events occurring before 2005, and the spot rate at the end of each year for those activities during and
after 2005 (Figure 8-B provides a graph of the exchange rates between the US dollar and the RMB).

II. Overview of China’s Financial System
II.1 A Brief Review of the History of China’s Financial System
China’s financial system was well developed before 1949. 3 One key finding in reviewing the
2

According to the U.S. Treasury Department, China’s holding of U.S. treasury securities reached $ 1.17 trillion in July
2011. Morrison and Labonte (2008) estimate that around 70% of China’s foreign reserves are invested in dollar
denominated assets.
3
For more descriptions of the pre-1949 history of China’s financial system, see AQQ (2008); for more anecdotal
evidence on China’s financial system in the same period, see, for example, Kirby (1995) and Lee (1993).
4

history of this period, including the rise of Shanghai as one of the financial centers of Asia during the
first half of the 20th Century, is that the development of China’s commerce and financial system as a
whole was by and large outside the formal legal system. For example, despite the entrance of
Western-style courts in Shanghai and other major coastal cities in the early 1900s, most businessrelated disputes were resolved through mechanisms outside courts, including guilds (merchant
coalitions), families and local notables. 4 In Section V.3 below, we argue that modern equivalents of
these nonlegal dispute-resolution and corporate governance mechanisms are behind the success of
Hybrid Sector firms in the same areas in the 1980s and 1990s, and that these alternative mechanisms
may be more responsive in adapting to changes in a fast-growing economy like China than the law
and legal institutions.
After the foundation of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, all of the pre-1949 capitalist
companies and institutions were nationalized by 1950. Between 1950 and 1978, China’s financial
system consisted of a single bank − the People’s Bank of China (PBOC), a central government
owned and controlled bank under the Ministry of Finance, which served as both the central bank and
a commercial bank, controlling about 93% of the total financial assets of the country and handling
almost all financial transactions. With its main role to finance the physical production plans, the
PBOC used both a “cash-plan” and a “credit-plan” to control the cash flows in consumer markets and
transfer flows between branches.
The first main structural change began in 1978 and ended in 1984. By the end of 1979, the
PBOC departed the Ministry and became a separate entity, while three state-owned banks took over
some of its commercial banking businesses: The Bank of China 5 (BOC) was given the mandate to
specialize in transactions related to foreign trade and investment; the People’s Construction Bank of
China (PCBC), originally formed in 1954, was set up to handle transactions related to fixed
investment (especially in manufacturing); the Agriculture Bank of China (ABC) was set up (in 1979)
to deal with all banking business in rural areas; and, the PBOC was formally established as China’s
central bank and a two-tier banking system was formed. Finally, the fourth state-owned commercial
bank, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) was formed in 1984, and took over the
rest of the commercial transactions of the PBOC.
4

See, e.g., Chung (2005), for descriptions on family- and community-based mechanisms for contract enforcement.
Looking at how disputes were resolved in and outside courts, Goetzmann and Köll (2005) conclude that the passing of
China’s first Company law in 1904, which was intended to provide a better legal environment for business and commerce,
did not lead to actual changes in corporate governance and better protection of (minority) shareholder rights.
5
BOC, among the oldest banks currently in operation, was originally established in 1912 as a private bank, and
specialized in foreign currency related transactions.
5

For most of the 1980s, the development of the financial system can be characterized by the
fast growth of financial intermediaries outside of the “Big Four” banks. Regional banks (partially
owned by local governments) were formed in the Special Economic Zones in the coastal areas; in
rural areas, a network of Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs; similar to credit unions in the U.S.) was
set up under the supervision of the ABC, while Urban Credit Cooperatives (UCCs), counterparts of
the RCCs in the urban areas, were also founded. Non-bank financial intermediaries, such as the Trust
and Investment Corporations (TICs; operating in selected banking and non-banking services with
restrictions on both deposits and loans), emerged and proliferated in this period.
The most significant event for China’s financial system in the 1990s was the inception and
growth of China’s stock market. Two domestic stock exchanges (SHSE and SZSE) were established
in 1990 and grew very fast during most of the 1990s and in recent years in terms of the total market
capitalization and trading volume. In parallel with the development of the stock market, the real
estate market also went from nonexistent in the early 1990s to one that is currently comparable in size
with the stock market. 6 Both the stock and real estate markets have experienced major corrections
during the past decade, and are characterized by high volatilities and speculative short-term behaviors
by many investors.
These patterns are in part due to the fact that the development of a supportive legal framework
and institutions has been lagging behind that of the markets. For example, China’s first bankruptcy
law (governing SOEs) was passed in 1986 on a trial basis, but the formal Company Law did not
become effective until the end of 1999. This version of the Company Law governs all corporations
with limited liability, publicly listed and traded companies, and branches or divisions of foreign
companies, as well as their organization structure, securities issuance and trading, accounting,
bankruptcy, mergers and acquisitions (for details see the website of China Securities Regulatory
Commission (CSRC), http://www.csrc.gov.cn/). In August 2006, a new bankruptcy law was enacted,
and it became effective June 1, 2007. We provide a brief analysis of the status and problems of the
stock market and real estate market in Section IV below.
Following the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997, financial sector reform has focused on stateowned banks and especially the problem of NPLs (the China Banking Regulation Committee (CBRC)
was also established to oversee the banking industry). We will further discuss this issue in Section III.
China’s entry into the WTO in December 2001 marked the beginning of a new era, as we continue to
observe increasing competition from foreign financial institutions and more frequent and larger scale
6

At the end of 2007, the total market capitalization of the two domestic exchanges (SHSE and SZSE) was around $1.8
trillion, whereas total investment in the real estate market was around $3.12 trillion.
6

capital flows. While increasingly larger inflows of foreign capital and the presence of foreign
institutions may continue to drive further growth of the financial system and economy, larger scale
capital flows can also increase the likelihood of damaging financial crises. We will discuss these
issues in Sections IV and VI.
A developed financial system is characterized by, among other factors, the substantial role
played by institutional investors. In China, institutional investors began to emerge in the late 1990s:
the first closed-end fund, in which investors cannot withdraw capital after initial investment, was set
up in 1997, and the first open-end fund, in which investors can freely withdraw capital (subject to
share redemption restrictions), was established in 2001. By November 2009, there were 65 fund
companies managing 551 funds with 520 open-ended funds and the rest close-ended. The total net
assets value (NAV) increased from RMB11 billion (or US$ 1.3 Billion) in 1998 to RMB 2.26 trillion
(or $328 billion) in November 2009, which is still small compared to the assets within the banking
sector. In 2003, a few Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (QFII) entered China’s asset
management industry, and they have been operating through forming joint ventures with Chinese
companies. On the other hand, China allowed Qualified Domestic Institutional Investors (QDII) to
invest in overseas markets beginning in July 2006. At the end of 2008, the ten QDII funds had a total
of $109.4 billion assets under management.
At the national level, the China Investment Corporation (CIC) was established in September
2007 with the intent of utilizing the accumulated foreign reserves for the benefit of the state and
$207.91 billion foreign reserves were placed under management at the establishment. CIC makes
occasional announcements about its investment, but the overall transparency of its investment
strategy is low. Since inception, CIC has made some aggressive investment decisions, including the
well publicized $3 billion (pre-IPO) investment in private equity group Blackstone, and the $5 billion
investment in Morgan Stanley (this took the form of mandatory convertible bonds that can be
converted into almost 10% of the firm’s equity).
Endowed with limited capital and given problems with the administration of the pension
system, pension funds have not played a significant role in the stock or bond market. 7 With a fast
aging population and the growth of households’ disposable income, further development of a multipillar pension system, including individual accounts with employees’ self-contributed (tax exempt)
7

While there is a nationwide, government run pension system (financed mainly through taxes on employers and
employees), the coverage ratio of the pension system varies significantly across regions and is particularly low in rural
areas. Moreover, there is a very limited amount of capital in individual accounts and most of the capital has been invested
in banks and government projects with low returns. See, for example, Feldstein (1999, 2003) and Feldstein and Liebman
(2006), for more details on China’s pension system.
7

funds that can be directly invested in the financial markets, can lead to the development of both the
financial system and the fiscal system as well as social stability. At the top of the pension fund
system, China’s National Social Security Fund (NSSF) was established in August 2002 and is
administered by the National Council for Social Security Fund. This (sovereign) fund is mainly
financed by capital and equity assets derived from the listing of state-owned companies, fiscal
allocations from the central government, and other investment proceeds. It has recently shifted its
core investment strategy of focusing on the domestic A-share and bond markets to a more diversified
basket of assets, including investments in emerging markets and Europe. At the end of 2008, the
fund had a total of $89.2 billion in assets; it grew to RMB856.7 billion ($142.8 billion) at the end of
2010 according to the annual report of NSSF. Finally, there are very few hedge funds that implement
“long-short” strategies, as short selling has been prohibited until recently. 8
Insert Figure 1 here.
Figure 1 depicts the current structure of the entire financial system. In what follows we will
describe and examine each of the major sectors of the financial system. In addition to the standard
sectors of banking and intermediation and financial markets, we will document the importance of the
non-standard financial sector. Due to space limitation, we do not cover China’s “foreign sectors” in
this chapter; for discussions on the history and the role of these sectors in supporting the growth of
the economy, see, for example, Prasad and Wei (2007) for a review.

II.2 Size and Efficiency of the Financial System: Banks, Markets, and Alternative Finance
In Table 1, we compare China’s financial system to those of other major emerging economies,
with measures for the size and efficiency of banks and markets taken from Levine (2002) and
Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2001) and data from the World Bank Financial Database. We present
average figures over the period 2001-2007 for each country as well as the average of all the other
emerging economies (excluding China). We first compare the size of a country’s banks and equity
markets relative to that country’s gross domestic product (GDP). In terms of total market
capitalization, China’s stock market, at 64% of its GDP over the period 2001-2007, is slightly larger
than the 58% of GDP average of the other major emerging economies. “Value Traded” is perhaps a
better measure of the actual size of the market than “market capitalization,” because the latter
includes non-tradable shares or tradable shares that are rarely traded. In this regard, the size of
8

Along with the introduction of an index future (for A shares) in April 2010, a trial program on short selling began for
selected institutional investors (security companies; see, e.g., www.wsj.com, 3/31/2010). The impact of introducing these
new programs and products on the financial market is yet to be seen.
8

China’s stock market (62% of GDP) is significantly larger than the average of other emerging
economies (with an average of 37% of GDP). Similarly, the size of China’s banking system, in terms
of total bank credit to non-state sectors, is 116% of its GDP over 2001-2007, and considerably larger
than the average of other major emerging economies (with an average of 65% of GDP). However,
the majority of the bank credit goes to state-owned firms in China and only a small fraction goes to
firms in the Hybrid Sector (more evidence of this is given below). In addition, NPLs account for a
larger fraction of all the loans in China than the average of other emerging economies (16% vs. 10%),
indicating that its banking sector still has scope to improve its efficiency. 9
Insert Table 1 here.
The next two columns of Table 1 (“Structure indices”) compare the relative importance of
financial markets vs. banks, with a lower score indicating that banks are more important relative to
markets. China’s score for “Structure size” (Log of the ratio of Market Capitalization/Total Bank
Credit) is positive, suggesting that the size of total market capitalization is actually larger than that of
bank credit, and the score is greater than the average of other emerging economies; its score for
“Structure Activity” (Log of the ratio of Float supply of market cap/Total Bank Credit) is negative,
indicating that float supply fraction of the market cap is still smaller than bank credit, and it is similar
to the average of other emerging economies. Taken together these numbers suggest that the financial
system of most emerging economies, including that of China, remains bank-dominated. In terms of
“Structure efficiency” (Log of product (Market capitalization/GDP) × (bank NPLs/bank total loans)),
which denotes the relative efficiency of markets vs. banks, China has a higher score than most other
developing countries, suggesting that its banks are relatively less efficient than markets compared to
other countries. “Structure regulatory” measures (based on 2005 data) the extent to which
commercial banks are restricted to participate in activities outside commercial lending, and China’s
score of 16 is higher than most other countries, suggesting that by law commercial banks in China
face tight restrictions in operating in other areas.
We also compare the development of the financial system (“Financial Development”),
including both banks and markets (the last three columns of Table 1). China’s overall financial
market size, in terms of both “Finance Activity” (Log of product of (Float supply of market/GDP) ×
(Bank credit/GDP)) and “Finance Size” (Log of product of (Market capitalization/GDP) + (Bank

9

Levine (2002) uses bank overhead cost/total assets to measure banking sector efficiency, and used this measure to
construct the “Structure Efficiency” and “Finance Efficiency” measures. However, the World Bank Financial Database no
longer reports the overhead cost/assets ratio; we replace this with NPLs/loans ratio as an alternative measure of efficiency
and use this variable to define other efficiency measures in Table 1.
9

credit/GDP)), are larger than the averages of other emerging countries. In terms of “Finance
Efficiency” (Log of (Total floating supply/GDP)/Bank NPLs Ratio), China’s measure is slightly
higher than the average of other emerging countries. Based on the evidence from the past decade, we
can conclude that China’s banks and markets, or the formal sectors of the financial system, are as
large as or larger than other major emerging economies (relative to its size of the economy).
However, the banking sector does not lend much to the Hybrid Sector, which as we will see in
Section V, is the dynamic part of the economy.
A related question to the size of banks and markets is where do most firms get the capital and
funds? As shown in AQQ (2005, 2008), the four most important financing sources for all firms in
China, in terms of firms’ fixed asset investments, are, (domestic) bank loans, firms’ self-fundraising,
the state budget and FDI, with self-fundraising and bank loans carrying most of the weight. Selffundraising, falling into the category of alternative finance (non-bank, non-market finance), includes
proceeds from capital raised from local governments (beyond the state budget), communities and
other investors, internal financing channels such as retained earnings and all other funds raised
domestically by the firms. The size of total self-fundraising of all firms has been growing at an
average annual rate of 23.6% over the period of 1994-2009, and reached $2,213.2 billion at the end of
2009, compared to a total of $565.7 billion for domestic bank loans for the same year. It is important
to point out that equity and bond issuance, which are included in self-fundraising (but fall into the
category of formal external finance), apply only to the Listed Sector, and account for a small fraction
of this category.
While the Listed Sector has been growing fast, SOEs are on a downward trend, as
privatization of these firms is still in progress. Around 30% of publicly traded companies’ funding
comes from bank loans, and this ratio has been very stable. Around 45% of the Listed Sector’s total
funding comes from self-fundraising, including internal financing and proceeds from equity and bond
issuance. Moreover, equity and bond sales, which rely on the use of external markets, only constitute
a small fraction of total funds raised in comparison to internal financing and other forms of
fundraising. Combined with the fact that self-fundraising is also the most important source of
financing for the State Sector (45% to 65%), we can conclude that alternative channels of financing
are important even for the State and Listed Sectors.
Not surprisingly, self-fundraising plays an even more important role for firms in the Hybrid
Sector, accounting for close to 60% of total funds raised, while individually owned companies, a
subset of the Hybrid Sector, rely on self-fundraising for 90% of total financing. Self-fundraising here

10

includes all forms of internal finance, capital raised from family and friends of the founders and
managers, and funds raised in the form of private equity and loans. Since firms in this sector operate
in an environment with legal and financial mechanisms and regulations that are probably poorer than
those available for firms in the State and Listed Sectors, financing sources may work differently from
how they work in the State and Listed Sectors, and those in developed countries. In Allen,
Chakrabarti, De, Qian, and Qian (ACDQQ, 2008), the authors argue that alternative finance channels,
substitute for formal financing channels through banks and markets, and expand the capacity of
financial systems in emerging countries such as China and India.

III. The Banking and Intermediation Sector
In this section, we examine the status of China’s banking and intermediation sector. After
reviewing aggregate evidence on bank deposits and loans, we analyze the size and time trend of
NPLs. Finally, we review evidence on the growth of non-state banks and financial intermediaries.
III.1 Aggregate Evidence on Bank Deposits and Loans
As in other Asian countries, China’s household savings rates have been high throughout the
reform era. Given the growth of the economy, the sharp increase in personal income, and limited
investment opportunities, it is not surprising that total bank deposits from individuals have been
growing fast since the mid-1980s. From Figure 2-A, residents in metropolitan areas contribute the
most to total deposits beginning in the late 1980s (roughly 50%), while deposits from enterprises
(including firms from all three sectors) provide the second most important source. The role of
deposits from government agencies and organizations (including non-profit and for-profit
organizations, not shown in the figure) has steadily decreased over time.
Insert Tables 2-A, 2-B, and Figures 2-A and 2-B here.
Table 2-A compares total savings and bank deposits in China, Japan, South Korea, and India
during the period 1997-2009. In terms of the ratio of Time and Savings Deposits/GDP, China
maintains the highest or second highest level (an average of over 90% in recent years), while Japan
leads the group in terms of total amount. Looking at the breakdown of bank deposits, interestbearing “savings deposits” are by far the most important form of deposits in China, providing a good
source for bank loans and other forms of investment. Figure 2-B compares total (nonstate) bank
credit (over GDP) extended to Hybrid Sector firms in China, and privately owned firms (including
those publicly listed and traded) in Taiwan and South Korea. For South Korea, we also plot the bank
credit ratios during its high economic growth period of the 1970s and 1980s (each year appearing on

11

the horizontal axis indicates the time period for China, while a particular year minus 20 indicates the
time period for South Korea). We can see that the scale and growth of China’s ‘hybrid’ bank credit
during 1991-2009 are far below those (of private bank credit) of Taiwan and South Korea in the same
period, but are similar to those of South Korea twenty years ago.
Table 2-B breaks down China’s bank loans by maturities, loan purposes, and borrower types
during the period 1994-2009. While there has been a shift from short-term to long-term loans (first
two columns), the majority of loans goes to SOEs in manufacturing industries (“Industrial Loans”
and “Commercial Loans”). Most of the “Infrastructure/Construction Loans” (a small component of
total loans) fund government sponsored projects, while the size of “Agricultural Loans” is much
smaller. More importantly, the size of loans made to TVEs, privately- and collectively-owned firms,
and joint ventures (last 3 columns), which all belong to the Hybrid Sector, is also much smaller.
Consistent with the aggregate evidence from Section II above and our firm-level evidence below, we
find that bank loans have been one of the important financing sources for Hybrid Sector firms, but the
majority of the bank loans goes to the State and Listed Sectors. Researchers have argued that the
imbalance between loans made to the State Sector and the Hybrid Sector reflects the government’s
policies of wealth transfer from the Hybrid Sector to the State Sector via state-owned banks (e.g.,
Brandt and Zhu, 2000).

III.2 An Analysis of NPLs and Further Reform of the Banking Sector
China’s banking sector is dominated by large state-owned banks, namely, the “Big Four”
banks of ICBC, BOC, PCBC, and ABC. The dominance of the Big Four banks also implies that the
degree of competition within the banking sector has been low. For example, Demirgüç-Kunt and
Levine (2001) compare the five-bank concentration (share of the assets of the five largest banks in
total banking assets), and find that China’s concentration ratio of 91% at the end of 1997 (and for
much of 1990s) is one of the highest in the world. However, China’s concentration ratio has been
falling sharply since 1997 with the entrance of many non-state banks and intermediaries.
The most significant problem for China’s banking sector, and for the entire financial system
during the last decade, was the amount of NPLs within state-owned banks, and in particular, among
the Big Four banks. Reducing the amount of NPLs to normal levels was a high priority for China’s
financial system. We mainly rely on official sources for our analysis on NPLs, but we also speculate
based on data from non-government sources, including case studies from particular regions or banks.

12

Some of this data and speculations paint a much gloomier picture of the NPLs and China’s stateowned banks than the official data suggests.
Comparing NPLs and Reducing NPLs in China
In Panel A of Table 3-A, we compare NPLs in China, the U.S., and other major Asian
economies during 1998-2010 based on official figures. NPLs are measured by their size (in
US$ billion) and as a percentage of GDP in the same year (shown in brackets). Notice that the
official information on China’s NPLs first became available in 1998, but the figures in 1998 and 1999
in Table 3-A probably significantly under-estimate the actual size of NPLs; this also explains the
jump in the size of China’s NPLs from 1999 to 2000. China’s NPLs are the highest in the group
from 2000 to 2007, and as high as 20% to 22.5% of GDP (in 2000 and 2001). The cross-country
comparison includes the period during which Asian countries recovered from the 1997 financial crisis
(e.g., the size of NPLs in South Korea exceeded 12% of GDP in 1999 but it was reduced to below 3%
two years later), and the period during which the Japanese banking system was disturbed by the
prolonged NPL problem (the size of Japan’s NPLs is the second largest of the group throughout the
period). However, the level of NPLs (over GDP) in China has shown a clear downward trend since
the peak in 2000-2001, with the total amount of NPLs also falling during 2004-2010. In fact, with
the banking sector in most developed countries struggling with the ongoing global financial crisis,
China’s banking sector has done quite well, with its total NPLs in 2010 ($68.1 billion) only one
seventh of that of the U.S. and the ratio of NPLs over GDP falling below that of the U.S. as well.
Insert Table 3-A here.
As bad as some of the NPL numbers in early years in Panel A of Table 3-A appear, they may
still significantly underestimate the amount of NPLs within China’s banking system according to
some critics. First, the official figures on outstanding NPLs (cumulated across all commercial banks
in China) do not include the bad loans that have been transferred from banks to four state-owned
asset management companies (AMCs)—with the purpose of liquidating these bad loans. For
example, if we add the NPLs held by the four AMCs (book value of RMB 866 billion, or $125.5
billion, shown in the last row of Table 3-B) in the first quarter of 2006 to the mix of NPLs shown in
Panel A of Table 3-A, the total amount of China’s NPLs would increase by two-thirds. Second, the
classification of NPLs has been problematic in China. The Basle Committee for Bank Supervision
classifies a loan as “doubtful” or bad when any interest payment is overdue by 180 days or more (in
the U.S. it is 90 days); whereas in China, this step has not typically been taken until the principal
payment is delayed beyond the loan maturity date or an extended due date, and in many cases, until

13

the borrower has declared bankruptcy and/or has gone through liquidation. Qiu et al. (2000) estimate
that the ratio of loan interest paid to state-owned banks over loan interest owed is on average less
than 50% in 1999, suggesting that the actual ratio of NPLs over total loans made can be higher than
50% in 1999. This piece of evidence, along with others, suggests that the amount of NPLs (and as a
percentage of GDP) could be twice as large as the official figures reported in Panel A of Table 3-A. 10
Since a large fraction of the NPLs among state-owned banks, and in particular, the Big Four
banks, resulted from poor lending decisions made for SOEs, some of which were due to political or
other non-economic reasons, it can be argued that the natural party to bear the burden of reducing the
NPLs is the government. This view of essentially treating NPLs as a fiscal problem implies that the
ultimate source of eliminating NPLs lies in China’s overall economic growth. 11 As long as the
economy maintains its strong growth momentum so that tax receipts also increase, the government
can always assume the remaining (and new) NPLs without significantly affecting the economy. In
this regard, Panel B of Table 3-A compares total outstanding government debt, and Panel C presents
a comparison of the ratio of (NPLs + Government Debt)/GDP across countries, with the sum of NPLs
and government debt indicating the total burden of the government. Depending on data availability,
total government debt is either measured by the sum of all types of domestic and foreign debt (the
U.S., Japan, and India), or by the level of outstanding government bonds (all other countries) in a
given year.
Unlike the severity of its NPL problem in the early 2000s, the Chinese government has not
issued a large amount of debt, with total outstanding government bonds growing from only 9% of
GDP in 1998 to around 20% of GDP in 2010. By contrast, countries such as the U.S. and India have
a large amount of government debt. Japan is the only country in the group that has a large amount of
NPLs and government debt for most of the period. When we combine the results from Panels A and
B and compare the total government burden in Panel C, we use two sets of ratios for U.S. and Japan.
In addition to using total outstanding government debt, we use ratios (in the brackets) based on the
sum of net government debt and NPLs, where net government debt is the difference between
government borrowing (a ‘stock’ measure) and government lending (also a stock measure); not
surprisingly, these ratios are much lower than using the gross figures.
From Panel C, China’s total government burden is in the middle of the pack: the ratios of total
10

Consistent with this view, Lardy (1998) argues that, if using international standards on bad loans, the existing NPLs
within China’s state-owned banks as of the mid-1990s would make these banks’ total net worth negative, so that the
entire network of state banks would have been insolvent.
11
See, for example, Perkins and Rawski (2008) for a review and projections on the prospects of long-run economic
growth and statistics in China.
14

government burden over GDP (using the official NPL figures) are significantly lower than those in
Japan, the U.S., and India, are comparable with those of Taiwan and Korea, and are higher than
Indonesia only. In recent years, even if we double the size of the official NPL figures, China’s total
government burden would not increase much as the total amount of NPLs is small relative to the size
of GDPs. Based on these crude comparisons, going forward it seems that the NPLs should not be an
arduous burden for the Chinese government (or the banking sector), while the same cannot be said for
Japan and the U.S. Caution is needed for this conclusion: first, new NPLs in China may grow much
faster than other countries as the government’s recent massive economic stimulus plan led to a
significant increase in new loans made during 2008-2009, including many questionable loans to local
governments 12; and second, China’s currently small government debt may experience a sharp
increase in the near future given the need for higher fiscal spending in areas such as pension plans
and other social welfare programs.
Recognizing the importance of and its responsibility in reducing NPLs in the Big Four banks,
the Chinese government injected large amounts of foreign currency reserves (mostly in the form of
US dollars, T-bills, Euros and Yen) into these banks to improve their balance sheets in preparation
for going public. This process began at the end of 2003, with the establishment of the Central Huijin
Investment Company, through which the PBOC injected US$45 billion of reserves into the BOC and
PCBC, while ICBC (the largest commercial bank in China and one of the largest in the world in
terms of assets) received US$15 billion during the first half of 2005. In 2008, ABC received US$19
billion from Huijin in spite of the global financial crisis. All Big Four banks have since become
publicly listed and traded on either the HKSE and/or the SHSE, including ABC (the last of the Big
Four), which completed its IPO on July 15, 2010 (SHSE) and July 16 (HKSE).
However, the injection plan will not prevent new NPLs from originating in the banking
system. In fact, it may create perverse “too big to fail” incentives for state-owned banks, in that if
these banks believe that there will be a ‘bailout’ whenever they run into future financial distress, they
have an incentive to take on risky, negative-NPV projects. This moral hazard problem can thwart the
government’s efforts in keeping the NPLs in check, while similar problems occurred during and after
the government bailouts in the S&L crisis in the U.S. in the 1980s (e.g., Kane 1989, 2003) and are
among the most significant factors that caused the ongoing financial crisis. In this regard, a credible

12

According to senior officials from the CBRC, Chinese banks are facing default risks on more than one-fifth of the
RMB7,700bn ($1,135bn) loans they have made to local governments across the country; most of these loans were used to
fund regional infrastructure projects (Financial Times, 08/01/2010). In July 2011, Moody estimated that local government
loans can be as high as RMB14.2 trillion, and the NPL ratio for Chinese banks could be 8-12% (Reuters, 07/05/2011).
15

commitment from the government that the capital injection plan is a one-time measure to boost the
capital adequacy of these banks, and that there will be no (similar) injection plans in the future can
help alleviate the moral hazard problem.
Another measure taken by the Chinese government to reduce the NPLs is the establishment of
four state-owned AMCs. As discussed earlier, the goal of the AMCs is to assume the NPLs (and
offering debt-for-equity swaps to the banks 13) accumulated in each of the Big Four banks and
liquidate them. The liquidation process includes asset sales, tranching, securitization, and resale of
loans to investors. 14 Table 3-B shows that cash recovery on the bad loans processed by the AMCs
ranges from 6.9% to 35% between 2001 and 2006 (first quarter) 15, while the asset recovery rates are
slightly higher. A critical issue that affects the effectiveness of the liquidation process is the
relationship among AMCs, banks, and distressed or bankrupt firms. Since both the AMCs and the
banks are state-owned, it is not likely that the AMCs would force the banks to cut off (credit) ties
with defaulted borrowers (SOEs or former SOEs) as a privately owned bank would do. Thus, as the
old NPLs are liquidated, new NPLs from the same borrowers continue to surface.
To summarize, NPLs have been considerably reduced in recent years. If the economy can
maintain its current pace of growth, the government can always write off a large fraction of the rest
(and newly accumulated) of the NPLs to avert any serious problems for China. Again, caution is in
place for this optimistic outlook. One can argue that NPLs are bigger than the official statistics
suggest to begin with, and that a substantial amount of new NPLs will continue to arise within stateowned banks. If the growth of the economy significantly slows down, while the accumulation of
NPLs continues, the banking sector problems could lead to a financial crisis. This could spill over
into other sectors of the economy and cause a slowdown in growth or a recession.
Insert Tables 3-B and 4-A here.
The Efficiency of State-owned Banks
As discussed above, the size of NPLs in the banking sector critically depends on the
efficiency of banks. We briefly discuss measures that have been taken to improve the efficiency of
state-owned banks. First, state-owned banks have diversified and improved their loan structure by
13

One example is Cinda Asset Management Corporation, which was set up in April, 1999, with a registered capital of
RMB 10 billion provided by the Ministry of Finance. It took over RMB 220 billion NPLs from the China Construction
Bank and funded its purchase via bond issues.
14
The sale of tranches of securitized NPLs to foreign investors began in 2002. The deal was struck between Huarong ,
one of the four AMCs, and a consortium of U.S. investment banks led by Morgan Stanley (and including Lehman
Brothers and Salomon Smith Barney) and was approved by the government in early 2003 (Financial Times, 05/2003).
15
The China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), from which we obtained data (for 2004-2009), stopped reporting
data on NPLs from AMCs.
16

increasing consumer-related loans while being more active in risk management and monitoring of
loans made to SOEs. For example, the ratio of consumer lending to total loans outstanding made
from all banks increased from 1% in 1998 to 12% in 2008; by the third quarter of 2009, RMB 4.99
trillion (or $730.4 billion) of outstanding bank loans were extended to consumers. The size of
housing mortgages, now the largest component (87% as in the third quarter of 2009) of consumer
credit, grew more than 200 times between 1997 and 2008, reaching a total of RMB 4.35 trillion
($637.2 billion), although the speed of growth has slowed down in 2011, according to the China
Quarterly Monetary Policy Report of the PBOC. One problem with the massive expansion of
consumer credit is that China lacks a national consumer-credit database to spot overstretching debtors,
although a pilot system linking seven cities was set up in late 2004. The deficiency in the knowledge
and training of credit risk and diligence of loan officers from state-owned banks is another significant
factor in credit expansion, which can lead to high default rates and a large amount of new NPLs if the
growth of the economy and personal income slows down.
Accompanying the rapidly expanding automobile industry, the other fast growing category of
individual-based loans is automobile loans, most of which are made by state-owned banks. The total
balance of all China’s individual auto loans increased from RMB 400 million ($50 million) in 1998
to RMB 200 billion ($25 billion) at the end of 2003, and as much as 30% of all auto sales were
financed by loans during this period (Financial Times, 05/25/2005). The growth in both auto sales
and loans slowed down significantly since 2004 in part due to the high default rates. In 2008,
outstanding auto loans decreased to RMB 158.3 billion ($23 billion). Only 8% of the auto sales were
financed by loans during that year. Shanghai and Beijing have the largest number of car sales and
loans. As many as 50% of debtors defaulted on their car loans in these cities. There are examples in
which loan applications were approved based solely on the applicants’ description of their personal
income without any auditing (Barron’s, 12/06/2004). However, the slowdown of the auto loan
market was temporary and it quickly resumed its fast pace of growth, mainly driven by tremendous
demand—China has recently overtaken the U.S. to become the largest auto market in the world. In
aggregate auto loans amount to 10%-20% of the total amount spent on autos. Most loans mature in
three to five years. 16
Second, the ongoing privatization process, including the listing of state-owned banks, is also
an effective channel for enhancing efficiency. As state ownerships stakes shrink, these banks can
focus more on for-profit goals, and, with more non-state owners entering the mix the strengthening of
16

A few foreign lenders (e.g., GM and Ford) were approved to enter China’s auto loan market by forming joint ventures
with Chinese automakers (Financial Times, 05/27/2005).
17

corporate governance to ensure profit-maximizing is the next step. Panel A of Table 4-A presents the
performance of IPOs of the Big Four banks (ABC remains in the State Sector) and that of the Bank of
Communications (BComm). A notable case is the IPO of ICBC (see Allen, Qian, Shan and Zhao,
2012 for more details). Simultaneously carried out in the HKSE and SHSE on October 27, 2006,
ICBC raised US$21.9 billion, making it the largest IPO (up to that date). The first day (and first
week cumulative) return, measured by the net percentage return of the closing price on the first (fifth)
trading day over offer price, was almost 15%, suggesting high demand for ICBC’s H shares among
(foreign) investors. In terms of ownership structure, the state, through various agencies, is by far the
largest shareholder, with only 22% of the market cap is ‘free float’ or tradable. The largest foreign
shareholder is Goldman Sachs with its 5.8% ownership stake negotiated before the IPO. The recent
IPO of ABC also attracted a lot of attention. The total proceeds from its IPO from HKSE (July 16,
2010) and SHSE (July 15, 2010) reached $22.1 billion, overtaking the ICBC IPO as the world’s
largest IPO (Associated Press, 08/16/2010). 17 In particular, foreign investors, including institutional
investors and wealthy families, contributed over 40% of the $12 billion raised from H shares (in the
HKSE). 18 While the first-week stock performance in the two markets was not as impressive as that
of ICBC, the fact that the IPO was carried out successfully during the recovery period following one
of the worst global financial crises is evidence that investors from around the globe have confidence
in ABC’s role as a leading institution in the world.
The IPOs of the other three large state-owned banks were also successful in terms of total
proceeds raised, and they all attracted significant foreign ownership at the IPO date as well. In fact,
as shown in Panel B of Table 4-A, four of the 10 largest banks in the world, measured in market
capitalization as of July 2010, are Chinese banks, with ICBC leading the chart and the newly listed
ABC making it into the chart too. In terms of (book) assets, ICBC is the eleventh largest bank in the
world (Panel C); however, given the accounting problems of evaluating troubled assets related to
subprime loans and sovereign debt in troubled Euro Zone countries, it is possible that ICBC’s assets,
with virtually no exposure to the U.S. housing markets or European sovereign debt, could be one of
the largest and highest quality in the world. Finally, Moody’s current ratings on these publicly listed
17

From Panel A, Table 4A, the total proceeds (in HK$ and RMB) of the ICBC IPO are actually larger than that of ABC’s
IPO, but given the appreciation of RMB over the period 2006-2010, the proceeds of the ABC IPO are slightly larger
measured in US$.
18
Foreign institutional investors include Qatar Investment Authority ($2.8 billion), Kuwait Investment Authority ($800
million), Britain's Standard Chartered Bank ($500 million), Dutch bank Radobank Nederland ($250 million), Australia's
Seven Group Holdings Ltd ($250 million) and Singapore's Temasek Holdings ($200 million); source: ABC’s post-IPO
news report. However, on a global basis, including shares that are distributed to various government agencies prior to the
IPO, foreign investors only hold 4% of all of ABC’s shares.
18

banks (on both deposits and loans) range from A to Baa (highest rating is Aaa); while S&P rates
these banks’ outstanding bonds between A and BBB (highest rating is AAA).
There are two imminent issues with the privatization process. The first is related to the
structure of the banking sector, and in particular, whether more competition, including the entrance of
more non-state (domestic and foreign) banks and intermediaries, is good for improving the efficiency
of both the Big Four banks and the entire sector. 19 Another issue is the government’s dual role as
regulator and as majority owner. These potentially conflicting roles can diminish the effectiveness of
each of the two roles that the government intends to carry out. In Section IV below, we consider
whether the ongoing process of floating non-tradable government shares in many listed companies
can be applied to the privatization process of many state-owned banks/institutions. Only after these
banks are (majority) owned by non-government entities and individuals can they unconditionally
implement all profit- and efficiency-enhancing measures. However, in light of what occurred in the
developed countries, where excessive risk-taking and poor risk management and governance in a few
large institutions essentially brought down the entire financial system, the current ownership structure
of the largest Chinese banks, in which the government retains the majority control, can enhance the
regulation of large financial institutions and help to prevent banking and financial crisis in China and
other emerging economies.
Third, reforming the organization structure of banks and providing more incentives to banks
and their employees can improve efficiency. For example, reforms taking place in the mid-1990s
provided local banks with more autonomous power, and after the 1994 reforms, approved credit
volume for specialized banks was based on a maximum ratio between loans and deposits instead of
administrative quota, which provided those banks with greater flexibility to use within-bank transfers
to adjust fund allocation. 20 The reforms also provide more profit incentives for managers. The
evaluation criteria changed from adherence to the national credit plan to “a combination of profits
made by the bank branch, attention to cost control, investment in fixed capital of the branch, deposit
increases, and reduction of overdue loans” (Park and Sehrt, 2001, p619).
A critical aspect of the decentralization process is to provide individuals with more authority
and responsibilities. According to a number of theories (e.g., Stein, 2002), these changes improve the
quality of ‘soft’ information produced by banks, an essential part of the lending process. Under the

19

For example, with a sample of both state- and non-state owned banks, Berger et al. (2009) show that the addition of
foreign ownership stakes into banks’ ownership structure is associated with a significant improvement of bank efficiency.
20
These reforms did not liberalize interest rates; the PBOC continues to set the range (upper and lower bounds, or base
rate and floating range) within which interest rates can be set; relending was also centralized by the PBOC.
19

old regime, decision making of the entire lending process was group-based and no individual loan
officers were held responsible for poor decisions. Facing imminent pressure from competitors
(including foreign banks) following China’s entrance to WTO in 2001, many state-owned banks
began implementing new lending policies in 2002. These new policies grant more authority to
individuals in charge of different steps of making loans and monitoring borrowers and hold them
responsible (ex post) for poor performance; decisions such as the final approval of loan contracts are
left to a group of senior employees (through voting). Using detailed loan-level data from a large
state-owned bank with branches throughout the country, Qian, Strahan and Yang (2011) find that an
internal risk assessment measure has a more pronounced effect, relative to publicly available
information (‘hard’ information), on both pricing (interest rates) and nonpricing terms (loan size) of
loan contracts after the reform and becomes a better predictor of loan outcomes. They also show that
when the loan officer and the branch president who approves the loan contract work together for a
longer period of time, the rating has an incrementally stronger effect on loan contracts. These results
highlight how organizational structure and incentives can affect the production and quality of soft
information. Better information, in turn, expands the supply of credit and improves (lending)
outcomes.
One problem that hinders banks’ efforts in improving efficiency is poor and inconsistent
enforcement of bankruptcy laws and creditor protection. China’s first bankruptcy law, passed in
1986, governed only SOEs and had little impact in practice. The new bankruptcy law, enacted in
August 2006 and effective on June 1, 2007, applies to all enterprises except partnerships and sole
proprietorships. In many aspects the new law resembles bankruptcy laws in developed countries.
For example, it introduces the bankruptcy administrator, who manages the assets of the debtor after
the court has accepted the bankruptcy filing. Moreover, the law states that these administrators
should be independent professionals, such as those working for law or accounting firms. Despite all
the legal procedures specified by the law, enforcement of the law remains weak and inconsistent.
Many distressed and insolvent firms are kept afloat, and almost all the listed firms that file for
bankruptcy end up with restructuring plans and these firms are rarely delisted. 21
A number of reasons can explain the weak enforcement of the bankruptcy law. There are
regulations and circulars issued by the central government applicable to SOE bankruptcies that are de

21

According to the National Development and Reform Commission, 67,000 small and mid-sized enterprises were shut
down in the first half of 2008, but only 2,955 bankruptcy cases were filed nationwide for the same year. When a listed
firm is in distress (with the “ST” flag), typically other (nonlisted) firms will invest in and restructure the ST firm to avoid
delisting, since the ‘shell’ of the distressed firm is valuable given the difficult and costly process of IPOs.
20

facto in priority over the Law. A good example is Doctrine #10 of the State Council, which governs
the bankruptcy process of SOEs in 111 pilot cities. This doctrine requires approval from
secured/senior creditors (e.g., banks) before an enterprise can go through bankruptcy proceedings. In
reality, however, the bankruptcy court also requires the consent of local government (Fan et al., 2008).
Since local governments are usually responsible for the settlement of workers displaced by bankrupt
firms, it is in their best interest to halt the bankruptcy filing until a satisfactory settlement plan is
reached. As a result, mergers and acquisitions with other firms are preferred to bankruptcy, and it has
been documented that M&As have been indeed used extensively to resolve firms’ distress (e.g., Kam
et al., 2008), and many bankruptcies cases are postponed or avoided. In fact, when in distress, both
the SOEs and local government give the greatest priority to employees; local government favors
SOEs over banks since SOEs provide more employment opportunities. Furthermore, banks are often
reluctant to push for bankruptcy since most of the distressed debt would be written off; the recovery
rate for most bank loans is less than 10% (World Bank, 2001). Taking the defaulted firm to court to
recover loans or seize the firm’s assets is a lengthy process and the chances of winning are slim; as a
result, only a small number of lawsuits involving bankrupt firms reach the courts.
For insolvent SOEs, what triggers the bankruptcy procedure is not their financial status per se,
but whether they can get preferential treatment from the government. The average number of
bankruptcy cases placed on file (by courts) was 277 per year during 1989-1993. This then jumped to
5,900 per year between 1994 and 2003, after the Capital Structure Optimization Program for
industrial SOEs was implemented in several pilot cities. 22 The number of cases fell after 2003 partly
due to the central government’s intention to maintain social stability by controlling the number of
bankruptcies; the Supreme People’s Court also ruled in 2002 that the courts would not process
bankruptcy cases if the main intention were to escape debts. According to the surveys presented by
Garnaut, Song and Yao (2004), 90% of CEOs of the surveyed SOEs believe that bankruptcy is
actually a feasible channel to evade bank debts. Since the government’s program provides
preferential treatments including debt write-offs, many SOEs would wait until they are covered by
the program before filing for bankruptcy.
As the most senior creditors (secured debt), banks’ willingness to lend depends on their
bargaining power and ability to seize collateralized assets upon default, and hence ineffective creditor
protection not only increases potential losses from bad loans, it also reduces banks’ incentive to

22

In China, a court must accept a case petition before deciding whether it should be declined or placed on file for
investigation/prosecution; thus the number of cases accepted is always greater than the number of cases placed on file.
21

investigate and monitor borrowers. 23 The favorable treatment SOEs enjoy during distress adversely
change their incentives in investment and corporate governance, these effects can also spill over into
banks’ decisions to lend to non-state firms and reduce the credit access of these firms. Therefore,
consistent regulation guidelines in dealing with distress and bankruptcy by different types of firms,
along with the government’s commitment to leave the decision process to professionals and courts,
can benefit the development of credit markets. On the other hand, we discuss evidence below that
informal dispute resolution mechanisms outside the legal system based on reputation and
relationships has been an effective substitute for Chinese firms and investors.

III.3 Growth of Non-state Financial Intermediaries
The development of both non-state banks and other (state and non-state) financial institutions
will allow China to have a stable and functioning banking system in the future. In addition to
boosting the overall efficiency of the banking system, these financial institutions provide funding to
support the growth of the Hybrid Sector.
First, we examine and compare China’s insurance market to other Asian economies (South
Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore). In terms of the ratio of total assets managed by insurance companies
over GDP (Figure 2-C), China’s insurance market is significantly smaller than that of other
economies. At the end of 2009 total assets managed are only about 10% of GDP, while this ratio for
the other three economies is over 30%. It is clear that the insurance industry is also significantly
smaller compared to China’s banking industry, and property insurance is particularly underdeveloped
due to the fact that the private real estate market was only recently established (in the past most
housing was allocated by employers or the government). Despite the fast growth of insurance
coverage and premium income, only 4% of the total population was covered by life insurance.
Insurance premiums were only 3.2% of GDP in 2008, standing far behind the global average figure
of over 7%; coverage ratios for property insurance are even lower (according to the reports by KPMG,
LLP). However, coverage ratios have been growing steadily at an average annual rate of 6% between
1998 and 2005 (XinHua News). In 2008 the insurance industry in China grew at the fastest pace
(40%) since 2002. In the first quarter of 2010, China Insurance Regulatory Committee announced
that China’s insurance premiums totaled RMB 454.14 billion, representing an increase of 38.6
percent year on year.
23

With a large sample of syndicated loans around the globe, Qian and Strahan (2007) show that strong creditor protection
(in borrower countries) enhances loan availability as lenders are more willing to provide credit on favorable terms (e.g.,
longer maturities and lower interest rates).
22

Insert Tables 4-B and 4-C, and Figure 2-C here.
Table 4-B provides a (partial) breakdown of the different types of banks. During the period of
2001-2009, although the largest four or five banks (the fifth largest bank is Bank of Communications,
also state owned) dominate in every aspect of the banking sector, the role of other banks in the entire
banking sector cannot be ignored. As of 2009, other banks (including foreign banks) and credit
cooperatives’ total assets compose over 70% of the largest five banks (the actual fraction is likely to
be higher due to incomplete information on all types of deposit-taking institutions); similar
comparisons can be made for total deposits and outstanding loans. In addition, these banks and
institutions appear to have less NPLs than the largest state-owned banks. Table 4-C provides
evidence on the growth of non-bank intermediaries. Overall, the growth of these non-bank
intermediaries has been impressive since the late 1990s. Among them, “other commercial banks”
(many of them are state-owned), RCCs, and TICs hold the largest amount of assets; the size of
foreign banks and mutual funds (not listed in the table) is minuscule, but these are likely to be the
focus of development in the near future. 24 Finally, our coverage of non-bank financial institutions
excludes various forms of informal financial intermediaries, some of which are deemed illegal but
overall provide a considerable amount of financing to firms in the Hybrid Sector.

IV. Financial Markets
In this section, we examine China’s financial markets, including both the stock and real estate
markets, and the recent addition of venture capital and private equity markets as well as asset
management industries. We also compare, at the aggregate level, how firms raise funds in China and
in other emerging economies through external markets in order to determine if China’s experience is
unique. We then briefly review publicly traded companies’ financing and investment decisions.
Finally, we discuss the further development of financial markets as well as corporate governance and
the performance of listed firms.
IV.1 Overview of Stock Markets
After the inception of China’s domestic stock exchanges, the SHSE and SZSE, in 1990, they
initially grew quickly. The high growth rates continued through most of the 1990s, and the market
reached a peak by the end of 2000. As shown in Figure 3, the momentum of the market, indicated by
the SSE Index, then reversed during the next five years as it went through a major correction with
24

Postal savings (deposit-taking institutions affiliated with local post offices) is another form of non-bank intermediation
that is not reported in Table 4-B due to a lack of time series data. However, at the end of 2008, total deposits within the
postal savings system exceeded RMB 2079 billion, or 9.5% of all deposits in China.
23

half of the market capitalization lost. Most of the losses were recovered by the end of 2006, and the
market reached new heights during 2007. However, following a string of negative news worldwide
(culminating with the subprime loans-led global crisis) and domestically (including high levels of
inflation) the market lost three quarters of its value by the end of 2008. During the first half of 2009,
with the impact of the massive stimulus package and rebounding from a trough, China’s stock market
bounced back and recovered about one third of the losses in 2008. However the stock market dipped
again in the first half of 2010, partly due to the concern that the government is taking measures to
cool down the fast growing housing market. Figure 3 compares the performance of some of the
major stock exchanges around the world, as measured by the ‘buy-and-hold’ return in the period
December 1992 and December 2010 (gross return at December 2010 with $1 invested in each of the
valued-weighted stock indexes at the end of 1992). We plot inflation-adjusted real returns. Over this
period, the performance of the value-weighted SHSE index (the calculation for the SZSE is very
similar) is below that of the SENSEX (India), which has the best performance among the group, and
that of S&P (U.S.), but better than FTSE (London) and the Nikkei Index, the worst among the group.
Insert Figure 3 and Table 5-A here.
As Table 5-A indicated, at the end of 2010, the SHSE was ranked the sixth largest market in
the world in term of market capitalization, while the SZSE was ranked the fourteenth. The Hong
Kong Stock Exchange (HKSE), where selected firms from Mainland China have been listed and
traded, is ranked the seventh largest in the world. Needless to say, the Chinese financial markets will
play an increasingly important role in world financial markets. Also from Table 5-A, “Concentration”
is the fraction of total turnover of an exchange within a year coming from the turnover of the
companies with the largest market cap (top 5%), and SHSE (55.8%) is in line with that of other large
exchanges, indicating that trading is concentrated among large-cap stocks. “Turnover velocity” is the
(annual) total turnover for all the listed firms expressed as a percentage of the total market
capitalization, and the figures for SZSE and SHSZ are the highest among the largest exchanges,
suggesting that there is a large amount of speculative trading especially among small- and mediumcap stocks (as these are more easily manipulated than large cap stocks) in the Chinese markets.
There are two other markets established to complement the two main exchanges. First, a fully
electronically operated market (“Er Ban Shi Chang” or “Second-tier Market,” similar to the
NASDAQ) for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) was opened in June 2004. It was designed to
lower the entry barriers for SME firms, especially newly established firms in the high-tech industries.
By the end of February 2007, there are 119 firms listed in this market. Second, a “third-tier market”

24

(“San Ban Shi Chang,” or “Third-tier Market,”) was established to deal primarily with de-listing
firms and other over-the-Counter (OTC) transactions. Since 2001, some publicly listed firms on both
SHSE and SZSE that do not meet the listing standards have been delisted and the trading of their
shares shifted to this market. On October 23, 2009, China launched a Nasdaq-style Growth
Enterprises Market (GEM, or “Chuang Ye Ban”) with 28 companies, mainly from hi-tech, electronic
and pharmaceutical industries. The main purpose of GEM is to provide financing for small and
medium sized private enterprises. The first 10 firms seeking to list on the GEM drew a combined
RMB 784 billion in subscriptions in September 2009, while the second and third sets had 18 firms,
including Huayi Brothers Media, China’s largest privately owned film company. As of October 2011,
no index is available for the GEM but most of the listed stocks have outperformed the indexes of the
two main exchanges. By April 2010, the number of listed firms on the GEM reached 200.
There is abundant evidence showing that China’s stock markets are not efficient in that prices
and investors’ behavior are not necessarily driven by fundamental values of listed firms. For
example, Morck et al. (2000) find that stock prices are more ‘synchronous” (stock prices move up
and down together) in emerging countries including China than in developed countries. They
attribute this phenomenon to poor minority investor protection and imperfect regulation of markets in
emerging markets. In addition, there have been numerous lawsuits against insider trading and
manipulation (see, e.g., AQQ (2008), for more details). In many cases, unlike Enron and other well
known companies in developed markets stricken by corporate scandals, managers and other insiders
from the Chinese companies did not use any sophisticated accounting and finance maneuvers to hide
their losses (even by China’s standards). These cases reveal that the inefficiencies in the Chinese
stock markets can be (partially) attributed to poor and ineffective regulation. We discuss below
issues related to regulation, market efficiency, and the further development of China’s financial
markets.
IV.2 Overview of Bond Markets
Table 5-B provides information on China’s bond markets. The government bond market had
an annual growth rate of 25.3% during the period 1990-2009 in terms of newly issued bonds, while
total outstanding bonds reached RMB 4,976.8 billion (or $721.3 billion) at the end of 2008. 25 The
second largest component of the bond market is called “policy financial bonds” (total outstanding
amount RMB 3,668.6 billion (or $531.7 billion) at the end of 2008. These bonds are issued by
25

On July 26, 2007, Moody’s raised the rating on China’s government bonds to A1 from A2 and kept it unchanged up to
now. In November 2009 it raised China’s sovereign rating outlook from stable to positive. These ratings are better or
comparable than Moody’s ratings on government bonds from most emerging economies.
25

“policy banks,” which operate under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance, and the proceeds of
bond issuance are invested in government run projects and industries such as infrastructure
construction (similar to municipal bonds in the U.S.). Compared to government-issued bonds, the
size of the corporate bond market is small. In terms of the amount of outstanding bonds at the end of
2008, the corporate bond market is less than one-fourth of the size of the government bond market.
However, the growth of the corporate bond market has picked up pace in the past few years and this
trend is likely to continue in the near future.
Insert Table 5-B here.
The small size of the bond market, especially the corporate bond market, relative to the stock
market, is common among Asian countries. AQQ (2008) compares different components (bank loans
to the private sectors or the Hybrid Sector of China; stock market capitalization; public/government
and private/corporate bond markets) of the financial markets around the world at the end of 2003.
Compared to Europe and the U.S., they find that the size of both the government (public) and
corporate (private) bond markets is smaller in Asia excluding Japan (Hong Kong, South Korea,
Malaysia, Taiwan, Singapore, Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand); even in Japan, the size of the
corporate bond market is much smaller compared with its government bond market. They also find
that the size of all four components of China’s financial markets are small relative to that of other
regions and countries, including bank loans made to the Hybrid Sector (private sector) in China
(other countries). Moreover, the most under-developed component of China’s financial markets is
the corporate bond market (labeled “private” bond market).
There are a number of reasons for the underdevelopment in bond markets in China and other
parts of Asia (see, e.g., Herring and Chatusripitak 2000). Lack of sound accounting/auditing systems
and high-quality bond-rating agencies is a factor. 26 Given low creditor protection and court
inefficiency (in China and most other emerging economies) the recovery rates for bondholders during
default are low, which in turn leads to underinvestment in the market (by domestic and foreign
investors). Lack of a well constructed yield curve is another factor in China, given the small size of
the publicly traded Treasury bond market and lack of historical prices. The situation is improving
however, as the terms of China’s Treasury bonds now ranges from one month to 30 years. In
December 2009, China’s first 50-year government bond made its trading debut simultaneously in the
interbank market and the stock exchange bond market, extending the bond yield curve even further.
26

Dagong Global Credit Ratings, a leading Chinese credit ratings agency, recently released its first sovereign ratings
report, in which the Chinese and German sovereign debt received higher ratings (AA+ and a stable outlook) than those of
US, the UK and Japan (AA or lower ratings and a negative outlook; Bloomberg, 7/14/2010).
26

The deficiencies in the term structure of interest rates have hampered the development of derivatives
markets that enable firms and investors to manage risk, as well as the effectiveness of the
government’s macroeconomic policies. Therefore, further development of China’s bond markets,
along with its legal system and related institutions, can help the advancement of other markets and
the overall financial system.
IV.3 Evidence on the Listed Sector
In this section, we briefly examine publicly listed and traded companies in China. It is
worthwhile to first clarify whether firms from the Hybrid Sector can become listed and publicly
traded. Regulations and laws (the 1986 trial version of the bankruptcy law and the 1999 version of
the Company Law) did not prohibit the listing of Hybrid Sector firms; and selected firms from the
Hybrid Sector did enter the Listed Sector through an IPO or acquisition of a listed firm from the
inception of SHSE and SZSE. However, the accessibility of equity markets for these firms has been
much lower than for former SOEs in practice due to the enforcement of the listing standards and
process. As a result, AQQ (2005) find that 80% of their sample of more than 1,100 listed firms are
converted from former SOEs. In recent years, the government has attempted to change the
composition of listed firms by relaxing regulations toward Hybrid Sector firms, including the
establishment of the recently opened GEM.
Until the recent share reform, which is discussed further below, listed firms in China issued
both tradable and nontradable shares (Table 6-A). The nontradable shares were either held by the
government or by other state-owned legal entities (i.e., other listed or non-listed firms or
organizations). Table 6-B shows that, as of the end of 2009, nontradable shares constituted around
half of all shares (53%, column 2) and the majority of tradable shares were A shares. Among the
tradable shares, Class A and B shares are listed and traded in either the SHSE or SZSE, while Class A
(B) shares are issued to and traded by Chinese investors (foreign investors including those from
Taiwan and Hong Kong and QFIIs). While the two share classes issued by the same firm are
identical in terms of shareholder rights (e.g., voting and dividend), B shares were traded at a
significant discount relative to A shares and are traded less frequently than A shares. 27 The “B share
discount” has been reduced significantly since the CSRC allowed Chinese citizens to invest and trade
B shares (with foreign currency accounts) in 2001. In addition, Class H shares, issued by selected

27

Explanations of the B share discount include: 1) Foreign investors face higher information asymmetry than domestic
investors, 2) lower B share prices compensate for the lack of liquidity (due to low trading volume), and 3) the A share
premium reflects a speculative bubble component among domestic investors. See, e.g., Chan, Menkveld, and Yang (2008)
and Mei, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2003) for more details.
27

“Red Chip” Chinese companies, are listed and traded on the HKSE. Finally, there are N shares and S
shares for firms listed in the U.S. and Singapore but operate in China (we omit discussions on these
shares since they are not listed on the domestic exchanges). After the share reforms discussed below
in Section IV.7, government shares became G shares and are tradable.
Insert Tables 6-A and 6-B here.
We next describe standard corporate governance mechanisms in the Listed Sector. First,
according to the (2005) Company Law, listed firms in China have a two-tier board structure: the
Board of Directors (five to nineteen members) and the Board of Supervisors (at least three members),
with supervisors ranking above directors. The main duty of the Board of Supervisors is to monitor
firms’ operations as well as top managers and directors; it consists of representatives of shareholders
and employees, with the rest either officials chosen from government branches or executives from the
parent companies; directors and top managers of the firms cannot hold positions as supervisors. The
company has the discretion to decide the number of representatives of employees on the Board of
Supervisors, but representatives of employees must account for at least one third of the board. The
Board of Directors serves similar duties as their counterparts in the U.S., including appointing and
firing CEOs. According to the “one-share, one-vote” scheme adopted by firms in the Listed Sector,
shareholders including the state and legal person shareholders (that typically own the majority of
shares) appoint the board members. Specifically, the Chairman (one person) and Vice Chairman (one
or two) of the Board are elected by all directors (majority votes); at the approval of the Board, the
CEO and other top managers can become members of the Board. The CSRC requires at least one
third (and a minimum of two people) of the Board to be independent.
Since the Law does not specify that every member of the Board must be elected by
shareholders during general shareholder meetings, in practice some directors are nominated and
appointed by the firms’ parent companies and the nomination process is usually kept secret, in
particular for former SOEs. Since not all members of either board are elected by shareholders, a
major problem with the board structure is the appointment of and contracting with the CEOs. Based
on firm-level compensation data (available since 1998 due to disclosure requirements), Fung et al.
(2003) and Kato and Long (2004) find that no listed firms grant stock options to CEOs or board
members. The situation is somewhat different now. Among overseas listed SOEs, barriers to
exercising stock options have been overcome, and some senior executives have been granted stock
options (examples include the former chairman of CNOOC Wei Liucheng and Bank of China-Hong
Kong former chairman Liu Mingkang) and received substantial rewards (Caijing Magazine, 2008).

28

However, the cash-based compensation level for CEOs is still much lower than their counterparts in
developed countries, and the consumption of perks, such as company cars, is prevalent.
Second, the existing ownership structure, characterized by the large amount of non-tradable
shares including cross-holdings of shares among listed companies and institutions, makes it difficult
for value-increasing M&As. According to the China Venture Source, there were 2,656 M&A deals
involving listed firms in 2010 totaling US$169.6 billion, a small fraction of the total market
capitalization. In many deals, a Hybrid Sector firm (non-listed) acquires a listed firm that is
converted from an SOE, but the large amount of non-tradable shares held by the state remain intact
after the transaction. 28 Such an acquisition can be the means through which low quality, non-listed
companies bypass listing standards and access financial markets (e.g., Du et al., 2008).
Third, one factor contributing to the occurrence of corporate scandals is the lack of
institutional investors (including non-depository financial intermediaries) as they are a very recent
addition to the set of financial institutions in China. Professional investors would perhaps not be so
easily taken in by simple deceptions. Another factor is that the enforcement of laws is questionable
due to the lack of legal professionals and institutions.
Fourth, the government plays the dual roles of regulator and blockholder for many listed firms,
including banks and financial services companies. The main role of the CSRC (counterpart of the
SEC in the U.S.) is to monitor and regulate stock exchanges and listed companies. The government
exercises its shareholder control rights in listed firms through the Bureau of National Assets
Management, which holds large fractions of nontradable shares, or other SOEs (with their holdings of
nontradable shares). However, since the senior managers of the Bureau are government officials, it is
doubtful that they will pursue their fiduciary role as controlling shareholders diligently, since their
compensation is probably not incentive-based; even if their compensation was tied to performance,
they may lack the expertise to make the correct strategic decisions. Moreover, the government’s dual
roles can lead to conflicting goals (maximizing profits as shareholder vs. maximizing social welfare
as regulator or social planner) in dealing with listed firms, which in turn weaken the effectiveness of
both of its roles. 29 There are cases in which the government, aiming to achieve certain social goals,
influenced the markets through state-owned institutional investors (e.g., asset management companies)
28

If we include the cross-border M&As and transactions between parent companies and subsidiaries, the total amount
increases to US $47 billion in 2000, $14 billion in 2001, $29 billion in 2002, and $24 billion in the first three quarters of
2003. 68% of all M&A deals (66% in terms of dollar deal amount) are initiated by Hybrid Sector firms, while former
SOEs and foreign firms initiate 29% and 3% of the rest, respectively (27% and 7% in deal amount). M&As are most
active in coastal regions, and in industries such as machinery, information technology, retail, and gas and oil.
29
See Pistor (2010) for a description of the complicated relationships among various regulatory agencies and the central
government branches, and how these relationships affect the decision-making process of regulations and enforcement.
29

but created unintended adverse effects. Based on a sample of 625 firms with 28% of the CEOs being
ex- or current government bureaucrats, Fan et al. (2007) find that the three-year post-IPO average
stock returns of the sample underperform the market by 20%, and the underperformance of firms
with such politically-connected CEOs exceeds those without politically-connected CEOs by almost
30%. Firms with politically-connected CEOs are also more likely to appoint other bureaucrats but
not personnel with relevant professional to boards of directors.
Overall, internal and external governance for the Listed Sector is weak, and further
development of governance mechanisms is likely in this sector going forward. In Section IV.7 below
we further discuss this issue..
IV.4 Real Estate Market
Like other economic sectors, China’s real estate market has long been operating under the
‘dual tracks’ of both central planning and market-oriented systems. Prior to 1998, government
control was dominant with the market only playing a secondary role, and mortgages were not
designated for retail customers and households. Chinese citizens working for the government and
government owned companies and organizations could purchase properties at prices significantly
below market prices, with the subsidies coming from their employers. The reform policies
introduced in 1998 aimed to end the distribution of properties by employers and establish new
housing finance and market systems. Provinces and autonomous regions have established programs
to sell properties (e.g., apartments in urban areas) to individuals instead of allocating residency as
part of the employment benefits.
Since 1998 the residential housing reform and the development of individual mortgages,
along with rising household income and demand for quality housing, had stimulated the fast growth
of the real estate market. Figure 4-A shows the total real estate investments and their funding sources
over time. Total investment increased from RMB 321 billion in 1996, 12% of the national fixed
assets investments, to RMB 4.8 trillion in 2010 and 20% of the national fixed assets investment.
Most of the investment funds have come from domestic sources. Not surprisingly, bank loans are the
most important source of real estate financing. China’s continuing economic growth especially in
private sectors, urbanization and industrialization, limited land supply, increasing foreign direct
investments and institutional investments, will further enhance the liquidity and long-term prospects
of China’s real estate assets.
As the real estate sector gained more weight in the economy, its impact on other industries,
especially the financial and banking industries, increased considerably. With the expansion of the

30

real estate market, banks and other financial institutions lent more to keep up with the demand for
financing. When the fast expansion, in part fueled by the inflows of speculative capital and agency
problems in investment, could not be sustained, increased demand led to hikes in property prices
andreal estate bubbles surfaced. The bursting of such bubbles can lead to painful consequences in the
entire economy.
Insert Figures 4-A, 4-B and 4-C here.
The real estate prices in major cities have risen sharply in recent years, and whether these fast
growing prices are ‘bubbles’ and how to cool down the markets are among the most closely watched
and hotly debated issues in China. We provide some simple analysis here; for a more thorough and
careful analysis see, e.g., Wu, Gyourko, and Deng (2011). Figure 4-B shows the trends of total
housing space developed vs. total space sold over the period 2002-2009 for the entire nation, and
Figure 4-C compares the growth rates of total housing space developed vs. total space sold; actual
space is normalized so that both charts begin at 100 in 2002; hence the vertical axis measures growth
rates. We can see that while total space developed and total space sold (for both residential and
nonresidential properties) grew at similar rates over the period (Figure 4-C), the gap between total
space developed and sold—a proxy for the inventory of housing supply in the markets—widened
from around 0.6 billion square meters in 2002 to 2.2 billion square meters in 2009.
In Figures 5-A through 5-E we plot and compare growth rates of average housing prices and
disposable household income, over the period 2002-2009, for the nation and the four major cities:
Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen and Guangzhou. Once again, actual housing prices (RMB per square
meter) and disposable income are normalized so that both charts begin at 100 in 2002; hence the
vertical axis measures growth rates and all the figures for prices and income are inflation adjusted.
Steady growth of disposable income in line with rising housing prices can help sustain the growth of
the housing markets, and hence considerable and increasing gaps in the growth rates reflect potential
bubbles in the housing markets. Based on the figures it appears that while at the national level and in
the city of Guangzhou there are no signs of bubbles, the opposite can be said for the large regional
markets in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, where housing prices are rising at much higher paces
than those of real disposable income in recent years. Shenzhen presents the most worrisome case,
where despite fast-rising housing prices fueled by the inflow of speculative capital, real household
income actually declined in 2008 and 2009 (from 2007 levels), perhaps (partially) due to the adverse
effects of the global financial crisis on the exporting sectors, which rely mainly on migrant workers
from other regions.

31

Insert Figures 5-A, 5-B, 5-C, 5-D, and 5-E here.
We would like to emphasize again that our results are based on simple measures; however,
analyses from Wu et al. (2011), who use more sophisticated metrics and regressions controlling for
other factors that may affect housing prices, yield similar results that there may well be bubbles in the
regional markets of Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen. There is some evidence that speculative
foreign capital (the “hot money”) flowing into China is partially responsible for the accelerated rise in
real estate markets (e.g., Chu and Sing, 2004; Guo and Huang, 2010). Given the rising status of the
Chinese economy and its currency, coupled with the weakening of the U.S. economy (and other
developed countries), the dollar and near-zero interest rates in most developed countries, the inflow
of ‘hot money’ into China’s real estate markets (and other sectors) may continue.
The government has been taking aggressive measures to control property prices. Since 2004,
it has issued new policies in order to suppress speculative activities; another policy measure to
control the growth of the real estate market is through the PBOC’s required reserve deposit ratio. In
2010 and 2011, in response to the fast rising housing prices, the government has announced a series
of interventions including: (a) increased equity down payment shares from 20% to 30% for first
homes of more than 90 square meters in size; (b) increased equity down payment shares from 40% to
50% for second homes; (c) general discouragement of the use of any leverage on third homes or by
external buyers (i.e., those not living in the market of the intended purchase); (d) new rules to prevent
developers from hoarding housing units; (e) preparation of the introduction of a local property tax,
with possible pilot implementations in Chongqing, a large city in the southwestern region that is
under direct control of the central government, within the next one to two years; and (f) direct
administrative orders on how much land and units of buildings can be developed. 30 Among these
measures, the proposed property tax may play a significant role in cooling down the markets, because
it would raise the cost of carry on speculative investments in owner-occupied housing.
Despite the government’s macroprudential policies in recent years and the newly announced
measures and strong signals in recent months, the impact of these measures on the housing markets
seems to be limited. One reason, as stipulated by many observers, is that since various government
agencies and officials have played a major role in developing ‘commercial properties’ it is not in their
best interest to see major market corrections. The evidence in Wu et al. (2011) provides some
support of this view. They find that much of the increase in housing prices is occurring in land
30

For more details, see “Gazette of Executive Meeting of the State Council,” December 14th, 2009; and “Circular of the
State Council on Resolutely Containing the Precipitous Rise of Housing Prices in Some Cities” (Decree No. [2010] 10),
April 17th, 2010, and Wu et al. (2011).
32

values. Using land auctions data from Beijing, they also find SOEs controlled by the central
government paid 27% more than other bidders for an otherwise equivalent land parcel. Since many
vested government officials have a lot to lose following a crash in the real estate markets, it is argued
that the new measures, including the proposed property taxes, will not be effectively enforced; such a
belief can also explain why speculative capital continues to enter the housing markets.
Given the experiences of many other countries in the recent and previous financial crises, the
government’s efforts in controlling the rise of housing markets in the aforementioned regions, and
preventing this spreading to other regions of the country can augment its other efforts in stabilizing
the economy and alleviating social tensions. In Section VI below we further examine how the inflow
of speculative capital and subsequent outflow can create bubbles in the markets and then the bursting
of the bubbles can spread to other sectors of the economy.

IV.5 Private Equity/Venture Capital and the Funding of New Industries
Allen and Gale (1999, 2000a) have suggested that stock market-based economies, such as the
U.K. in the 19th century and the U.S. in the 20th century, have been more successful in developing
new industries than intermediary-based economies such as Germany and Japan. They argue that
markets are better than banks for funding new industries, because evaluation of these industries based
on experience is difficult, and there is wide diversity of opinion. Stock market-based economies such
as the U.S. and U.K. also tend to have well-developed systems for the acquisition and distribution of
information, so the cost of information to investors is low. Markets then work well because investors
can gather information at low costs and those that anticipate high profits can provide the finance to
the firms operating in the new industries.
A key part of this process is the private equity/venture capital sector (see, e.g., Kortum and
Lerner 2000). Venture capitalists are able to raise large amounts of funds in the U.S. because of the
prospect that successful firms will be able to undertake an IPO. With data from 21 countries, Jeng
and Wells (2000) find that venture capital is less important in other countries, while the existence of
an active IPO market is the critical determinant of the importance of venture capital in a country.
This is consistent with the finding of Black and Gilson (1998) in a comparison of the U.S. and
Germany, that the primary reason venture capital is relatively successful in the U.S. is the active IPO
market that exists there.
These facts imply that the development of active venture capital and private equity markets
can increase the financing for China’s new industries. What is unusual about China (perhaps along

33

with India) is that it currently has the ability to develop both traditional industries, such as
manufacturing, and in the near future new, high-tech industries, such as aerospace, computer software,
semiconductors, and bio-genetics. This is different from the experience of South Korea and Taiwan
in the 1970s and that of most other emerging economies in the 1990s, as all these other countries
focused on developing manufacturing industries first. In terms of developing traditional industries
(e.g., Korea and Taiwan in the 1970s), China has already followed suit in first introducing advanced
(relative to domestic companies) but not the most advanced technologies from developed countries;
and “nationalizing” these technologies within designated companies before moving toward the more
advanced technologies. Allen and Gale (1999, 2000a) argue that banks are better than financial
markets for funding mature industries because there is wide agreement on how they are best managed,
so the delegation of the investment decision to a bank works well. This delegation process, and the
economies of scale in information acquisition through delegation, makes bank-based systems more
efficient in terms of financing the growth in these industries. Therefore, the banking system can
contribute more in supporting the growth and development of these industries than markets.

IV.6 Asset Management Industries
The mutual fund industry in China has gone through three stages of development. The first
stage is between 1992, when China’s first fund (LiuBo) was established, and 1997, when the first
version of the mutual fund regulation was drafted and passed by the CSRC. The LiuBo Fund was a
closed-end fund with NAV RMB100 million RMB ($12.5 million) and began to trade on the SHSE
in 1993. While the industry experienced fast growth in the few years after 1992, lack of regulation
and problems associated with fund trading hampered the further development of the industry. The
first open-end fund was established in September, 2001 (Hua An Chuangxin), following the
announcement of the proposal for open-end fund investment by the CSRC, a milestone for China’s
mutual fund industry.
Figure 6 shows the development of the mutual fund industry in China. With only a handful of
funds in 1998, China now has sixty-five fund companies managing 551 different funds as of
November 2009. The total net assets value increased from RMB11 billion (or $1.3 Billion) in 1998
to about RMB 2.26 trillion (or $328 billion) in November 2009 (this figure was much higher in the
second half of 2007 before the markets went south). In 2001, the NAV of all funds was about 0.8%
of GDP and 1.19% of total national savings; these figures rose to 6.16% of GDP and 8.58% of total
savings in 2008. The growth of open-end funds contributed to most of the growth in the industry. As

34

of November 2009, 520 funds are open-ended and 31 are close-ended, with 96% of the total fund
value managed by open-end funds. The most popular investment style is actively managed (domestic)
equity, with only a few index funds and ETFs (exchange traded funds).
Insert Figure 6 here.
Many mutual fund companies are owned by securities and other financial services companies.
Like their counterparts in the U.S., management fees are the major source of income for fund
companies, accounting for about 80% of total income. Administration fees account for 9% of total
income, and the rest of the income comes from investment and other incomes. More than half of the
fund managers have a master-level or higher academic degree, and the majority of them are 36 to 45
years old. Investment capital from institutional investors is about the same as that from individual
investors in 2005, but in 2006 individual investors account for 70% of the total mutual fund
investment. Among the 23 newly launched funds in the first half of 2009, individual investors
account for 75.8%.
The first fund managed by a qualified foreign institutional investor (QFII) was set up in 2002.
The State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) is the government agent that regulates the
QFII funds. The QFII Act allows foreign investors to invest in Chinese securities, with the intention
of introducing sophisticated foreign investors to the Chinese market with the hope that their presence
would improve market efficiency. In addition, with the exercise of their shareholder rights, their
presence can also help improve corporate governance of the Listed Sector. However, the original
QFII rules imposed restrictions on foreign investors, such as a capital lock-up period of one to three
years limiting capital withdrawal (and leaving China) and other operating restrictions. In August
2006, CSRC revised QFII rules to promote more participation from foreign investors. Under the new
rules, there has been a significant increase in applications from foreign investors for QFII quotas.
Most of the institutions in the first group of QFII applicants were securities companies and
investment banks, with other financial services companies such as insurance companies and pension
fund companies also on the list. By the end of July 2006, China had approved a total of $7.495
billion foreign investment capital (quota) from 45 QFIIs, or three quarters of the then ceiling of $10
billion capital inflow through QFIIs. In December 2007, the investment quota/ceiling tripled, from
$10 billion to $30 billion. In September 2009, draft rules were issued by SAFE to increase the
upward limit of investment for an individual QFII institution to $1 billion from the previous $800
million. Some analysts believe that the move to increase the QFII quota was also intended to prepare
for the large amount of floating of non-tradable shares. If the holders of the newly floated shares rush

35

to sell, QFII funds can be a stabilizing source of the market. As of August 2011, there were a total of
116 approved QFIIs operating in China, of which 103 were investment funds. The approved
investment quotas reached $20.69 billion.
The approval of qualified domestic institutional investors (QDII) to invest in overseas markets
came after QFII, in July 2006. The QDII funds invest in stocks, bonds, real estate investment trusts
and other mainstream financial products in markets such as New York, London, Tokyo and Hong
Kong. Similarly to the QFII scheme, it is a transitional arrangement that provides limited
opportunities for domestic investors to access foreign markets at a stage in which a country/territory’s
currency is not freely convertible and capital flows are restricted. As of early 2008, ten fund
companies had obtained the approval to launch QDII. The total number of QDII funds reached 75 in
July 2009. By April 2011, QDIIs had approved investment quotas of $72.67 billion. Given the
recent turmoil in the global financial markets, the performance of the QDII funds has been less than
stellar. Going forward, the probable continuing appreciation of the RMB against major international
currencies including the dollar is a major concern for QDII investors.
China’s asset management industry is expected to continue its growth in the near future. In
the U.S., mutual funds became the largest group of financial intermediaries in financial markets in
1999, holding 29% of all financial assets. By contrast, mutual funds in China only held around 8.1%
of all financial assets as at the end of 2009. The further growth of the economy and continuing reform
of the pension system will generate both demand and supply of capital for the industry. If the trend
of opening up domestic markets to foreign investors continues, there will be a greater inflow of QFIIs.

IV.7 Further Changes in Financial Markets
As we have documented, the financial markets in China do not currently play nearly as
important a role as banks. Going forward, further improvements in the operation of China’s financial
markets can help to promote the development of high-technology industries as discussed in Section
IV.5. In addition, developing new financial products and markets can enhance the risk management
capabilities of China’s financial institutions and firms. Finally, deep and efficient markets can
provide an alternative to banks for raising large amounts of capital.
In recent years the performance of the stock markets has been volatile. This is somewhat
surprising given the robust performance of the real economy. We attribute this (relatively) poor
performance to a number of factors including the following:
(i)

Limited self-regulation and formal regulation.

36

(ii)

The large overhang of shares owned by government entities.

(iii)

The lack of listed firms originating in the Hybrid Sector.

(iv)

The lack of trained professionals.

(v)

The lack of institutional investors.

(vi)

Limited financial markets and products.

Efforts have been made to address some of these weaknesses. However, some of these are
problems can only be tackled over the long run. We discuss each in turn.
Regulations
There are two ways in which markets are regulated in practice and each has advantages and
disadvantages: first, market forces and self-regulation, and second, government regulation.
A good example of regulation through market forces and self-regulation is provided by the
capital markets in the UK in the nineteenth and early twentieth century (Michie, 1987). The role of
government regulation and intervention was minimal. Despite this the markets did extremely well
and London became the financial capital of the world. Many firms and countries from all over the
world raised large amounts of funds. Reputation and trust were an important factor in the smooth
operation of these markets. For example, Franks et al. (2003) compare the early twentieth century
capital markets with those in the mid-twentieth century. Despite extensive changes in the laws
protecting minority shareholders there was very little change in the ways in which the market
operated. The authors attribute this to the importance of trust.
We argue below that China’s Hybrid sector is another example of a situation where market
forces are effective. Formal regulation and legal protections do not play much of a role and yet
financing and governance mechanisms are quite effective. In this case, as we shall see, it appears that
competition as well as reputation and trust work well.
In contrast, the examples of fraud and other problems of manipulation and the inefficiency of
markets pointed to in Section IV.1 suggest that in China’s formal financial markets these alternative
mechanisms do not work well. Although such mechanisms may develop in the long run as in the
nineteenth and early twentieth century U.K., in the short run formal government regulation of the
type introduced in the U.S. in the 1930s and subsequently as a response to the stock market collapse
that started in 1929 and the Great Depression may allow Chinese markets to function better. There is
evidence from many countries that this type of formal regulation is effective. For example, based on
a study of securities laws with the focus on the public issuance of new equity in 49 countries (China

37

is not included) LLS (2006) find that disclosure and liability rules help to promote stock market
development.
Sale of Government Shares in Listed Firms
One of the major problems Chinese stock markets have faced in recent years has been caused
by the large amount of shares in listed companies owned by the government and government entities
shown in Table 6-B. The Chinese government attempted sales of state shares of selected firms in
1999 and 2001, but halted the process both times after share prices plunged and investors grew
panicky about the value of the entire market. This overhang created great uncertainty about the
quantity of shares that would come onto the market going forward. This uncertainty was probably in
part responsible for the stagnation of share prices between 2002 and 2005 despite the very high levels
of growth in the economy.
In 2005 the government announced a plan of “fully floating” state shares. Under the plan, the
remaining state shares among listed firms were converted to “G” shares. The CSRC outlined the
format for compensating existing shareholders and also imposed lockups and restrictions on the
amount of G shares that could be sold immediately after they became tradable. More specifically, the
plan stipulated that G shares were not to be traded or transferred within 12 months after the
implementation of the share structure reform. Shareholders owning more than 5% of the original
non-tradable shares can only trade less than 5% of the total shares outstanding within one year and
less than 10% within 2 years. These restrictions of G share sales were intended to reduce the
downward pressure on the stock price, maintain market stability and protect the interests of public
investors. The details of the “fully floating plan” for a firm, including the number of G shares to be
granted to each Class A shareholder and the time window (e.g., one to three years) of G shares
become fully floating, had to be approved by two thirds of Class A shareholders of the firm.
Share reforms began with a pilot program with only four companies participating in April
2005. By the end of 2006, 96% of all the listed companies had completed share reforms; by the end
of 2007, there were only a few companies that had not reached an agreement with their shareholders
on the terms of the reform. 31 As documented in Table 6-B above, as of September 2009, for the first

31

Hwang et al. (2006) document that share reform increases turnover, especially for firms with low liquidity prior to the
reform, and reduces speculative trading. Although share prices drop significantly on the day of share supply increases,
shareholder wealth increases by 15% overall. Beltratti and Bortolotti (2006) document an 8% abnormal return around the
date of share reform announcement. Liao and Liu (2008) show that market reactions to share reforms are positively
associated with the quality of the listed firms (as measured by firm disclosure), providing evidence of improved market
efficiency.
38

time tradable shares accounted for more than half of the stock market, suggesting that the floating of
nontradable shares is progressing.
Another fact worth mentioning is that for the firms that go public (IPOs) after the share
reform, not all of their stocks are immediately floated to the market. Lock-up periods may still apply
to large shareholders who obtained the shares before the IPO. For example, in the case of ABC’s
recent IPO, the majority of A shares (87.6%) have already been distributed to various agencies of the
government before the IPO. In fact, only 25.5 billions A shares (8.6% of total outstanding A shares)
were issued in the IPO. Those shares held by the government have a lock-up for 3 years. However,
they are technically A (not G) shares. Thus no compensation will be paid when those shares become
freely tradable.
The Listing of Firms from the Hybrid Sector
One of the major problems of the stock exchanges is that most of the firms listed are former
SOEs. Relatively few are firms from the more dynamic Hybrid Sector. Reforming listing
requirements and procedures to make it advantageous for dynamic and successful companies to
become listed on the exchanges can enhance the overall quality of the Listed Sector. The
establishment of the recently opened “GEM” provides an example in this regard.
The Training of More Professionals
This step will allowan improvement in the enforcement of laws and contracts. An independent
and efficient judicial system requires a sufficient supply of qualified legal professionals. The
Ministry of Justice of China states that there are 143,000 lawyers and 12,428 law firms as of 2007.
Two hundred and six out of China’s 2,000 counties still do not have lawyers. Lawyers represent only
10% to 25% of all clients in civil and business cases, and even in criminal prosecutions, lawyers
represent defendants in only half of the cases. Among the approximately five million business
enterprises in China, only 4% of them currently have regular legal advisers. Moreover, only one-fifth
of all lawyers in China have law degrees, and even a lower fraction of judges have formally studied
law at a university or college. As mentioned before, a similar situation exists for auditors and
accounting professionals.
Institutional Investors
In most developed stock markets institutional investors, such as insurance companies, pension
funds, mutual funds, and hedge funds, play an important role. They employ well-trained
professionals who are able to evaluate companies well. This causes markets to have a higher degree
of efficiency than if they are dominated by individual investors. In addition, there can be advantages

39

in terms of corporate governance if institutional investors actively participate in the monitoring of
firms’ managers and are directly involved in firms’ decision-making process as blockholders of
stocks. For example, in the U.S., pension funds such as CALPERS have become the symbol of
shareholder activism that strengthens corporate governance, while in Japan and Germany, financial
intermediaries serve similar purposes. For China, the efficiency of China’s stock markets as well as
corporate governance of listed firms can be improved by further entry of domestic financial
intermediaries that can act as institutional investors. With their large-scale capital and expertise in all
relevant areas of business, financial intermediaries can provide a level of stability and
professionalism that is sorely lacking in China’s financial markets.
Currently institutional investors such as insurance companies, mutual funds and pension funds
are relatively small in terms of assets held given their early stage of development. However, they are
expanding dramatically. Among policies that can further encourage the development of such
intermediaries are those that provide tax advantages to various types of products such as life
insurance and pension related savings and investments.
A Greater Range of Financial Products and Markets
More financial products allow investors to form diversified portfolios with more than just
stocks. As discussed above, corporate bond markets, along with better enforcement of bankruptcy
laws and bond rating agencies, provide an alternative class of assets to stocks. Second, the
introduction of more derivative securities such as forwards, futures, and options on commodities
(already in place and trading) as well as on other securities, enlarges the risk management toolbox of
investors and firms. In fact, China has launched an index future on April 16th, 2010, tracking the
Shanghai-based Hushen 300, the index of 300 Shanghai- and Shenzhen listed class A-shares. On the
first day four contacts were traded. Of the 2,200 index future accounts opened as of May 4, 2010, 95%
of them were individuals, and the rest were institutional investors. The proportion of institutional
investors is expected to rise in the future, since the index future is targeted mainly toward more
sophisticated investors for hedging purposes. The launch of this long awaited index future is a major
step in the reform of capital markets in China and introduces a new tool for risk management. Along
with the index future, margin trading and short selling of shares were also permitted in April.
Third, the expansion of their coverage and products (e.g., in property and auto insurance as
well as life and medical insurance) by insurance companies, and the introduction and development of
asset-backed securities and other structured finance products by financial services companies can
further diversify the supply of financial products.

40

V. The Non-standard Financial Sector and Evidence on Hybrid Sector Firms
In this section we study how the non-standard financial sector supports firms in the Hybrid
Sector to raise funds and to grow from start-ups to successful industry leaders. We also examine the
alternative governance mechanisms employed by investors and firms that can substitute for formal
corporate governance mechanisms. Due to data limitations, much of this evidence is by necessity
anecdotal or by survey. 32
We first compare the Hybrid Sector with the State and Listed Sectors to highlight the
importance of its status in the entire economy in Section V.1. Second, we consider survey evidence
in Section V.2. Finally, Section V.3 provides discussions and comparisons of alternative financing
channels and governance mechanisms that support the growth of the Hybrid Sector versus formal
financing channels (through banks and markets) and governance mechanisms (laws and courts).
V.1 Comparison of Hybrid Sector vs. State and Listed Sectors
Figure 7-A compares the level and growth of industrial output produced in the State and
Listed Sectors combined vs. that of the Hybrid Sector from 1998 to 2009. 33 The output from the
Hybrid Sector has been steadily increasing during this period and exceeded that of the other two
sectors in 1998. The total output in 2009 is almost $5,700 billion for the Hybrid Sector, while it is
around $2,500 billion in the State and Listed Sectors combined. 34 The Hybrid Sector grew at an
annual rate of over 23% between 1998 and 2009, while the State and Listed Sectors combined grew
at around 15% during the same period. 35 In addition, the growth rates for investment in fixed assets
of these sectors are comparable (China Statistics Yearbooks; and AQQ (2005)), which implies that
the Hybrid Sector is more productive than the State and Listed Sectors. In fact, with large samples of
firms (from sources) with various ownership structures, Liu (2007) and Dollar and Wei (2007) both
32

All firms including Hybrid Sector firms must disclose accounting and financial information to the local Bureau of
Commerce and Industry, and most of the reports are audited. However, these data are then aggregated into the Statistical
Yearbook without any firm-level publications.
33
The National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China revised its total industrial output statistics in the 2000 year book
without any explicit explanations. The outputs in previous years (i.e. 1997) were significantly revised down compared to
the 1998 year book. To be consistent and avoid confusion, we only use data from the NBS after 1998.
34
Due to data limitations, our calculations underestimate the output of the State and Listed Sectors. We use the output
produced by SOEs and listed firms in which the state has at least a 50% ownership stake as the total output for these
sectors, but this calculation excludes output from listed firms that are not majority owned by the state; the output for the
Hybrid Sector is the difference between the total output and the total for the other two sectors. However, as mentioned
above, only around 20% of all listed firms do not have the state as the largest owner, hence the total output of these firms
is not likely to change our overall conclusion on the dominance of the Hybrid Sector over the other two sectors.
35
There is an ongoing process of privatizing SOEs. Potentially this may bias the growth rate of the Hybrid Sector higher,
as there are firms shifting from the State Sector to the Hybrid Sector. However, the overwhelming majority of SOEs
became Listed Sector firms (the main channel through which SOEs were partially privatized prior to 2004), thus this
process is unlikely to change the validity of the results above.
41

find that the returns to capital is much higher in non-state sectors than the State Sector, and that a
capital reallocation from state to private sectors will generate more growth in the economy. Fan et al.
(2006) and Li et al. (2007) find that state-owned firms in China have a much easier access to the debt
market and accordingly higher leverage than non-state firms. One reason for the differences is that
due to government protection (for economic and social/political reasons) the costs for bankruptcy and
financial distress are much lower for state-owned firms. These firms also have easier access to bank
loans, especially credit extended by state-owned banks.
All of the above facts make the growth of the Hybrid Sector even more impressive. Not
surprisingly, there has been a fundamental change among the State, Listed, and Hybrid Sectors in
terms of their contribution to the entire economy: the State Sector contributed more than two thirds of
China’s GDP in 1980 and (non-agricultural) privately owned firms, a type of Hybrid Sector firm,
were negligible, but in 2009 the State Sector only contributed 30% of the GDP (China Statistical
Yearbook, 1998-2010). The above trend of the Hybrid Sector replacing the State Sector is likely to
continue in the near future.
Insert Figures 7-A and 7-B here.
Figure 7-B presents the number and growth of non-agricultural employees in the three sectors.
The Hybrid Sector is a much more significant source for employment opportunities than the State and
Listed Sectors. Over the period from 1990 to 2010, the Hybrid Sector employs an average of over 77%
of all non-agricultural workers; the TVEs (part of the Hybrid Sector) have been the most important
employers providing (non-agricultural) jobs for residents in the rural areas, while (non-agricultural)
privately owned firms employ more than 40% of the workforce in the urban areas. Moreover, the
number of employees working in the Hybrid Sector has been growing at 1.5% over this period, while
the labor force in the State and Listed Sectors has been shrinking. 36 These patterns are particularly
relevant for China, given its vast population and potential problem of unemployment.
V.2 Survey Evidence
Much of the information concerning the Hybrid Sector comes from surveys. We focus on
evidence in AQQ (2005) and Cull and Xu (2005). The most significant findings of these surveys
regarding financing channels are the following. First, during the startup stage, funds from founders’
family and friends are an essential source of financing. Banks can also play an important role.
36

Our calculations of the total number of workers employed by the Hybrid Sector actually underestimate the actual work
force in the sector, because the Chinese Statistics Yearbooks do not provide employment data for all types of firms (by
ownership structure), especially small firms, in the Hybrid Sector.
42

Second, internal financing, in the form of retained earnings, is also important. During their growth
period financing from private credit agencies (PCAs), instead of banks, as well as trade credits are
key channels for firms in AQQ’s sample. As documented by Tsai (2002), PCAs take on many forms,
from shareholding cooperative enterprises run by professional money brokers, lenders and
middlemen, to credit associations operated by a group of entrepreneurs (raising money from group
members and from outsiders to fund firms; zijin huzushe), from pawnshops to underground private
money houses.
As far as corporate governance is concerned, when asked about what type of losses concern
them the most if the firm failed, every firm’s founders/executives (100%) included in the AQQ study
said reputation loss is a major concern, while only 60% of them said economic losses are of major
concern. Competition also appears to be an important factor ensuring firms are well run.
Cull and Xu (2005) find that firms in most regions and cities rely on courts to resolve less
than 10% of business-related disputes (the highest percentage is 20%), with a higher reliance on
courts in coastal and more developed areas. One reason that firms go to courts to resolve a dispute is
because the courts are authoritative so that the dispute will be resolved even though the resolution
may not be fair (e.g., Clarke et al. 2008).
V.3 Discussion on How the Non-standard Financial Sector Works
In this subsection we first discuss mechanisms within the non-standard financial sector in
supporting the growth of the Hybrid Sector. We then compare these alternative institutions that
operate outside the legal system with the law and legal institutions that have been widely regarded as
the basis for conducting finance and commerce. There are two aspects to alternative financing
channels in the Hybrid Sector. The first is the way in which investment is financed. The second is
corporate governance. We consider each in turn.
Once a firm is established and doing well, internal finance can provide the funds necessary for
growth. AQQ (2005) find that about 60 percent of the funds raised by the Hybrid Sector are
generated internally. Of course, internal finance is fine once a firm is established but this raises the
issue of how firms in the Hybrid Sector acquire their “seed” capital, perhaps the most crucial
financing during a firm’s life cycle. AQQ present evidence on the importance of alternative and
informal channels, including funds from family and friends and loans from private (unofficial) credit
agencies (see also Tsai (2002)). There is also evidence that financing through illegal channels, such
as smuggling, bribery, insider trading and speculations during early stages of the development of
financial markets and real estate market, and other underground or unofficial businesses can also play

43

a critical role in the accumulation of seed capital.
Perhaps the most significant corporate governance mechanism is competition in product and
input markets, which has worked well in both developed and developing countries (e.g., McMillan
1995, 1997; Allen and Gale 2000b). What we see from the success of Hybrid Sector firms in
WenZhou and other surveyed firms recounted in AQQ, suggest that it is only those firms that have
the strongest comparative advantage in an industry (of the area) that survived and thrived. A relevant
factor for competition in an industry is entry barriers for new firms, as lower entry barriers foster
competition. Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (DLLS hereafter, 2002) examine
entry barriers across 85 countries, and find that countries with heavier (lighter) regulation of entry
have higher government corruption (more democratic and limited governments) and larger unofficial
economies. With much lower barriers to entry compared to other countries with similar (low) per
capita GDP, China is once again an “outlier” in the DLLS sample given that China is one of the least
democratic countries, and such countries tend to have high barriers to entry. Survey evidence from
AQQ (2005) reveals that there exist non-standard methods to remove entry barriers in China, which
can reconcile these seemingly contradictory facts.
Another mechanism is reputation, trust, and relationships. Greif (1989, 1993) argues that
certain traders’ organizations in the 11th century were able to overcome problems of asymmetric
information and the lack of legal and contract enforcement mechanisms, because they had developed
institutions based on reputation, implicit contractual relations, and coalitions. Certain aspects of the
growth of these institutions resemble what worked to promote commerce and the financial system in
China prior to 1949 (e.g., Kirby (1995)) and the operation of the non-standard financial sector today
(AQQ (2005)), in terms of how firms raise funds and contract with investors and business partners.
In addition, Greif (1993) and Stulz and Williamson (2003) point out the importance of cultural and
religious beliefs for the development of institutions, legal origins, and investor protections.
The above factors are of particular relevance and importance to China’s development of
institutions. Without a dominant religion, some argue that the most important force in shaping
China’s social values and institutions is the set of beliefs first developed and formalized by Kongzi
(Confucius). This set of beliefs clearly defines family and social orders, which are very different
from western beliefs on how legal codes are formulated. Using the World Values Survey conducted
in the early 1990s, LLSV (1997b) find that China has one of the highest levels of social trust among a

44

group of 40 developed and developing countries. 37 We interpret high social trust in China as being
influenced by Confucian beliefs. Throughout this chapter and AQQ (2005; 2008) we have presented
evidence that reputation and relationships make many financing channels and governance
mechanisms work in China’s Hybrid Sector.
There are other effective corporate governance mechanisms. First, Burkart et al. (2003) link
the degree of separation of ownership and control to different legal environments, and show that
family-run firms will emerge as the dominant form of ownership structure in countries with weak
minority shareholder protections, whereas professionally managed firms are the optimal form in
countries with strong protection. Survey evidence on the Hybrid Sector in AQQ and empirical results
on the Listed Sector, along with evidence in Claessens et al. (2000, 2002) and ACDQQ (2008),
suggests that family firms are a norm in China and other Asian countries, and these firms have
performed well. Second, Allen and Gale (2000a) show that, if cooperation among different suppliers
of inputs is necessary and all suppliers benefit from the firm doing well, then a good equilibrium with
no external governance is possible, as internal, mutual monitoring can ensure the optimal outcome.
AQQ (2005) and ACDQQ (2008) present evidence on the importance of trade credits as a form of
financing for firms in the Hybrid Sector. Cooperation and mutual monitoring can ensure payments
(as long as funds are available) among business partners despite the lack of external monitoring and
contract enforcement. The importance of trade credits is also found in other emerging economies
(e.g., ACDQQ (2012) on India) as well as in developed countries (Burkart et el. (2011) on the U.S.).
It is worth mentioning how entrepreneurs and investors alleviate and overcome problems
associated with government corruption. According to proponents of institutional development (e.g.,
Rajan and Zingales 2003b; Acemoglu and Johnson 2005), poor institutions, weak government and
powerful elites can severely hinder China’s long-run economic growth. However, our evidence
shows that corruption has not prevented a high rate of growth for China’s firms, in particular, firms in
the Hybrid Sector, where legal protection is perhaps weaker and problems of corruption worse
compared to firms in the State and Listed sectors.
A potentially effective solution for corruption is competition among local
governments/bureaucrats from different regions within the same country. Entrepreneurs can move
from region to region to find the most supportive government officials for their private firms, which
in turn motivates officials to lend “helping hands” rather than “grabbing hands” in the provision of
37

Interestingly, the same survey, used in LLSV (1997b), finds that Chinese citizens have a low tendency to participate in
civil activities. However, our evidence shows that, with effective alternative mechanisms in place citizens in the
developed regions of China have a strong incentive to participate in business/economic activities.
45

public goods or services (e.g., granting of licenses to start-up firms), or else there will be an outflow
of profitable private businesses from the region (Allen and Qian 2009). This remedy is typically
available in a large country with diverse regions like China. Complementing this view, Xu (2011)
reviews China’s unique institutional foundation of “regionally decentralized authoritarian system,” in
which the sub-national governments have considerable autonomous power over regional economic
decisions and at the same time remain under the control of the central government. Under this
structure, local governments play a major role in supporting TVEs, allocating bank credits to firms,
choosing good firms to get listed. This system alleviates the information problem that regulators face,
and creates incentives for sub-national governors though personnel control and regional competition.
Xu argues that this governance structure is responsible for the spectacular economic growth of China,
despite weak enforcement of formal laws.
To summarize, the extraordinary economic performance of China in recent decades,
especially that of the Hybrid Sector, raises questions about the conventional wisdom of using the
legal system as the basis of commerce. Most observers would characterize the economic
performance in China and India as ‘successful despite the lack of western-style institutions,’ and the
failure to adopt western institutions will be one of the main factors to halt the long-run economic
growth. By contrast, Allen and Qian (2010) argue that China’s economy has been successful because
of this lack of western-style institutions – in that conducting business outside the legal system in fastgrowing economies such as China can actually be superior to using the law as the basis for finance
and commerce.
Focusing on dispute resolution and contract enforcement mechanisms based on the law and
courts vs. alternative mechanisms operating outside the legal system, Allen and Qian (2010) argue
that despite many well-known advantages, there are disadvantages in using legal institutions. First,
recent research on political economy factors, and in particular, work by Rajan and Zingales (2003a,b)
shows that rent-seeking behaviors by vested interest groups can turn legal institutions into barriers to
changes. We expect these problems to be much more severe in developing countries and the costs of
building good institutions can be enormous. 38 One way to solve this problem is not to use the law as
the basis for commerce but instead to use alternative mechanisms outside the legal system. Evidence
38

A frequently talked about and controversial topic is intellectual property rights including patents and copyrights. The
practice of enforcing intellectual property rights by courts is much more vigilant and prevalent in developed countries
than in developing countries such as China. An extensive literature in economics has found mixed evidence on the
relationship between patent/copyright protection and the pace of innovations. While exclusive property rights provide
strong incentives for innovations and do lead to more innovations in a few industries such as chemicals and
pharmaceuticals, excessive protection deters competition, which is another important factor in spurring innovations.
46

presented in this chapter and other related work on China and other emerging economies (e.g.,
ACDQQ (2012) on India) suggests that these alternative mechanisms can be quite effective.
Second, in democracies there can be a lengthy political process before significant changes can
be approved (by the majority of the population and/or legislature), and the people in charge of
revising the law (e.g., politicians and judges) may lack the expertise of business transactions and have
limited capacity (time and effort) to examine the proposed changes. 39 In the context of a fastgrowing economy with frequent changes such as China, Allen and Qian (2010) show that there is an
additional advantage of using alternative institutions because this type of system can adapt and
change much more quickly than when the law is used. In particular, competition can ensure the most
efficient mechanism prevails and this process does not require persuading the legislature and the
electorate to revise the law when circumstances change.
To conclude, we argue that while legal institutions along with formal financing channels are
an integral part of developed economies’ institutions, alternative mechanisms and financing channels
play a much more prominent role in emerging economies, and can be superior to legal mechanisms in
supporting business transactions in certain industries or entire economies. Therefore, the
development of alternative dispute resolution and contract enforcement mechanisms alongside the
development of legal and other formal institutions can promote a broader base of economic growth
that is also more sustainable in emerging economies. The coexistence of and competition between
alternative and legal mechanisms can also exert positive impact on the development of legal
institutions, so that they are less likely to be captured by interest groups and become more efficient in
adapting to changes.

VI. Financial Crises
Financial crises often accompany the development of a financial system. Conventional
wisdom says that financial crises are bad. Often they are very bad, as they disrupt production and
lower social welfare as in the Great Depression in the U.S. Hoggarth et al. (2002) carefully measure
the costs of a wide range of recent financial crises and find that these costs are on average roughly
15-20 percent of GDP. It is these large costs that make policymakers so averse to financial crises.
39

A good example is the U.S. payment system. At the beginning of the 21st Century the U.S. had a 19th Century system:
Checks had to be physically transported from where they were deposited to a central operations center, then to the clearer
and then back to the banks they were drawn on. Despite repeated calls for changes from the banks and businesses, the U.S
Congress did not act on this simple yet costly problem, until after September 11, 2001. After the terrorist attack all
commercial flights were grounded for several days, completely halting the check clearing process. The Check Clearing
for the 21st Century Act was signed in October 2003, allowing electronic images to be a substitute for the original checks,
and thus the clearing process is no longer dependent on the mail and transportation system.
47

It is worthwhile to point out, however, that financial crises may be welfare improving for an
economy. One possible example is the late nineteenth century U.S., which experienced many crises
but at the same time had a high long run growth rate. In fact, Ranciere et al. (2003) report an
empirical observation that countries which have experienced occasional crises have grown on
average faster than countries without crises. They develop an endogenous growth model and show
theoretically that an economy may be able to attain higher growth when firms are encouraged by a
limited bailout policy to take more credit risk in the form of currency mismatch, even though the
country may experience occasional crises (see Allen and Oura (2004) for a review of the growth and
crises literature, Allen and Gale (2004a) who show that crises can be optimal and Allen and Gale
(2007) for a review of the crises literature).
In this section, we consider financial crises in China. Given China’s current situation with
limited currency mismatches any crisis that occurs is likely to be a classic banking, currency or twin
crisis. It is perhaps more likely to be of the damaging type that disrupts the economy and social
stability than of the more benign type that aids growth. The desirability of preventing crises thus
needs to be taken into account when considering reforms of China’s financial system. First, we
examine how China can prevent traditional financial crises, including a banking sector crisis and a
stock market or real estate crisis/crash. We then discuss the impact of different types of financial
crises, such as the “twin crises” (simultaneous foreign exchange and banking/stock market crises)
that occurred in many Asian economies in the late 1990s, on China.
VI.1 Banking Crises and Market Crashes
Among traditional financial crises, banking panics, arising from the banks’ lack of liquid
assets to meet total withdrawal demands (anticipated and unanticipated), were often particularly
disruptive. Over time one of the most critical roles of central banks came to be the elimination of
banking panics and the maintenance of financial stability. To a large degree central banks in different
countries performed well in this regard in the period following the Second World War. However, in
recent years, banking crises are often preceded by abnormal price rises (“bubbles”) in the real estate
and/or stock markets. At some point the bubble bursts and assets markets collapse. In many cases
banks and other intermediaries are overexposed to the equity and real estate markets, and following
the collapse of asset markets a banking crisis ensues. Allen and Gale (2000c) provide a theory of
bubbles and crises based on the existence of an agency problem. Many investors in real estate and
stock markets obtain their investment funds from external sources. If the providers of the funds are
unable to observe the characteristics of the investment, and because of the investors’ limited liability,

48

there is a classic risk-shifting problem (Jensen and Meckling 1976). Risk shifting increases the return
to risky assets and causes investors to bid up asset prices above their fundamental values. A crucial
determinant for asset prices is the amount of credit that is provided for speculative investment.
Financial liberalization, by expanding the volume of credit, can interact with the agency problem and
lead to a bubble in asset prices.
As discussed above in Section III, if NPLs continue to accumulate and/or if growth slows
significantly then there may be a banking crisis in China. This may involve withdrawal of funds
from banks. However, given the government’s strong position regarding the low level of debt (Table
3-A), it is feasible for the government to prevent this situation from getting out of control. Since the
real estate markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen (largest volume and most developed) and other major
cities have already experienced bubbles and crashes (see China Industry Report,
http://www.cei.gov.cn, http://house.focus.cn and Cao (2008) for more details), it is quite possible that
similar episodes in the future could cause a banking crisis that will be more damaging to the real
economy. With booming real estate markets, there will be more speculative money poured into
properties with a large amount coming from banks. The agency problem in real estate lending and
investment mentioned above worsens this problem. If the real estate market falls significantly within
a short period of time, defaults on bank loans could be large enough to trigger a banking panic and
crisis. The size of the stock market during the first decade of its existence was small relative to the
banking sector and the overall economy, and hence a crash in the market could hardly put a dent in
the real economy. However, given the quick growth of the stock market (as shown in Table 5-A) and
the fact large and small investors may borrow (from banks) to finance their investment, especially
during a bubble period, a future market crash could have much more serious consequences. Overall,
a banking crisis triggered by crashes in the real estate and/or stock markets represents the most
serious risk of a financial crisis in China.
Having said that, we also want to point out that the Chinese government has maintained
strong control over the big banks through their (nontradable) shareholdings. While government
control may have a negative effect in more developed countries in terms of efficiency, it may be
beneficial in countries with less developed financial markets. In particular, the government can help
to control the risk taking behaviors of the banks by regulations and direct interventions as a
shareholder. Moreover, in the case of a crisis, the government has the ability to speed up the
recovery and maintain the stability of the market by loan expansion if it has control over major banks.
In fact, the Chinese banking sector and financial markets were not affected much by the 2007-2009

49

global financial crisis. Though we recognized earlier in the paper that government’s dual roles as
regulator and as majority owner can be problematic, this can also be beneficial both in terms of
preventing and coping with a crisis.

VI.2 Capital Account Liberalization, Sterilization, Twin Crises and Contagion
After the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, a different breed of
financial crisis emerged. Lindgren, Garcia, and Saal (1996) found that three quarters of the IMF’s
member countries suffered some form of banking crisis between 1980 and 1996, and their study did
not include the subsequent Asian financial crisis in 1997. In many of these crises, banking panics in
the traditional sense were avoided either by central bank intervention or by explicit or implicit
government guarantees. But as Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) find, the advent of financial
liberalization in many economies in the 1980s, in which free capital in- and out-flows and the
entrance and competition from foreign investors and financial institutions follow in the home country,
has often led to “twin” banking and currency crises. A common precursor to these crises was
financial liberalization and significant credit expansion and subsequent stock market crashes and
banking crises. In emerging markets this is often then accompanied by an exchange rate crisis as
governments choose between lowering interest rates to ease the banking crises or raising them to
defend the home currency. Finally, a significant fall in output occurs and the economies enter
recessions.
Liberalization of the Capital Account and Financial Sector
Capital account liberation can attract more foreign capital, but large scale and sudden capital
flows and foreign speculation significantly increase the likelihood of a twin crisis. The first key
question is, when and to what extent a country opens its capital account and financial sector to
foreign capital and foreign financial institutions? With a model of endogenous financial
intermediation, Alessandria and Qian (2005) demonstrate that an efficient financial sector prior to
liberalization is neither necessary nor sufficient for a successful financial liberalization. Applying
these ideas to China, even though the overall efficiency of China’s banking sector (especially stateowned banks) is still low compared to international standards, banks can have a stronger incentive to
limit the moral hazard concerning borrowers’ choices of investment projects through monitoring and
designing of loan contracts (e.g., adjusting interest rates and/or maturities) following a capital
account liberalization. Therefore, the efficiency of the banking sector improves and the liberalization
can generate a large welfare increase, since it leads to both a larger scale of investment and a better

50

composition of investment projects. This is more likely to occur with low interest rates in
international markets (so that cost of capital for domestic banks is also low). A financial sector
liberalization, which allows foreign financial institutions to enter China’s lending markets, can
further improve welfare as more competition provides stronger incentives for all banks to further
discourage moral hazard in investment.
Sterilization of Foreign Currency Reserves
China has experienced a large increase in its foreign exchange reserves since 2001, due to a
continuous inflow of capital and the commitment to maintain a fixed rate against the US dollar
initially and then a crawling peg exchange rate regime after 2005. Figure 8-A plots the exchange rate
of RMB against US dollar. The RMB kept appreciating against US dollar until mid 2008, when the
exchange rate stayed flat again at around 6.83 RMB/US$. It resumed the path of appreciation in June
2010 and the exchange rate further dropped to 6.5 RMB/US by April 2011. Figure 8-B plots monthly
foreign reserves as shown on the balance sheet of the PBOC; a clear trend emerges as the reserves
increased rapidly since 2003. 40 On the balance of payments side, the current account surplus grew
from $37 billion in 1997 to $305.4 billion in 2010; net export grew from 2.5% of GDP in 2004 to 8%
of GDP in 2008 and then dropped to 3.1% in 2010 due to a decrease in net exports. The capital
account was mostly positive during the period 1995 to 2009, implying a net capital inflow. The
current account surplus has come mainly from trade surpluses, while the capital account surplus
mainly comes from FDI. It has long been recognized that a large stock of foreign reserves has both
pros and cons. Abundant foreign reserves enable a country to maintain a stable exchange rate and to
meet its foreign debt obligations. It can also be used to cushion the sudden shocks on a country’s
current and capital accounts. However, an increase in foreign exchange reserves leads to an
accumulation of foreign assets, a component of the monetary base. Thus an increase in foreign
reserves, ceteris paribus, causes monetary expansion and puts inflationary pressures on the economy,
resulting in an appreciation of the real exchange rate. This experience is not unique for China. Many
East Asian countries have experienced similar problems induced by large (private) capital inflows
starting in the late 1980s.
Insert Figures 8-A and 8-B here.
To offset the expansionary effect of the increasing foreign reserves, the central bank can
sterilize the foreign assets by taking opposite actions with domestic assets, or implement other
40

The PBOC has made use of its foreign reserves in ways other than investing in low risk assets such as long term
government bonds. As discussed above, some foreign reserves were used to recapitalize the large state owned financial
institutions.
51

contractionary monetary policies. In China’s case, the major sterilization tools are open market
operations (OMO) and raising required reserve ratios. These two methods affect the liability side of
the central bank’s balance sheet in a similar way. Generally the cost of sterilization using required
reserves is lower than open market operations, since the central bank pays minimal interest on
required and excess reserves. OMOs in China mainly include central bank bill issuance and short
term repurchases operations (repos, usually within 91 days). Since February 2003, the central bank
has engaged in two or more OMOs each week. The total PBOC bonds outstanding as percentage of
foreign reserves has been increasing consistently from 2000 to 2010, implying an increasing trend in
sterilization. 41
Moreover, China has been gradually raising the required reserve ratios since the third quarter
of 2003, corresponding to an increase in foreign reserves inflows. The required reserve ratio rose
from 6% to 21.5% in June 2011, an historical high. Since Chinese commercial banks tend to
maintain a high excess reserve ratio due to a lack of alternative investment channels, the PBOC has
decreased the interest rate on excess reserves from 1.62% in 2003 to 0.72% in 2008 to discourage the
hoarding of excess reserves. To make sterilization effective, China also has to impose tight capital
controls. As the famous “trilemma” implicates, with a fixed exchange rate and free capital flows, the
sterilization process will be immediately offset by further capital inflows. Though it has been
documented that capital controls in China are somewhat porous (Prasad and Wei (2007)), it is still
widely believed that China has successfully sterilized at least some of its rising foreign reserves (e.g.,
Prasad and Goodfriend (2006), Ouyang, Rajan and Willett (2007), He. at el. (2005)). Moreover, due
to a combination of rapid increases in foreign reserves and low interest rates on domestic bonds, the
PBOC’s income from foreign reserve investment is likely to exceed the sterilization cost stemming
from central bank bill issuance and high required reserve ratios, enabling China to carry out
sterilization to a large extent. Nevertheless, possible appreciation of the RMB may have a profound
negative impact on the PBOC’s income from foreign reserves in domestic currency terms.
Currency Crisis and Banking Crisis (A Twin Crisis)
A currency crisis that may trigger a banking crisis is a possibility. The rapid increase in
foreign exchange reserves in recent years suggests there is a lot of speculative money in China in
anticipation of an RMB revaluation. If there is a significant future revaluation or if after some time it
becomes clear there will not be one then much of this money may be withdrawn. What happens then
41

There are also non-market tools such as transferring the deposits from the commercial banking system to the central
bank. In recent years, the PBOC also started making foreign exchange swaps with big commercial banks as a tool for
controlling liquidity.
52

will depend on how the government and central bank respond. If they allow the currency to float so
they do not use up the exchange reserves then any falls in the value of the RMB may occur quickly
and this may limit further outflows. If they try to limit the exchange rate movement then there may
be a classic currency crisis. This is in turn may trigger a banking crisis if there are large withdrawals
from banks as a result. Quickly adopting a full float can help to avoid a twin crisis, and thus reduce
the overall economic costs of the currency crisis. 42
Financial Contagion
Another phenomenon that has been present in many recent crises (e.g., the 1997 Asian crisis)
is that financial crises are contagious. A small shock that initially affects only a particular region or
sector can spread by contagion within the banking system or asset markets to the rest of the financial
sector, then to the entire economy and possibly other economies. Contagion can occur in a number of
ways. In the Chinese context with tight capital control and where financial markets are relatively
unimportant it is most likely they will occur either from contractually interconnected financial
institutions or large asset price movements that cause spillovers to financial institutions.
Allen and Gale (2000d) focus on the channel of contagion that arises from the overlapping
claims that different regions or sectors of the banking system have on one another through interbank
markets. When one region suffers a banking crisis, the other regions suffer a loss because their
claims on the troubled region fall in value. If this spillover effect is strong enough, it can cause a
crisis in the adjacent regions, and a contagion can occur which brings down the entire financial
system. Allen and Gale (2004b) show how large price falls can come about as a result of forced
liquidations when there is a limited supply of liquidity in the market. Cifuentes et al. (2005) show
that contagion is likely to be particularly severe when these two factors interact.
Insert Table 7 here.
Given China’s current financial system, what is the likelihood of financial contagion caused
by contractual interlinkages as in the interbank market or because of a meltdown in asset prices if
there are forced sales? China’s interbank market grew very quickly since its inception in 1981; in
fact, the growth of this market was so fast, with the participation of many unregulated financial
institutions and with large amount of flows of funds through this market to fixed asset investment,
that it exacerbated high inflation in the late 1980s. Since then the government and PBOC increased
42

Chang and Velasco (2001) develop a model of twin crises based on the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model of bank
runs. Money enters agents’ utility function, and the central bank controls the ratio of currency to consumption. In some
regimes, there exists both a “good” equilibrium in which early (late) consumers receive the proceeds from short-term
(long-term) assets, and a “bad” equilibrium in which everybody believes a crisis will occur and these beliefs are selffulfilling. If the bad equilibrium occurs, there is a twin crisis.
53

their regulation by limiting participation of non-bank financial institutions and by imposing
restrictions on interest rate movements. In 1996 a nation-wide, uniform system of interbank markets
was set up. It contains two connected levels: the primary network, which includes the largest PBOC
branches, large commercial banks, and a few large non-bank financial institutions, and the secondary
network that includes many banks and non-bank institutions and their local branches (see China
Interbank Market Annual Reports for more details). Table 7 documents the growth of the interbank
market during 2001-2010: while the trading volume of long maturity contracts (20 days or longer) is
low, the volume of short-term contracts (overnight and week-long) has been high (reaching RMB 10
trillion to 20 trillion, or $1.5 billion to $2.9 billion). Therefore, the increasing interlinkages can
potentially create a contagion if a crisis develops in one area or sector.
With regard to a meltdown of asset prices, this can happen because of a limited supply of
liquidity if there is a rapid liquidation of assets. It seems unlikely that this can occur and cause a
serious problem in China’s securities markets. A more serious threat is real estate markets if there
are bankruptcies and forced selling. This could potentially interact with bank interlinkages and cause
a systemic problem. As mentioned above, a crash in real estate and/or stock markets could quite
possibly be the cause of a financial crisis in China.

VII. Summary and Concluding Remarks
One of the most frequently asked questions about China’s financial system is whether it will
stimulate or hamper its economic growth. Our answer to this question, based on examining the
history and current status of the financial system and comparing them to those of other countries, is in
four parts. First, the large banking sector dominated by state-owned banks has played a much more
important role in funding the growth of many types of firms than financial markets. While the
problem of NPLs has been under control in recent years, continuing the improvement of the
efficiency of major banks toward international standards will allow growth to continue. Second, the
stock market has been growing fast since 1990, but has played a relatively limited role in supporting
the growth of the economy. However, with rapid growth that is likely to be sustained in the near
future the role of the financial markets in the economy will become increasingly more significant.
If we can summarize that the role of the banking sector and financial markets has been that
they have done enough not to slow down the growth of the economy, our third conclusion is that
alternative financing channels have had great success in supporting the growth of the Hybrid Sector,
which contributes most of the economic growth compared to the State and Listed Sectors. The non-

54

standard financial sector relies on alternative financing channels including internal finance, and on
alternative governance mechanisms, such as those based on trust, reputation and relationships, and
competition in output and input markets to support the growth of the Hybrid Sector. It is possible
that these alternative institutions are superior to western-style legal institutions in supporting a fastgrowing economy such as China’s.
We conclude by pointing out that economic stability is crucial for the continuing development
of the Chinese economy, and the stability of the financial system relates to economic stability in three
dimensions. The continuing effort by banks to reduce NPLs and improve efficiency can help to avoid
a banking crisis, while the efforts to improve the regulatory environment surrounding the financial
markets (including governance and accounting standards) can help to prevent a crash/crisis in the
stock and/or real estate markets. If China further opens the capital account, there will be a large
inflow of foreign capital, but large scale capital flows and speculations also bring the risk of a twin
crisis (foreign exchange and banking/stock market crisis), which severely damaged emerging
economies in Asia in 1997.

55

References
1. Acemoglu, Daron and Johnson, Simon, 2005. “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy
113, 949-995.
2. Alessandria, George, and Jun Qian, 2005. “Endogenous Financial Intermediation and Real Effects of
Capital Account Liberalization,” Journal of International Economics 67, 97-128.
3. ____, and Douglas Gale, 1999. “Diversity of Opinion and Financing of New Technologies,” Journal of
Financial Intermediation 8, 68-89.
4. ____, and ____, 2000a. Comparing Financial Systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
5. ____, and ____, 2000b. “Corporate Governance and Competition,” in Corporate Governance: Theoretical
and Empirical Perspectives, Xavier Vives, ed., Cambridge University Press, London, 23-94.
6. ____, and ____, 2000c. “Bubbles and Crises,” Economic Journal 110, 236-255.
7. ____, and ____, 2000d. “Financial Contagion,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1-33.
8. ____, and ____, 2004a, “Financial Intermediaries and Markets” (with D. Gale) Econometrica 72, 10231061.
9. ____, and ____, 2004b, “Financial Fragility, Liquidity and Asset Prices” (with D. Gale), Journal of the
European Economic Association 2, 1015-1048.
10. ____, and ____, 2007, Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford University
Press, Oxford and New York.
11. ____, and Hiroko Oura, 2004. “Sustained Economic Growth and the Financial System,” Monetary and
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 22 S-1, 95-119.
12. ____, and Jun Qian, 2009. “Corruption and Competition,” working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
13. ____, and ____, 2010. “Comparing Legal and Alternative Institutions in Commerce,” Global Perspectives
on the Rule of Law, Heckman et al., Eds., Routledge-Cavendish.
14. ____, ____, and Meijun Qian, 2005. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in China,” Journal of
Financial Economics 77, 57-116.
15. ____, ____, and ____, 2008. “China’s Financial System: Past, Present, and Future,” Chapter 14 in China’s
Great Economic Transformation, L. Brandt and T. Rawski, Eds., Cambridge University Press.
16.

____, ____, Chenyu Shan, and Mengxin Zhao, 2012. “The IPO of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
and the ‘Chinese Model’ of Privatizing Large Financial Institutions
,”European Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
17. ____, Rajesh Chakrabarti, Sankar De, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian, 2008. “The Financial System Capacities
of China and India,” working paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

56

18. ____, ____,____, ____, and ____, 2012. “Financing Firms in India,” Journal of Financial Intermeditation,
21, 409-445.
19. Berger, Allen, Iftekhar Hasan, and Mingming Zhou, 2009. “Bank Ownership and Efficiency in China:
What will Happen in the World’s Largest Nation?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 33, 113-130.
20. Black, Bernard S. and Ronald J. Gilson, 1998. “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets:
Bank versus Stock Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 47, 243-277.
21. Brandt, Loren, and Xiaodong Zhu, 2000. “Redistribution in a Decentralized Economy: Growth and
Inflation in China under Reform,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 422-439.
22. Bortolotti, Bernardo and Andrea Beltratti, 2006. "The Nontradable Share Reform in the Chinese Stock
Market," Working Papers 2006.131, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei.
23. Burkart, Mike, Tore Elligensen, and Mariassunta Giannetti. 2011. “What You Sell is What you Lend?
Explaining Trade Credits Contracts.” Review of Financial Studies 24, 1261-1298
24. ____, Fausto Panunzi, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003. “Family Firms,” Journal of Finance 58, 2167-2201.
25. Cao, Yingxue and Li Liao, 2008. “An International Comparison of Real Estate Prices” (in Chinese), Price
theory and practice (Jia Ge Li Lun Yu Shi Jian), v2,2008, p56-57.
26. Chan, Kalok, Albert Menkveld, and Zhishu Yang, 2008. “Information Asymmetry and Asset Prices:
Evidence from the China Foreign Share Discount,” Journal of Finance, 63, 159-196.
27. Chang, Roberto, and Andres Velasco, 2001. “A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 489-518.
28. Chu, Yongqiang, and Tien Foo Sing, 2004. “Inflation Hedging Characteristics of the Chinese Real Estate
Market,” Journal of Real Estate Portfolio Management 10, 145-154.
29. Chung, Stephanie Po-yin, 2005 “Changes and continuities. Evolution of a Chinese family business (1876–
2004)”, Asia Europe Journal, Volume 3, Number 2
30. Cifuentes, Rodrigo, Gianluigi Ferrucci, and Hyun Song Shin, 2005, “Liquidity Risk and Contagion,”
Journal of the European Economic Association 3, 556-566.
31. Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry Lang, 2000. “The Separation of Ownership and Control in
East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.
32. ____, ____, Joseph Fan, and, and Larry Lang, 2002. “Expropriation of Minority Shareholders in East
Asia,” Journal of Finance 57, 2741-2771.
33. Clarke, Donald, Peter Murrell, and Susan Whiting, 2008. “Law, Property Rights and Institutions,” Ch. 11
China’s Great Economic Transformation, L. Brandt and T. Rawski, Eds., Cambridge University Press.
34. Cull, Robert, and Colin Xu, 2005. “Institutions, Ownership, and Finance: The Determinants of
Reinvestments of Profit among Chinese Firms,” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 117-146.
35. Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, 2001. Financial Structure and Economic Growth: Cross-country
Comparisons of Banks, Markets, and Development, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
57

36. Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy 91, 401-419.
37. Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.
38. Dollar, David and Shang-jin Wei, 2007. “Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment
Efficiency in China,” working paper, IMF.
39. Du, Julan, Oliver Rui and Sonia Wong, 2008. “Financing Motivated Takeovers: The Case of China,”
working paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
40. Fan, Joseph, Huang Jun and Zhu Ning, (2008), “Financial Distress without Bankruptcy: The Case of
China”, available at http://ihome.cuhk.edu.hk/~b109671/wp/Distress-090408.pdf.
41. Fan, Joseph, Oliver Rui, and Mengxin Zhao, 2006. “Rent Seeking and Corporate Finance: Evidence from
Corruption,” working paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
42. ____, T.J. Wong, and Tianyu Zhang 2007. “Politically-connected CEOs, Corporate Governance and PostIPO Performance of China’s Partially Privatized Firms,” Journal of Financial Economics 84, 330-357.
43. Feldstein, Martin, 1999. “Social Security Pension Reform in China,” China Economic Review 10, 99-107.
44. ____, 2003. “Banking, Budgets, and Pensions: Some Priorities for Chinese Policy,” speech at the China
Development Forum 2003 hosted by the Development Research Center of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China, available at http://www.nber.org/feldstein/chinaforum5.pdf
45. Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey Liebman, 2006. “Realizing the Potential of China’s Social Security Pension
System.”, pp. 309-313, chapter 15, in Public finance in China: reform and growth for a harmonious
society, Edited by Jiwei Lou, Shuilin Wang, World Bank
46. Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi, 2003. “Ownership: Evolution and Regulation,” working
paper, London Business School.
47. Fung, Peter, Michael Firth, and Oliver Rui, 2003. “Corporate Governance and CEO Compensation in
China,” working paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
48. Garnaut, Ross, Song Ligang and Yao Yang, 2004, “SOE Restructuring in China”, Stanford Center for
International Development Working Paper No. 204
49. Goetzmann William, Köll Elisabeth, 2005, “The History of Corporate Ownership in China: State
Patronage, Company Legislation, and the Issue of Control”, NBER volume: A History of Corporate
Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers.
50. Goodfriend Marvin. and Prasad Eswar 2006, “A framework for independent monetary policy in China”,
Economic Studies, 2007, vol. 53, issue 1, pages 2-41
51. Greif, Avner, 1989. “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders,”
Journal of Economic History 49, 857-882.
52. ____, 1993. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi Traders’
Coalition,” American Economic Review 83, 525-548.
58

53. Guo, Feng and Ying Sophie Huang, 2010. “Does 'Hot Money' Drive China’s Real Estate and Stock
Markets?” International Review of Economics & Finance 19, 452-466.
54. He.D., Chu C., Shu C.and Wong A. (2005), “Monetary management in Mainland China in the face of
large capital inflows.” Reserach Memorandum No 07/2005, Hong Kong Monetary Authority
55. Herring, Richard, and N. Chatusripitak, 2000. “The Case of the Missing Market: The Bond Market and
Why it Matters for Financial Development,” working paper, Wharton Financial Institutions Center.
56. Hoggarth, Glenn, Ricardo Reis, and Victoria Saporta (2002), “Costs of Banking System Instability: Some
Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 825-855.
57. Hwang, Chuan-Yang, Shaojun Zhang, and Yanjian Zhu, 2006. “Float Liquidity, Speculation, and Stock
Prices: Evidence from the Share Structure Reform in China,” Nanyang Technological University Working
Paper
58. Jeng, Leslie A., and Philippe C. Wells, 2000. “The Determinants of Venture Capital Funding: Evidence
across Countries,” Journal of Corporate Finance 6, 241-289.
59. Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling, 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs,
and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
60. Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balanceof-payments Problems,” American Economic Review 89, 473-500.
61. Kane, Edward, 1989. The S&L Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
62. ____, 2003. “What Economic Principles Should Policymakers in Other Countries Have Learned from the
S&L Mess?” Business Economics 38, 21-30.
63. Kato, Takao, and Cheryl Long, 2004. “Executive Compensation and Corporate Governance in China,”
William Davidson Institute Working Paper No. 690.
64. Kirby, William, 1995. “China Unincorporated: Company Law and Business Enterprise in TwentiethCentury China,” Journal of Asian Studies 54, 43-63.
65. Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000. “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital on Innovation,”
RAND Journal of Economics 31, 674-692.
66. ____, ____, and ____, 2006. “What Works in Securities Laws?” Journal of Finance 61, 1-32.
67. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 1997b. “Trust in Large Organizations,” American Economic Review 87, 333338.
68. Lardy, Nicholas R., 1998. China’s Unfinished Economic Revolution, Brookings Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
69. Lee, Tahirih V., 1993. “Risky Business: Courts, Culture, and the Marketplace,” University of Miami Law
Review 47, 1335-1414.
70. Levine, Ross, 2002. “Bank-based or Market-based Financial Systems: Which is Better?” Journal of
Financial Intermediation 11, 1-30.
59

71. Li, Kai, Heng Yue and Longkai Zhao, 2007. “Ownership, Institutions, and Capital Structure: Evidence
from Non-listed Chinese Firms,” working paper, University of British Columbia.
72. Liao, Li, and Bibo Liu, 2008. “Moral Hazard, Information Disclosure and Market Efficiency: Evidence
from China’s Share Reform,” working paper, Tsinghua University.
73. Lindgren, C., G. Garcia, and M. Saal, 1996. Bank Soundness and Macroeconomic Policy, Washington,
D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
74. Liu, Qiao, 2007. “Institutions, Financial Development, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from an
Implied Return on Capital in China,” working paper, University of Hong Kong.
75. McMillan, John, 1995. “China’s Nonconformist Reform,” Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and
Russia: Realities of Reform, ed. Edward Lazear, Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 419-433.
76. ____, 1997. “Markets in Transition,” Ch.6 of Advances in Economics and Econometrics Vol. 2, David M.
Kreps, and Kenneth F. Wallis, eds., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 210-239.
77. ____, and Barry Naughton, 1992. “How to Reform a Planned Economy: Lessons from China,” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 8, 130-143.
78. Mei, Jianping, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2003. “Speculative Trading and Stock Prices: An
Analysis of Chinese A-B Share Premia,” working paper, Princeton University.
79. Michie, R., 1987. The London and New York Stock Exchanges 1850-1914, London: Allen & Unwin.
80. Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu, 2000. “The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why do Emerging
Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movement?” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215-260.
81. Morrison, Wayne, and Marc Labonte, 2008. “CRS report for congress: China’s holding of U.S. securities:
Implications for the U.S. Economy”, Congressional research service.
82. Ouyang, Y.A., Rajan R.S. and Willett T.D., 2007, “China as a Reserve Sink: The Evidence from Offset
and Sterilization Coefficients”, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research
83. Park, Albert, Loren Brandt, and John Giles, 2003. “Competition under Credit Rationing: Theory and
Evidence from Rural China,” Journal of Development Economics 71, 463-495.
84. Park, Albert, Sehrt Kaja, 2001. “Tests of Financial Intermediation and Banking Reform in China,” Journal
of Comparative Economics 29, 608–644.
85. Perkins, Dwight, and Thomas Rawski, 2008. “Forecasting China’s Economic Growth to 2025,” Ch. 20 in
China’s Great Economic Transformation, L. Brandt and T. Rawski, Eds., Cambridge University Press.
86. Pistor, Katharina, 2010. “The governance of China’s finance,” forthcoming in NBER book Capitalizing
China.
87. Prasad, Eswar and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007. “The Chinese Approach to Capital Flows: Patterns and Possible
Explanations,” forthcoming in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies, ed. Sebastian
Edwards, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

60

88. Qian, Jun, and Philip Strahan, 2007. “How Laws and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The Case of
Bank Loans,” Journal of Finance 62, 2803-2834.
89. ____, ____, and Zhishu Yang, 2011. “The Impact of Incentives and Communication Costs on Information
Production: Evidence from Bank Lending,” working paper, Boston College.
90. Qiu, Yuemin, Bing Li, and Youcai Cai, 2000. "Losses of State-Owned Commercial Banks: Reasons and
Policy Response," Jingji gongzuozhe xuexi ziliao [Study Materials for Economic Workers], no. 44.
91. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 2003a. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
92. _____, and _____, 2003b. Saving Capitalism from Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial
Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity, Random House, New York.
93. Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann, (2003). “Crises and Growth: A Re-evaluation,”
NBER Working Paper 10073.
94. Stein, Jeremy, 2002. “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized vs. Hierarchical
Firms,” Journal of Finance 57, 1891-1921.
95. Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson, 2003. “Culture, Openness, and Finance,” Journal of Financial
Economics 70, 261-300.
96. Tsai, Kellee, 2002. Back-alley Banking, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
97. Xu, Chenggang, 2011. “The Fundamental Institutions of China’s Reforms and Development,” Journal of
Economic Literature 49, 1076-1151.
98. World Bank (2001). “Bankruptcy of State Enterprises in China — A Case and Agenda for Reforming the
Insolvency System”.
99. Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongsheng Deng, 2011. Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese
Housing Markets, Regional Science and Urban Economics, forthcoming.

61

Table 1 Comparing financial systems: Banks and Markets (average 2001-2007)
This table compares financial markets and banking sector of China with those of other large emerging economies. All the
measures on the size and efficiency of banks and markets are based on Levine (2002) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine
(2001), and data is from the World Bank Financial Database. We present the 2001-2007 average figures for all countries
(except for “Structure Regulatory,” which are based on 2005 figures). Average of other emerging economies are (simple)
averages across other emerging economies excluding China.
Size of Banks and Markets
Measures

Bank
credit/
GDP

NPL/
Total
Loans

Financial Development**
(banking and market sectors)

Structure Indices: Markets vs. banks*

Value
traded
/GDP

Market
cap.
/GDP

Structure
Activity

Structure
Size

Structure
Efficiency

Structure
Regulatory

Finance
Activity

Finance
Size

Finance
Efficiency

China

1.16

0.16

0.62

0.64

-0.62

8.88

2.32

16

8.88

8.91

5.97

Argentina

0.14

0.10

0.04

0.48

-1.32

3.93

1.59

7

3.93

6.50

3.60

Brazil

0.34

0.04

0.19

0.53

-0.61

6.45

0.72

10

6.45

7.49

6.17

Egypt

0.52

0.21

0.19

0.60

-1.02

6.88

2.54

13

6.88

8.04

4.48

India

0.37

0.07

0.57

0.64

0.44

7.65

1.50

10

7.65

7.76

6.71

Indonesia

0.24

0.12

0.12

0.28

-0.69

5.66

1.23

n/a

5.66

6.51

4.60

Malaysia

1.15

0.12

0.43

1.45

-0.98

8.51

2.85

10

8.51

9.72

5.89

Mexico

0.18

0.03

0.06

0.26

-0.99

4.74

-0.26

12

4.74

6.11

5.38

Pakistan

0.26

0.14

0.72

0.28

1.01

7.55

1.36

10

7.55

6.61

6.26

Peru

0.21

0.08

0.03

0.44

-1.96

4.10

1.22

8

4.10

6.81

3.63

Philippines

0.34

0.15

0.07

0.47

-1.54

5.50

1.97

7

5.50

7.36

3.85

Russian

0.26

0.04

0.27

0.65

0.06

6.54

0.96

n/a

6.54

7.41

6.52

S. Africa

1.38

0.02

0.88

2.06

-0.45

9.40

1.43

8

9.40

10.25

8.38

Sri Lanka

0.31

0.15

0.03

0.18

-2.33

4.52

1.00

7

4.52

6.31

2.97

Thailand

1.02

0.11

0.50

0.63

-0.72

8.52

1.95

9

8.52

8.77

6.10

Turkey
Ave. for
EMs

0.20

0.10

0.39

0.28

0.67

6.65

1.05

12

6.65

6.32

5.93

0.46

0.10

0.30

0.62

-0.70

6.44

1.41

9.46

6.44

7.46

5.36

Notes: *: Structure indices measure whether a country’s financial system is market- or bank-dominated; the higher the measure,
the more the system is dominated by markets. Specifically, “structure activity” is equal to log(value traded/bank credit) and
measures size of bank credit relative to trading volume of markets; “structure size” is equal to log(market cap/bank credit) and
measures the size of markets relative to banks; “structure efficiency” is equal to log(market cap ratio×bank NPL ratio) and
measures the relative efficiency of markets vs. banks; finally, “structure regulatory” is the sum of the four categories in
regulatory restriction, or the degree to which commercial banks are allowed to engage in security, firm operation, insurance, and
real estate: 1- unrestricted; 2-permit to conduct through subsidiary; 3-full range not permitted in subsidiaries; and 4-strictly
prohibited.
**
: Financial development variables measure the entire financial system (banking and market sectors combined), and the
higher the measure, the larger or more efficient the financial system is. Specifically, “finance activity” is equal to log (total
value traded ratio×private credit ratio), “finance size” is equal to log (market cap ratio×bank private credit ratio), and “finance
efficiency” is equal to log (total value traded ratio/bank NPL ratio).

62

Table 2-A Comparisons of Total Savings and Deposits (in US$ billions)
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Demand depositsa

320

391

465

China
533
647

777

899

1030 1265 1671 1931 2683

Savings depositsb

606

674

722

820

961

1143

1445

1748 2069 2363 3187 3811

100

114

136

171

199

253

307

410

Time & Savings Dep/GDP

68%

73%

72%

85%

91%

95% 101% 92% 100% 114%

Demand depositsa
Time, savings & foreign
currency deposits
Time & Savings Dep/GDP

1793

2259

2073

75%
80%
Japan
1838
2567

3523

3795

3541 3523 3683 4560

-

7921

8997

8059

5351

5383

5416

5448

4642 4536 4778 6160

-

181% 185% 184% 142%

131%

118%

114% 109% 106% 106% 110%

-

Time deposits

c

Demand deposits

a

Time, savings & foreign
currency deposits
Time & Savings Dep/GDP
Demand depositsa
Time, savings & foreign
currency deposits
Time & Savings Dep/GDP

South Korea
27
36

676

878 1205 1661

38

46

54

67

66

50

63

383

410

467

485

546

543

471

574

63%

64%

58%

57% 56% 52% 58%

63%

31
175

India
32
35
198
235

44
277

60
333

71
368

96
653

119
800

39%

42%

46%

46%

46% 49% 54% 59%

60%

18

22

23

185

251

289

315

46%

54%

61%

64%

24
140

28
161

34%

36%

46%

89
460

114
647

Source: IMF and CEIC database
Notes: a: Demand deposits, balance of the accounts can be withdrawn on demand of customers (e.g., check-writing); b:
Savings deposits, interest-bearing accounts that can be withdrawn but cannot be used as Money (e.g., no checking
writing); c: Time deposits, savings accounts or CD with a fixed term.

Table 2-B Breakdown of Bank Loans (end-of-year figures in RMB billions)
Year

Total
Loans

Short-term
Loans

Industrial
Loans

Commercial
Loans

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

3,997.60
5,054.41
6,115.66
7,491.41
8,652.41
9,373.43
9,937.11
11,231.47
13,129.39
15,899.62
17,819.78
19,469.04
22,534,72
26,169.09
30,339.46
39,968,48

2,694.87
3,337.20
4,021.00
5,541.83
6,061.32
6,388.76
6,574.81
6,732.72
7,424.79
8,366.12
8,684.06
8,744.92
9,853.44
11,447.79
12,518.17
14,661,13

994.83
1,177.47
1,421.33
1,652.66
1,782.15
1,794.89
1,701.93
1,863.67
2,019.05
2,275.60
2,389.66
2,251.67
2,865.4
3,362.33
3,614.29
3,876,92

1,050.98
1,283.71
1,533.26
1,835.66
1,975.24
1,989.09
1,786.85
1,856.34
1,797.31
1,799.44
1,707.41
1,644.76
1,667.15
1,783.33
1,773.22
1,948,33

Infrastructure
Construction
Loans
61.72
79.93
97.38
159.11
162.87
147.69
161.71
209.96
274.80
300.21
278.01
298.37
361.26
374.19
368.46
364,68

Source: Statistical Yearbooks of China, CEIC database (1985 – 2009).
63

Agricultural
Loans

Loans to
TVEs

114.39
154.48
191.91
331.46
444.42
479.24
488.90
571.15
688.46
841.14
984.31
1,152.99
1,320.82
1,542.93
1,762.88
2,162,25

200.24
251.49
282.19
503.58
558.00
616.13
606.08
641.30
681.23
766.16
806.92
790.18
622.20
711.26
745.4
902,9

Privately
Owned
Firms
15.59
19.62
27.98
38.67
47.16
57.91
65.46
91.80
105.88
146.16
208.16
218.08
266.76
350.77
422.38
712,10

Joint Ventures
& Cooperative
Firms
79.23
99.91
134.63
189.10
248.75
298.58
304.98
326.35
269.74
256.94
219.84
197.53
183.27
206.91
227.08
218,03

Table 3-A A Comparison of Non-performing Loans (NPLs) and Government Debt
This table compares total outstanding NPLs within the banking system, government debt, and the ratio of (NPLs +
Government Debt)/GDP among China, the U.S., and other major Asian countries for the period 1997-2010. Panel A presents
the size of the NPLs, as measured by US$ billion and as the percentage of GDPs in the same year. NPLs in the U.S. measure
the outstanding “delinquency loan”; NPLs in Japan measure the “risk management loans” (or loans disclosed under the
Financial Reconstructed Law and/or loans subject to self-assessment). In Panel B, outstanding government debt is measured at
the end of each year; for the U.S. and Japan, total government debt includes domestic and foreign debt. In Panel C, the ratios
for China include using the official NPL numbers and using doubled official NPLs (i.e., the ratios in the brackets are (doubled
NPLs + government debt)/GDP); the ratios in the brackets for the U.S. and Japan are (net government debt + NPLs)/GDP,
where net government debt is the difference between government borrowing (stock measure) and government lending (flow
measure). All figures are converted into U.S. dollars using the average exchange rate within the observation year.
Year

China

U.S.

Japan

Korea

India

Indonesia

Taiwan

Panel A: Size of NPLs: In US$ billion and as percentage of GDPs in the same year (in brackets)
--

66.9 (0.8%)

217.4 (5.1%)

16.2 (3.1%)

--

0.2

(0.1%)

19.6 (6.5%)

1998

20.5 (2.0%)

71.3 (0.8%)

489.7 (12.7%)

23.2 (6.7%)

12.7 (3.1%)

5.5

(5.2%)

21.8 (7.9%)

1999

105.1 (9.7%)

72.2 (0.8%)

547.6 (12.6%)

54.4 (12.2%)

14.0 (3.2%)

3.2

(3.8%)

27.2 (9.1%)

2000

269.3 (22.5%)

90.1 (0.9%)

515.4 (11.1%)

35.5 (6.9%)

12.9 (2.8%)

6.3

(2.7%)

33.2 (10.3%)

2001

265.3 (20.0%)

108.4 (1.1%)

640.1 (15.6%)

12.2 (2.5%)

13.2 (2.8%)

4.3

(1.7%)

37.9 (13.0%)

2002

188.4 (13.0%)

107.8 (1.0%)

552.5 (14.1%)

9.9 (1.8%)

14.8 (3.0%)

3.3

(2.0%)

30.7 (10.4%)

2003

181.2 (11.0%)

95.9 (1.0%)

480.1 (11.3%)

11.7 (1.9%)

14.6 (2.5%)

4.7

(1.5%)

23.1 (7.7%)

2004

207.4 (10.7%)

81.3 (0.9%)

334.8 (7.3%)

10.0 (1.5%)

14.4 (2.2%)

3.8

(2.1%)

26.4 (5.1%)

2005

164.2 (7.3%)

84.6 (0.7%)

183.3 (4.0%)

7.6 (1.0%)

13.4 (1.7%)

6.0

(1.5%)

11.2 (3.2%)

2006

157.4 (5.9%)

103.8 (0.8%)

157.8 (3.6%)

8.2 (0.9%)

11.2 (1.3%)

5.2

(1.4%)

11.3

3.1%

2007

166.8 (5.1%)

168.1 (1.2%)

148.6 (3.4%)

8.3 (0.8%)

13.6 (1.2%)

4.5

(1.0%)

10.0

2.6%

2008

80.6 (1.9%)

328.7 (2.3%)

190.8 (3.7%)

13.0 (1.4%)

15.4 (1.3%)

4.3

(0.8%)

9.0

2.3%

2009

72.6 (1.5%)

477.5 (3.3%) 188.45 (3.63%)

13.9 (1.5%)

18.2 (1.3%)

4.6

(1.0%)

6.7 (1.8%)

2010

68.1 (1.1%)

423.4 (2.9%) 208.70 (3.82%)

26.8

20.7 (1.2%)

4.3

(0.6%)

3.8 (0.9%)

Outstanding
Government
Bond

Outstanding
Government
Bond

1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Outstanding
Government
Bond
66.5
93.8
127.3
165.1
188.6
233.5
273.0
311.3
350.0
364.6
599.8
701.6
753.6
805.3

(2.6%

Panel B: Outstanding Government Debt ($ billion)
Total
Total
Outstanding
Government
Government
Treasury
Total Public
Debt
Debt
Bonds
Debt
5,802.8
4,254.0
5.3
-5,788.8
4,858.0
14.4
178.4
5,822.7
6,053.1
28.5
260.2
5,612.7
6,209.8
32.7
232.4
5,734.4
6,036.0
39.8
225.4
6,169.4
6,321.3
45.2
250.2
6,789.7
6,852.9
67.9
259.7
7,335.6
7,446.6
107.0
299.6
7,809.5
8,299.5
165.5
347.1
8,451.4
7,587.1
216.7
375.2
8,950.7
7,707.7
245.0
472.0
9,985.8
8,966.2
217.8
496.4
12,867.5
9,466.8
290.9
556.6
14,551.8
11,284.9
364.0
643.6

34.1
45.1
43.5
42.1
48.0
44.7
39.9
45.7
51.8
52.8
52.5
68.4

46.5
45.5
58.7
77.7
75.7
85.2
86.7
85.8
94.5
90.4
82.9
102.0

Panel C: (NPLs + Outstanding Government Debt)/GDP

1998

--

0.71

(0.54)

1.05

(0.40)

0.04

--

--

--

0.11

0.67

(0.50)

1.39

(0.63)

0.11

0.46

--

--

64

1999

0.21

0.64

(0.45)

1.51

(0.64)

0.19

0.62

0.24

0.25

2000

0.36

0.58

(0.40)

1.45

(0.65)

0.13

0.53

0.31

0.24

2001

0.34

0.58

(0.39)

1.63

(0.83)

0.11

0.50

0.30

0.33

2002

0.29

0.60

(0.42)

1.76

(0.90)

0.10

0.54

0.23

0.37

2003

0.28

0.63

(0.45)

1.73

(0.86)

0.13

0.48

0.22

0.33

2004

0.27

0.63

(0.46)

1.70

(0.81)

0.17

0.47

0.19

0.32

2005

0.23

0.63

(0.47)

1.86

(0.84)

0.22

0.47

0.16

0.27

2006

0.20

0.65

(0.44)

1.78

(0.88)

0.24

0.44

0.14

0.26

2007

0.23

0.66

(0.45)

1.79

(0.89)

0.24

0.44

0.13

0.27

2008

0.18

0.72

(0.50)

1.78

(0.88)

0.25

0.42

0.11

0.25

2009

0.17

0.94

(0.46)

1.55

(1.15)

0.24

0.58

0.11

0.24

2010

0.21

1.01

(0.70)

1.94

(1.20)

0.33

0.45

0.10

0.25

Sources: Statistical Bureau of China, the People’s Bank of China, Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission; Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve Bank, Statistical Abstracts of the U.S., the Statistical Bureau of Japan; Ministry of Finance, Korea, the Bank of
Korea, Korean Statistical Information System; IMF, World Bank; Bank Indonesia; Ministry of Finance, India; National Statistical
Bureau of Taiwan, Bloomberg, Chinabond, and Taiwan financial supervisory commission.

Table 3-B Liquidation of NPLs by Four Asset Management Companies (RMB billion)
This table presents results on the liquidation of NPLs by four state-owned asset management companies in China during
the period 2001 to the 1st quarter of 2006. These asset management companies were set up to specifically deal with NPLs
accumulated in the ‘Big Four’ state-owned banks.
Book value of
Assets
(Accumulated)

Assets
Recovered

23.21
53.11
18.29
29.90
124.51

12.54
6.30
8.51
22.50
49.86

Cash
Recovered

Asset Recovery
Rate (%)

Cash Recovery
Rate (%)

7.55
3.69
4.42
10.49
26.15

54.0
11.9
46.5
75.3
40.0

32.5
6.9
24.2
35.1
21.0

10.20
5.47
5.57
10.51
31.75

35.7
17.5
47.9
52.7
35.7

31.8
12.0
25.2
31.8
23.9

2001
Hua Rong
Great Wall
Oriental
Xin Da
Total

2002
Hua Rong
Great Wall
Oriental
Xin Da
Total

32.04
45.48
22.10
33.10
132.73

11.43
7.94
10.60
17.46
47.43

Accumulated
Disposal

Cash
Recovered

Disposal
Ratio (%)

Asset Recovery
Ratio (%)

Cash Recovery
Ratio (%)

Hua Rong
Great Wall
Oriental
Xin Da
Total

209.54
209.91
104.55
151.06
675.06

41.34
21.57
23.29
50.81
137.00

59.77
61.91
41.42
48.90
53.96

25.29
14.43
29.50
38.29
25.48

19.73
10.27
22.27
33.64
20.29

Hua Rong
Great Wall

243.38
263.39

54.39
27.35

69.17
77.88

26.92
12.90

22.35
10.39

2004

2005

65

Oriental
Xin Da
Total

131.76
201.21
839.75

Hua Rong

246.80

Great Wall

270.78

Oriental

32.01
62.84
176.60
2006 (Q1)
54.66

52.08
63.82
66.74

28.73
34.30
24.58

24.30
31.23
21.03

70.11

26.50

22.15

27.83

80.11

12.70

10.28

141.99

32.81

56.13

27.16

23.11

Xin Da

206.77

65.26

64.69

34.46

31.56

Total

866.34

180.56

68.61

24.20

20.84

Notes: 1. Accumulated Disposal refers to the accumulated amount of cash and non-cash assets recovered as well as loss
incurred by the end of the reporting period.
2. Disposal Ratio = Accumulated Disposal / Total NPLs purchased .
3. Asset Recovery Ratio = Total Assets Recovered / Accumulated Disposal.
4. Cash Recovery Ratio = Cash Recovered / Accumulated Disposal.
Source: Almanac of China’s Finance and Banking 2002-2005, and the reports of China Banking Regulatory Commission
2004-2009.

Table 4-A Chinese Banks’ IPOs and Comparison with Other Banks
This table presents information on the IPOs of the Big Four banks and that of Bank of Communications (BComm). BOC,
ICBC and ABC were listed in both the HKSE (HK dollar) and SHSE (RMB), while PCBC and BComm only listed shares
on the HKSE. First day (first week) return is percentage return of closing price of first day (fifth trading day) over offer
price. Foreign ownership indicates size of ownership stakes of foreign institutions and investors at the date of IPOs.
Panel A Performance of Chinese Banks’ IPOs

IPO Date
Offer Price
Proceeds
1st Day Return
1st Week Return
Foreign Ownership

ICBC
HKSE
SHSE
(HK$)
(RMB)
10/27/2006 10/27/2006
3.07
3.12
124.95B
46.64B
14.66%
5.13%
16.94%
4.81%
7.28%
--

BOC
HKSE
SHSE
(HK$)
(RMB)
6/01/2006 7/05/2006
2.95
3.08
82.86B
20.00B
14.41%
22.73%
19.49%
19.16%
14.40%
--

PCBC
HKSE
(HK$)
10/27/2005
2.35
59.94B
0.00%
-1.06%
14.39%

BComm
HKSE
(HK$)
6/23/2005
2.5
14.64B
13.00%
13.00%
18.33%

ABC*
HKSE
SHSE
(HK$)
(RMB)
7/15/2010 7/16/2010
3.2
2.68
93.8B
68.5B
2.2%
1％
9.1%
1.9%
40.8%
--

Source: IPO prospectuses submitted to SHSE and HKSE; SHSE and HKSE.
*: In USD, ABC raised $22.1 billion from its IPO, beating the record of $21.9 billion from ICBC’s IPO. However in
terms of RMB, ICBC still holds the record of largest IPO since RMB has appreciated significantly since 2006.

Panel B Top 10 Banks Measured by Market Capitalization ($billion)

Rank Bank Name
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

IND & COMM BK
CHINA CONST BANK
HSBC HLDGS PLC
JPMORGAN CHASE
BANK OF AMERICA
WELLS FARGO & CO
BANK OF CHINA
AGRICULTURAL BANK

HQ
Country
China
China
U.K.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
China
China
66

Market Cap. $B
(July. 16th, 2010)
214.51
189.04
166.51
155.17
140.26
136.71
130.29
128.60

Total Return (%)
YTD
-20.14
-1.99
-15.40
-6.06
-7.06
-2.46
1.71
0.4

9
10

CITIGROUP INC
BANCO SANTANDER

US
Spain

113.00
102.77

17.82
-21.87

Source: Bloomberg.
Panel C Top 20 Banks Measured by Total Assets (July 2010; $trillion)

HQ Country

Rank Bank Name (HQ Country)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

BNP PARIBAS
ROYAL BANK SCOTLAN
HSBC HLDGS PLC
BANK OF AMERICA
DEUTSCHE BANK-RG
CREDIT AGRICOLE
BARCLAYS PLC
MITSUBISHI UFJ F
JPMORGAN CHASE
CITIGROUP INC
IND & COMM BANK
MIZUHO FINANCIAL
LLOYDS BANKING
BANCO SANTANDER
CHINA CONST BA-H
SOC GENERALE
SUMITOMO MITSUI
AGRICULTURAL BANK
UBS AG-REG
UNICREDIT SPA

Total Assets
($trillion)

France
UK
UK
U.S
Germany
France
U.K.
Japan
U.S.
U.S.
China
Japan
U.K.
Spain
China
France
Japan
China
Switzerland
Italy

2.95
2.68
2.36
2.36
2.26
2.23
2.23
2.18
2.01
1.94
1.73
1.67
1.66
1.55
1.48
1.47
1.32
1.30
1.29
1.28

Source: Bloomberg (based on latest filings), July 15th, 2010.
Table 4-B State-owned and Private Banks in China (RMB billion)
Types of Banks
Big Five Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

Total Assets

40,089.0
17,465.0
11,785.0
5,680.0
1,349.2
27.2
5,492.5

Big Five Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

31,836.0
12,941.2
8,809.2
4,132.0
1,344.8
80.4
5,211.3

Big Five Banks

28,007.0

Total Deposits
2009

29,506.5
15,041.5
10,548.7
4,492.8
668.8
39.5
4,742.1
2008
23,696.1
11,072.2
7,801.8
3,270.4
533.5
76.2
4,173.6
2007
20,067.7

67

Outstanding Loans

20,151.7
9,606.6
6,707.4
2,899.2
727.1

Profit1

NPL rate (%)

400.1

1.8

92.5
49.7
6.5
0.2
22.8

1.0
1.3
0.9

354.2

2.8
1.3
2.3
0.8

3,753.2

84.1
40.8
11.9
0.62
21.9

13,850.9

246.6

8.05

5,421.3
15,029.3
7,162.4
5,054.5
2,107.9
762.1

Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

10,589.9
7,249.4
3,340.5
1,252.5
131.2
4,343.4

Big Five Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

24,236
8,038.4
5,444.6
2,593.8
927.9
183.1
3,450.3

Big Five Banks2
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

21,005.0
6,502.2
4,465.5
2,036.7
715.5
203.3
3,142.7

Big Four Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

16,932.1
4,697.2

Big Four Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

16,275.1
3,816.8

Big Four Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

14,450.0
4,160.0
2,990.0
1,170.0
324.2
119.0
--

Big Four Banks
Other Commercial Banks
1) Joint Equity
2) City Commercial Banks
Foreign Banks
Urban Credit Cooperatives
Rural Credit Cooperatives

13,000.0
3,259.0
2,386.0
873.0
373.4
128.7
--

1,693.8
515.9
171.5
3,101.3

1,465.4
333.1
148.7
2,674.6

9,023.3
6,432.0
2,591.4
390.0
134.1
3,534.9
2006
18,285.1
7512.8
5,396.5
2,116.2
244.0
157.9
3,040.2
2005
16,283.8
6,261.1
4,570.0
16,91.2
179.3
181.3
2,767.4
2004
14,412.3
4,059.9

5,684.4
4,001.9
1,682.6
700.0

56.4
24.8
6.1
0.77
19.3

2.15
3.04
0.46

197.5

9.22

43.4
18.1
5.8
1.0
18.6

2.81
4.78
0.78

10,224.0
4,576.6
3,487.7
1,088.9
363.8
113.1
2,319.9

156.1

10.49

28.9
12.1
3.7
0.9
12.0

4.22
7.73
1.05

10,086.1
2,885.9

45.9
50.7
17.6
8.5
18.8
0.4
9.65

15.57
4.93
5.01
11.73
1.34

196.5

19.74
7.92
6.5
14.94
2.87

84.7
3,256.1
11,426.2
5526.6
4,156.9
1,369.7
485.9

100.7
2,747.6

1,434.1
126.4
154.9
2,734.8
2003
13,071.9
3,286.5

904.5
255.8
97.9
1,974.8

1,174.7
90.7
127.1
2,376.5
2002
11,840.0
3,390.0
---101.0
1,987.0
2001

774.4
147.6
85.6
1,775.9

14.6
5.4
18.1
0.01
4.4

8,460.0
2,290.0
--154.0
66.4
1,393.0

71.0
---15.2
---

26.1
-9.5
17.7
--

10,770.0
2,530.7
1,849.0
681.7
-107.1
1,729.8

7,400.0
1,649.8
1,224.0
425.8
153.2
72.5
1,197.0

23.0
12.9
10.5
2.4
1.7
2.6
--

25.37
-12.94
-----

9,950.1
2,368.2

Notes: 1. It is before tax profit up to 2006, and after tax profit from 2006-2009.
68

--

2. Big four (stated owned) banks refer to Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Industrial and
Commercial Bank of China, and Agricultural Bank of China. Big five banks are the Big four Banks and Bank of
Communications.
Source: Almanac of China’s Finance and Banking 2000-2008, CEIC data base, Quarterly Monetary Report of PBC.

Table 4-C Comparison of Assets Held by China’s Non-Bank Intermediaries (RMB billion)
This table compares total assets held by banks and non-bank intermediaries during the period 1995-2009.
Year

Stateowned
Banks
5,373.3
6,582.7
7,914.4
8,860.9
9,970.6
10,793.7
11,188.2
13,549.6
16,275.1
16,932.1
21,005.0
24,23.0
28,007.0
31,836.0
40,089.0

1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

RCCs

UCCs

Insurance
Companies

TICs

Non-deposit
Intermediaries

679.10
870.66
1,012.20
1,143.11
1,239.24
1,393.06
1,610.80
2,205.21
2,674.62
3,103.30
3,142.7
3,450.3
4,343.4
5,211.3
5,492.5

303.92
374.78
498.94
560.63
630.15
678.49
780.02
119.23
148.72
171.50
203.3
183.1
131.2
80.4
27.2

----260.4
337.4
459.1
649.4
912.3
1185.4
1529.6
1973.1
2900.4
3341.8
4063.5

458.60
563.70
636.40
802.50
907.50
975.90
1,088.30
1,544.10
-------

48.97
82.02
100.42
120.97
137.08
160.82
223.67
408.10
495.58
------

Other
Commercial
Banks
536.91
769.98
948.61
1,128.18
1,376.89
1,828.26
2,255.70
2,997.72
3,816.80
4,697.20
6,502.2
8,038.4
10,589.9
12,941.2
17,465.0

Source: Aggregate Statistics from the People’s Bank of China (China’s Central Bank) and CEIC, 2000 – 2009.

Table 5-A A Comparison of the Largest Stock Markets in the World (01/01-12/31, 2010)
Rank

Stock Exchange

Total Market Cap
(US$ million)

Concentration
(%)

Turnover
Velocity (%)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

NYSE Euronext (US)

13,394,081.8

57.0%

130.2%

NASDAQ OMX

3,889,369.9

71.9%

340.4%

Tokyo SE Group

3,827,774.2

60.1%

109.6%

London SE Group

3,613,064.0

82.3%

76.1%

NYSE Euronext (Europe)

2,930,072.4

68.9%

76.5%

Shanghai SE

2,716,470.2

55.8%

178.5%

Hong Kong Exchanges
TSX Group
Bombay SE

2,711,316.2
2,170,432.7
1,631,829.5

69.4%
79.5%
87.7%

62.2%
74.1%
18.1%

National Stock Exchange India

1,596,625.3

69.6%

57.3%

BM&FBOVESPA

1,545,565.7

64.2%

64.7%

Australian Securities Exchange

1,454,490.6

79.4%

82.3%

Deutsche Börse

1,429,719.1

78.4%

119.3%

Shenzhen SE

1,311,370.1

31.2%

344.3%

SIX Swiss Exchange

1,229,356.5

65.6%

73.5%

BME Spanish Exchanges

1,171,625.0

NA

117.2%

Korea Exchange

1,091,911.5

75.7%

176.3%

NASDAQ OMX Nordic Exchange

1,042,153.7

69.7%

79.7%

MICEX

949,148.9

64.3%

52.8%

Johannesburg SE

925,007.2

35.0%

33.3%

69

Foreign
Banks
42.90
55.30
75.80
118.40
191.40
379.20
341.80
317.90
331.10
515.90
715.5
927.9
1,252.5
1,344.8
1,349.2

Notes: All figures are from http//:www.world-exchanges.org, the web site of the international organization of stock exchanges.
Concentration is the fraction of total turnover of an exchange within a year coming from the turnover of the companies with the
largest market cap (top 5%). Turnover velocity is the total turnover of domestic stocks for the year expressed as a percentage of
the total market capitalization.

Table 5-B China’s Bond Markets: 1990 – 2009 (Amount in RMB billion)
This table presents the development of China’s bond markets. “Policy Financial Bonds” are issued by “policy banks,”
which belong to the Treasury Department, and the proceeds of bond issuance are invested in government run projects
and industries such as infrastructure construction (similar to municipal bonds in the U.S.)

Year

Amount
Issued

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

19.72
28.13
46.08
38.13
113.76
151.09
184.78
241.18
380.88
401.50
465.70
488.40
593.43
628.01
692.39
704.20
888.33
2313.91
855.82
1792.7

2006
2007
2008
2009
Yearly
Growth

25.3%

Treasury Bonds
Redemption Balance
Amount
7.62
11.16
23.81
12.33
39.19
49.70
78.66
126.43
206.09
123.87
152.50
228.60
226.12
275.58
374.99
404.55
620.86
584.68
753.14
707.15
24.4%

89.03
106.00
128.27
154.07
228.64
330.03
436.14
550.89
776.57
1,054.20
1,367.40
1,561.80
1,933.60
2,260.36
2,577.76
2,877.40
3144.87
4874.10
4976.78
-25.0%

Policy Financial Bonds
Amount
Amounts
Balance
Issued Redemption

Corporate Bonds
Amounts
Amounts Balance
issued Redemption

6.44
6.69
5.50
0.00
0.00
-105.56
143.15
195.02
180.09
164.50
259.00
307.50
456.14
414.80
585.17
898.00
1109.02
1082.30
1167.8
29.7%

12.4
24.9
68.37
23.58
16.18
30.08
26.89
25.52
15.00
15.82
8.30
14.70
32.50
35.80
32.70
204.65
393.83
505.85
843.54
1662.9
25.5%

5.01
3.37
3.00
3.43
1.35
-25.45
31.23
32.04
47.32
70.92
143.88
155.57
250.53
177.87
205.30
379.0
413.36
406.38
-27.7%

8.49
11.81
14.31
10.88
9.53
170.85
250.96
362.88
512.11
644.75
738.33
853.45
1,005.41
1,165.00
1,401.93
1,781.80
2,300.80
2992.68
3668.6
-40.1%

7.73
11.43
19.28
25.55
28.20
33.63
31.78
21.98
10.53
5.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.70
167.24
288.09
327.78
440.0
22.3%

19.54
33.11
82.20
80.24
68.21
64.66
59.77
52.10
67.69
77.86
86.16
100.86
133.36
169.16
201.86
401.81
553.29
768.33
1285.06
-26.2%

Source: Aggregate Statistics from the People’s Bank of China (China’s Central Bank) 2000 – 2009 and the Statistical
Yearbook of China 2000-2009.

70

Table 6-A Types of Common Stock Issued in China
Tradable?
No
State-owned
(Private
shares*
block
(G shares after
transfer
recent reform
possible) and tradable)
Entrepreneur's
shares
Foreign owners
Legal entity
holders
Employee shares
Yes
A Shares
(Newly
issued
B Shares
shares)
H Shares

Definition
Shares that are controlled by the central government during the process when firms are
converted into a limited liability corporation but before listing. These shares are either
managed and represented by the Bureau of National Assets Management or held by other
state-owned companies, both of which also appoint firms’ board members. After reforms
announced in 2005 and implemented in 2006-7 state shares became G shares and are tradable.
Shares reserved for firms’ founders during the same process described above; different from
shares that founders can purchase and sell in the markets.
Shares owned by foreign industrial investors during the same process
Shares sold to legal identities (such as other companies, listed or non-listed) during the same
process.
Shares sold to firm’s employees during the same process.
Shares issued by Chinese companies that are listed and traded in the Shanghai or Shenzhen
Stock Exchange; most of these shares are sold to and held by Chinese (citizen) investors.
Shares issued by Chinese companies that are listed and traded in the Shanghai or Shenzhen
Stock Exchange; these shares are sold to and held by foreign investors; starting in
2001Chinese investors can also trade these shares.
Shares issued by selected Chinese companies listed and traded in the Hong Kong Stock
Exchange; these shares can only be traded on the HK Exchange but can be held by anyone.

*: There are sub-categories under this definition

Table 6-B Tradable vs. Non-tradable Shares for China’s Listed Companies
Year

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

Shanghai SE:
State/total
shares
0.41
0.49
0.43
0.39
0.35
0.32
0.34
0.43
0.44
0.50
0.52
0.57
0.58
0.57
0.36
0.37
0.47
0.49

^Non-tradable/total
shares

Tradable/total
shares

0.69
0.72
0.67
0.64
0.65
0.65
0.66
0.65
0.64
0.64
0.65
0.64
0.64
0.62
0.65
0.69
0.58
0.53

0.31
0.28
0.33
0.36
0.35
0.35
0.34
0.35
0.36
0.36
0.35
0.35
0.36
0.38
0.35
0.31
0.42
0.47

A/total shares A/Tradable
shares*
0.16
0.16
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.30
0.27
0.28
0.37
0.50

0.52
0.57
0.64
0.60
0.62
0.66
0.71
0.75
0.80
0.80
0.74
0.76
0.77
0.78
0.81
0.90
0.91
0.98

^: Non-tradable shares include “state-owned” and “shares owned by legal entities”;
This column is calculated as “(Non-tradable in Shanghai SE+ Non-tradable in Shenzhen SE)/(Market cap in
Shanghai SE + Market cap in Shenzhen SE)”
*: tradable shares include A, B, and H shares;
Source: China Security Regulation Committee Reports (2000-2006), CEIC database and http://www.csrc.gov.cn

71

Table 7 Trading Volume of National Interbank Market
(RMB billion)
Maturity
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Overnight
103.88
201.52
641.89
283.34
223.03
635.21
8030.47
10651.36
16166.60
24486.20

7 days
560.69
852.34
1,456.31
1041.41
896.26
1290.43
2178.01
3500.47
2134.79
2426.90

20 days
93.35
100.35
56.60
30.67
60.42
38.13
50.16
110.71
102.15
65.01

Source: The People’s Bank of China (2001-2010).

72

30 days
35.28
29.17
44.11
18.93
29.91
19.11
34.16
113.55
204.84
161.30

60 days
9.40
10.78
10.14
9.20
7.51
12.03
27.94
44.52
53.80
46.61

90 days
4.73
4.76
10.18
5.84
14.09
5.22
31.80
66.61
71.00
134.02

120 days
0.87
11.81
2.81
2.57
1.54
1.41
13.34
18.50
62.3
19.75

Figure 1 Overview of China’s Financial System
China’s Financial System

Banking and
Intermediation

Financial Markets

Non-standard Financial

Foreign sectors

Sector

(FDI, Capital Flows)

Sector

Policy Banks

Commercial banks

Stock market

Informal Financial

(SHSE, SZSE, HKSE)

Institutions

Bond market

State Owned

Government bond

Partially state owned

Corporate bond

Private owned
and Foreign

Non-bank Financial
Institutions

RCC, UCC, Postal Savings

TIC, Mutual Funds,
Finance Companies

Venture Capital /PE

Real Estate

Coalitions/ institutions
among Hybrid
Sector firms and their
investors

Components of Bank Deposits
60%

Enterprise (% of total)
Budgetary(% of total)

40%
30%

Govt. Agency and
organizations(% of total)

20%

Urban and Rural
Savings(% of total)

10%

Agricultural Savings(% of
total)

2009

2006

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

0%
1979

% of total deposits

50%

Year

Figure 2-A Sources for Bank Deposits in China

0.8

China

0.6

S. Korea

0.4

S. Korea 20
years ago

0.2

Taiwan

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

0
1991

ratio

1

year

Figure 2-B Comparing Total Bank Credit extended to private/hybrid sectors

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

China
S. Korea
Taiwan
Singapore

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

S. Korea 10
years ago

1994

% of GDP

Assets Managed by Insurance Companies

Year

Figure 2-C A Comparison of Assets Under Management of Insurance Companies
4

Real Value of $1 investment 1992=100

3.5

SSE - China
3

S&P 500 - US

2.5

Sensex - India

2

FTSE - London
1.5

1

0.5

Nikkei - Japan

0

Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec- Dec92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10

Figure 3 A Comparison of Performance of Major Stock Indexes
(Buy-and-hold returns of $1 between Dec. 1992 and Dec. 2010)

75

Real Estate Investment (1996-2009)
4000
3500

In RMB Billions

3000

Total Real Estate Investment

2500
2000
Domestic funded

1500
1000
500
0

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Year

Real Estate Investment (1996-2009)
bottom part of the graph (same colors)
300
270
240
HMT funded

In RMB Billions

210
180

foreign funded

150
120

State Owned

90
60
Collective owned

30
0

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Year

Figure 4-A Total Real Estate Investments and their sources (1996-2009)
Bottom part of the figure in the top panel is enlarged and plotted in the bottom panel, which
presents the funding sources of real estate investment over the period of 1996-2009.
76

4.5

Trillions of sq meters

4
3.5
Total Floor Space
under Construction

3

Floor Space under
Construction:
Residential
Total Floor Space
Sold

2.5
2
1.5

Floor Space Sold:
Residential

1
0.5

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

0

Figure 4-B Total Floor Space (developed vs. sold) in China
(data source for Figures 4-B and 4-C: CEIC)

Normalized chart, 2002=100
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100

Total Floor Space
under Construction
Floor Space under
Construction:
Residential
Total Floor Space Sold

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Floor Space Sold:
Residential

Figure 4-C Growth Rats in Total Floor Space (developed vs. sold) in China

77

National Housing Price vs Disposable Annual Income
Normalized, base year=2002
adjusted by CPI, 2002=100
250
200
150
100

income

Apr-10

Dec-09

Aug-09

Apr-09

Dec-08

Aug-08

Apr-08

Dec-07

Aug-07

Apr-07

Dec-06

Aug-06

Apr-06

Dec-05

Aug-05

Apr-05

Dec-04

Aug-04

Apr-04

Dec-03

Aug-03

Apr-03

50

Dec-02

housing price, RMB/sqr

Figure 5-A: Comparing the growth of National Housing Prices and Disposable Household
Income (data source for Figures 5-A through 5-E: CEIC)

Beijing Housing Price vs Disposable Annual Income
Normalized, base year=2002
adjusted by CPI, 2002=100
housing price, RMB/sqm

Apr-10

Dec-09

Aug-09

Apr-09

Dec-08

Aug-08

Apr-08

Dec-07

Aug-07

Apr-07

Dec-06

Aug-06

Apr-06

Dec-05

Aug-05

Apr-05

Dec-04

Aug-04

Apr-04

Dec-03

Aug-03

Apr-03

income

Dec-02

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50

Figure 5-B: Growth of Housing Prices and Disposable Household Income in Beijing

78

Shanghai Housing Price vs Disposable Annual Income
per capita
adjusted by CPI, 2002=100

housing price, RMB/sqm

income
Dec-02
Apr-03
Aug-03
Dec-03
Apr-04
Aug-04
Dec-04
Apr-05
Aug-05
Dec-05
Apr-06
Aug-06
Dec-06
Apr-07
Aug-07
Dec-07
Apr-08
Aug-08
Dec-08
Apr-09
Aug-09
Dec-09
Apr-10
Aug-10
Dec-10

350
300
250
200
150
100
50

Figure 5-C: Growth of Housing Prices and Disposable Household Income in Shanghai

Shenzhen Housing Price vs Disposable Annual Income
per capita
adjusted by CPI, 2002=100

housing price, RMB/sqm

income
Dec-02
Apr-03
Aug-03
Dec-03
Apr-04
Aug-04
Dec-04
Apr-05
Aug-05
Dec-05
Apr-06
Aug-06
Dec-06
Apr-07
Aug-07
Dec-07
Apr-08
Aug-08
Dec-08
Apr-09
Aug-09
Dec-09
Apr-10
Aug-10
Dec-10

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50

Figure 5-D: Growth of Housing Prices and Disposable Household Income in Shenzhen

79

Guanzhou Housing Price vs Disposable Annual Income
Normalized, base year=2002
adjusted by CPI, 2002=100

250
200
income

150
100

Apr-10

Dec-09

Aug-09

Apr-09

Dec-08

Aug-08

Apr-08

Dec-07

Aug-07

Apr-07

Dec-06

Aug-06

Apr-06

Dec-05

Aug-05

Apr-05

Dec-04

Aug-04

Apr-04

Dec-03

Aug-03

Apr-03

Dec-02

50

housing price, RMB/sqm

Figure 5-E: Growth of Housing Prices and Disposable Household Income in Guangzhou
3,000
500
2,500
2,000
300

1,500

200
100

total value of
open-end fund
Total number of
funds

1,000

Number of openend fund

500

Number of closeend fund

Sep-09

Mar-09

Sep-08

Mar-08

Sep-07

Mar-07

Sep-06

Mar-06

Sep-05

Mar-05

Sep-04

Mar-04

Sep-03

Mar-03

Sep-02

Mar-02

0
Sep-01

0

RMB bn

400

Total value of
funds

Figure 6 Growth in China’s Mutual Fund Industry (1998-2009)

80

Industrial Output by Sectors
（above Designated Size ）
6000

$ Billion

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
SOE and Listed Sectors

Hybrid Sector

Figure 7-A Comparing the Sectors – Industrial Output
In this figure we plot total “industrial output” for State (SOEs) and Listed (publicly listed and traded firms) Sectors
combined and for the Hybrid Sector (all the rest of the firms) during 2000 to 2008. Data source for this table is the
Chinese Statistical Yearbook (2000 – 2009).

SOE and Listed Sector

2009

2010

2011 Q2

Year

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

1990

Millions persons

Employment by Sectors

Hybrid Sector

Figure 7-B Comparing the Sectors – Employment
In this figure we plot total number of workers employed by the State (SOEs) and Listed (publicly listed and traded firms)
Sectors combined and by the Hybrid Sector (all the rest of the firms) during 1990 to 2008. Data source for this table is
the Chinese Statistical Yearbook and CEIC database .

81

Exchange Rate of RMB/USD and HK/USD (2000-Sept.2011)
8.4

RMB/USD

8.0
7.6

HK/USD

7.2

Jul-11

Jan-11

Jul-10

Jan-10

Jul-09

Jan-09

Jul-08

Jan-08

Jul-07

Jan-07

Jul-06

Jan-06

Jul-05

Jan-05

Jul-04

Jan-04

Jul-03

Jan-03

Jul-02

Jan-02

Jul-01

Jan-01

Jan-00

6.4

Jul-00

6.8

Date

Figure 8-A Trends of Exchange Rates (US$, RMB, and HK$)

3500

3000

2000

Jan-11

Jan-10

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

Jan-99

Jan-98

Jan-97

1500

1000

500

0

time

Figure 8-B China’s Foreign Exchange Reserves

82

In billions of USD

2500

Monthly changes (LHS)
Stock of Reserve (RHS)

Jan-96

115
105
95
85
75
65
55
45
35
25
15
5
-5
-15
-25
-35
-45
-55

Jan-95

In billions of USD

Foreign Exchange Reserve: Flows and Stocks

