NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES MACRO-PRU LEAK? EVIDENCE FROM A UK POLICY EXPERIMENT
Shekhar Aiyar
Charles W. Calomiris
Tomasz Wieladek
Working Paper 17822
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17822

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

The authors are grateful to the Bank of England for providing data and encouragement. An earlier
version of this paper appeared as a Bank of England Working Paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the Bank of England, or the International Monetary Fund.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Shekhar Aiyar, Charles W. Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment
Shekhar Aiyar, Charles W. Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek
NBER Working Paper No. 17822
February 2012
JEL No. E32,E51,F30,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
The regulation of bank capital as a means of smoothing the credit cycle is a central element of forthcoming
macro-prudential regimes internationally. For such regulation to be effective in controlling the aggregate
supply of credit it must be the case that: (i) changes in capital requirements affect loan supply by regulated
banks, and (ii) unregulated substitute sources of credit are unable to offset changes in credit supply
by affected banks. This paper examines micro evidence—lacking to date—on both questions, using
a unique dataset. In the UK, regulators have imposed time-varying, bank-specific minimum capital
requirements since Basel I. It is found that regulated banks (UK-owned banks and resident foreign
subsidiaries) reduce lending in response to tighter capital requirements. But unregulated banks (resident
foreign branches) increase lending in response to tighter capital requirements on a relevant reference
group of regulated banks. This “leakage” is substantial, amounting to about one-third of the initial
impulse from the regulatory change.

Shekhar Aiyar
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC 20431
SAiyar@imf.org
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Tomasz Wieladek
Economics Department
London Business School
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
England
twieladek@london.edu

1

Introduction
Capital requirements have been a central tool of the prudential regulation of

banks in most countries for the past three decades. Recently, under Basel III,
regulators have agreed to vary minimum capital requirements somewhat over time, as
part of the cyclical mandate of macro-prudential policies.1 During boom times, capital
requirements would increase, and during recessions they would decline. That
variation is intended to achieve three macro-prudential goals: (1) cooling off creditfed booms with higher capital requirements, (2) mitigating credit crunches during
recessions with commensurate reductions in capital requirements, and (3) boosting
capital and provisioning requirements during booms to provide an additional cushion
to absorb losses during downturns.2
This paper analyses the extent to which this sort of variation in capital
requirements is effective in regulating the supply of bank lending over the cycle. Our
analysis is made possible by an apparently unique policy experiment performed in the
UK during the 1990s and 2000s. As we explain more fully in Section 2, the Financial
Services Authority (FSA) varied individual banks’ minimum risk-based capital
requirements substantially. The extent of this variation across banks in the minimum
required risk-based capital ratio was large (its minimum was 8%, its standard
deviation was 2.2%, and its maximum was 23%). The variation in the average capital
requirement over the business cycle was also large, and tended to be counter-cyclical,
as envisaged under Basel III.
Before undertaking our empirical analysis in Sections 2 through 4, we begin
by reviewing the theoretical foundations of macro-prudential capital regulation and
the empirical literature relating to those foundations. Three necessary conditions must
hold true if the time-varying, macro-prudential capital requirements envisioned under
1

In addition to cyclical variation of capital ratios, macro-prudential policy could entail other cyclical variation in policy
instruments (e.g., liquidity and provisioning requirements) as well as “structural” interventions to promote financial
stability. For more details, see Tucker (2009, 2011), Galati and Moessner (2011), Bank of England (2009), and Aikman,
Haldane and Nelson (2010).
2
As regulations have evolved over time, the complexity of capital regulation has also increased. Under the Basel I
system, capital requirements consisted of three ingredients: definitions of capital that distinguished between tier 1 and tier
2 capital, a formula for measuring risk-weighted assets, and setting constant minimum ratios of 8% for the total riskbased capital (defined as the sum of tier 1 and tier 2 capital, divided by risk-weighted assets), and 4% for the tier 1 riskbased capital. Under Basel II, the calculation of risk-weighted assets was modified to permit, under some circumstances,
the use of internal models and rating agency opinions. Under Basel III, the Basel I minimum ratio is being raised, with a
greater focus on the common equity component of capital, and the so-called “counter-cyclical capital buffer” implies that
minimum risk-based capital ratios will now vary over the economic cycle.

2

Basel III are to be effective in controlling system-wide credit growth: (1) equity (the
key variable of interest in bank capital regulation) must be a relatively costly source
of bank finance, (2) minimum capital requirement ratios must have binding effects on
banks’ choice of capital ratios, and (3) when macro-prudential regulation diminishes
(increases) the supply of credit by banks subject to macro-prudential policy, other
sources of credit must not fully offset such changes through increases (decreases) in
the credit supplied by other sources.

Necessary Condition 1: Equity Must Be a Relatively Costly Source of Finance
The supply of loans from regulated banks will not respond to changes in
capital requirements unless bank capital is a relatively costly means of financing bank
activities. If bank leverage were irrelevant to the cost of bank finance – as implied by
the Miller-Modigliani Theorem – then changes in minimum capital requirements
would not be useful in reducing credit growth during booms or in mitigating credit
crunches; banks would costlessly adjust their capital ratios without any effect on their
lending activities.
Theoretical models that incorporate the tax benefits of debt finance and
asymmetric information about banks’ conditions and prospects imply that, in general,
raising funds from external equity finance is more costly for banks than from debt
finance, which implies that a rise in capital requirements will raise the cost of bank
finance, and thus lower the supply of lending.3 The favourable tax treatment of debt
results from the deductibility of interest payments, but not dividend payments.
With respect to the asymmetric information costs of equity, Myers and Majluf
(1984) show that the adverse-selection costs of raising external equity (which take the
form of under-pricing of the equity offerings of unobservably healthy banks in their

3

There is also a theoretical literature in banking that discusses how agency problems arising from greater capital or
capital requirements can give rise to social costs in addition to credit contraction – for example, changes in managerial
effort or risk preferences. We do not describe this literature, since it is not directly related to the amount of lending, which
is our focus. For a review of that literature, see VanHoose (2008) and Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2008). Admati et al.
(2011) express scepticism about the magnitude of equity capital costs for banks.

3

model) apply more to junior securities (like equity) than to relatively senior debt
instruments.4
Equity may also be relatively costly as a source of finance because of ex post
verification costs, another form of asymmetric information. For example, Diamond
(1984) and Gale and Hellwig (1985) show that banks that offer debt contracts can
economize on those costs.5
The negative signalling effects of equity offerings modelled by Myers and
Majluf (1984) will be mitigated if equity offerings respond to an observable
regulatory change, and so, the raising of equity capital to respond to observable
changes in macro-prudential regulation will have a lower cost than the raising of
equity in response to unobservable changes in requirements or other unobservable
motivations for raising new equity. That does not imply, however, that the imposition
of observably higher regulatory capital requirements would eliminate the negative
signalling effects of choosing to issue equity to meet higher regulatory requirements.
In equilibrium, bank heterogeneity would also result in differences among
banks in the extent to which they would choose to raise equity as opposed to
shrinking their risk-weighted assets in response to higher capital requirements. Banks
in relatively good condition would eschew equity offerings more, ceteris paribus, to
avoid long-term dilution of incumbent stockholders. For these reasons, higher equity
capital requirements do not eliminate the information costs, and attendant adverse
selection risks, that make equity offerings relatively costly.6

4

The Myers and Majluf (1984) model envisions adverse-selection costs as entirely reflected in the pricing of an equity
offering, since in their model, there is no technology available to firms to invest in overcoming problems of asymmetric
information. More realistically, part of the cost of asymmetric information takes the form of paying high underwriting
costs to investment bankers who market equity offerings. Firms pay those costs to mitigate the more severe adverse
pricing effects on equity offerings that otherwise would result from asymmetric information (Calomiris and Tsoutsoura
2011).
5
Additionally, Calomiris and Kahn (1991) show that agency problems associated with asymmetric information about
portfolio realizations will tend to encourage demandable debt contracting rather than long-term debt issuances (in their
model, equity is supplied entirely by insiders). In that model, requiring bankers to raise the ratio of equity to risky assets
would result in less lending by banks (since outside equity finance is prohibitively expensive. That model is extended by
Diamond and Rajan (2000, 2001).
6
Additionally, even if all banks went to the equity market at the same time to raise equity, banks would differ according
to their investment banking choices; banks whose managers knew that they were in better condition would have an
incentive to expend more on underwriting to ensure that investors receive more information about their superior
condition. Those expenditures contribute to the costs of equity capital requirements, and would also have signalling
effects on the pricing of both high-underwriting cost and low-underwriting cost banks.

4

There is a substantial empirical literature in support of the general proposition
that equity capital is relatively costly to raise, and that the financing costs of debt
sources of funding increase in the extent to which the debt claim is more equity-like –
that is, costs are lowest for deposits, higher for contractual debt and preferred stock
(which are de jure junior to deposits in many countries and also de facto junior
because of their longer maturity), higher still for mezzanine instruments (e.g., debt
that is convertible into equity), and highest for equity.7 Equity prices tend to decline in
reaction to an announcement of an equity offering, especially when issuers are
informationally opaque, and that announcement effect is lower for convertible debt,
and zero for straight debt (James 1987, James and Wier 1990). Underwriting costs for
equity are also much higher than for debt (Calomiris 2002). Ediz et al (1998) and
Francis and Osborne (2009) also find that, consistent with Myers and Majluf (1984),
UK banks behave as if tier 2 capital is less costly to raise than equity, and that banks
that have relatively low costs of raising equity raise equity capital more (as opposed to
contracting risky assets) in response to increases in capital requirements.
Because the high cost of equity capital is a necessary condition for credit
supply to respond to either a loss of equity capital or an increase in capital
requirements, evidence that contractions of credit result from these phenomena is
powerful evidence that equity finance is costly. The literature on bank “capital
crunches” documents that shocks to bank equity capital have large contractionary
effects on the supply of lending (Bernanke 1983, Bernanke and Lown 1991, Kashyap
and Stein 1995, 2000, Houston, James, and Marcus 1997, Peek and Rosengren 1997,
2000, Campello 2002, Calomiris and Mason 2003, Calomiris and Wilson 2004,
Cetorelli and Goldberg 2009).
Many studies also suggest that increases in regulatory capital requirements can
precipitate contractions in the supply of credit (see VanHoose 2008 for a review).
Some of these existing studies analyze banks’ lending behaviour around the time of
regulatory regime changes (Chiuri et al. 2002), and thus do not isolate the effects of
bank minimum capital requirement changes, per se. Others analyze cross-sectional
7

The view that junior instruments are more costly sources of finance also explains the common regulatory reluctance to
impose large increases on banks’ minimum capital ratios. The initial Basel minimum capital requirements were set at
ratios that were quite close to those prevailing at the time. Indeed, the distinctions between tier 1 and tier 2 capital, and
the 4% and 8% minimum risk-based capital ratios, were devised in 1988 to allow banks that were subject to the Basel
guidelines to comply with the new guidelines without raising significant new capital, and despite significant differences
in the capital structures of banks across countries.

5

differences in lending by banks that differ according to their regulatory circumstances,
including whether they are the subject of a regulatory action, or whether they have
relatively small buffers of capital relative to the minimum requirement (e.g., Peek and
Rosengren 1995a, 1995b, Gambacorta and Mistrulli 2004). Experiencing a regulatory
action is a special event, however, and one that is highly endogenous to a variety of
circumstances that may affect bank lending. Similarly, the relative sizes of banks’
capital buffers do not provide a reliable measure of the relative degree to which banks
are constrained by regulation; the sizes of a banks’ capital buffers are endogenous to
banks’ particular circumstances, which can produce substantial variation in their
targeted capital buffers (more on this below). Finally, it is important to control for
cross-sectional variation in loan demand when measuring the effects of capital
requirements on loan supply, which only some of the pre-existing studies of lending
attempt to do.
To our knowledge, our study is the first analysis of bank-specific responses to
variation in regulatory minimum capital requirements. Unlike prior studies, we can
document regulatory capital requirements at the level of individual banks, and we
show that these requirements vary substantially cross-sectionally and over time.
Furthermore, when measuring the loan-supply response of banks to capital
requirements we are able to control for contemporaneous variation in loan demand
because we have access to detailed information about the composition of bank loan
portfolios. Jimenez, Saurina, Ongena, and Peydro (2011) study the effects of bankspecific changes in dynamic provisioning requirements for Spanish banks. Like our
study, theirs controls for demand-side influences. Changes in dynamic provisioning
should be thought of as changes in the “front-loading” of capital requirements against
risky assets, rather than permanent changes in capital ratio requirements. For that
reason, the magnitudes of loan-supply reactions to provisioning changes should be
smaller than the reactions to changes in capital ratio requirements. Thus, the findings
of Jimenez et al. (2011) – which imply magnitudes of roughly half the size of those
reported below – are consistent with the findings we report below.

6

Necessary Condition 2: Capital Requirements Must Bind
A second necessary condition for bank capital requirements to affect the loansupply decisions of banks is that regulatory capital requirements must continuously
act as binding constraints on bank capital ratio choices. If market discipline motivates
banks to maintain ratios of capital far in excess of those required by regulators, then
changes in regulatory requirements might have no effect on bank capital choices, and
therefore, no effect on bank loan supply. Calomiris and Mason’s (2004) study of
credit card banks in the 1990s shows that, under some circumstances, market
discipline can motivate capital ratios substantially in excess of the regulatory
minimum.
When capital requirements bind, the equilibrium amount of total bank capital
will still exceed the minimum requirement by a buffer chosen to minimize the costs of
complying with capital requirements.8 Empirical research has identified substantial
heterogeneity with respect to bank responses to capital requirements, and particularly,
the extent to which capital requirements bind on banks’ choices of capital ratios. In
many studies, actual capital ratios respond strongly to changes in capital
requirements, but in other studies, there is little observed response, which indicates
that in some circumstances market discipline may be the dominant influence on
variation in capital ratios (VanHoose 2008).
For our sample of UK banks, there have been two studies examining the extent
to which changes in bank-specific capital requirements affected actual capital ratios
(Alfon et al (2005) and Francis and Osborne (2009)). Both studies find a substantial
impact, and both conclude that capital requirements were binding on capital ratio
8
The dynamic behaviour of buffers is a matter of some theoretical controversy. Repullo and Suarez (2009) derive a
dynamic model of capital buffers under the Basel II regime. They show that the determination of risk under Basel II
contributes greatly to the pro-cyclicality of capital requirements (when compared with Basel I); during recessions, capital
requirements effectively rise. Thus they argue that banks will choose to hold high buffers of capital during expansions,
anticipating the need for additional capital during recessions, and that this effect is so large that it is not fully mitigated by
the extent of variation in macro-prudential policy. Aliaga-Diaz et al (2011) develop a dynamic optimization model to
analyze the effectiveness of macro-prudential policy, based on parameters drawn from Latin American experience. They
show that variation in capital requirements may have to be large to make macro-prudential policies effective. In their
framework, however, anticipated reductions in capital requirements due to macro-prudential policy lead banks to
endogenously choose capital buffers that are smaller during booms than during economic declines. That means that the
countercyclical effect of capital requirement changes can be mitigated by the endogenous offsetting decisions of banks
with respect to their chosen buffers. The difference between the conclusions reached by Repullo and Suarez (2009) and
Aliaga-Diaz et al (2011) about the cyclical properties of capital buffers reflect differences in assumptions about the size
of macro-prudential capital requirement variation over the cycle and the extent to which recessions are associated with
substantial changes in risk weights on assets.

7

choices. In Section 2, we confirm that capital requirements appear to have been
binding on bank capital decisions continuously for our sample of UK banks from
1998 to 2007. Moreover, since binding regulatory requirements are a necessary
condition for capital requirement changes to affect bank credit supply, our empirical
finding in Section 3 – confirming that capital requirement changes have important
effects on the supply of credit – further corroborates that capital requirements were
binding.

Necessary Condition 3: Limited Substitutability of Alternative Funding
The effectiveness of macro-prudential variation in regulatory capital
requirements depends on limited substitutability between the credit supplied by banks
that are subject to capital regulation and the financing provided by other sources not
subject to minimum capital requirements. To the extent that other sources can offer
substitutes for the loans of regulated domestic banks, there will be offsetting
“leakages” to macro prudential policy-induced variation in the supply of loans by
regulated banks. These other sources could include lending by unregulated domestic
intermediaries, cross-border bank lending and securities offerings (such as
commercial paper, corporate bonds or equity offerings).
The theoretical and empirical finance literature suggests that loans from
intermediaries are not perfect substitutes for securities offerings. Loans involve much
more detailed contracting terms than bonds – many pages that describe conditions
pertaining to warranties, covenants, and collateral – which must be custom-designed
for each loan contract and which require monitoring and enforcement after the loan is
made.9 Furthermore, the importance of “soft” information for limiting the screening,
monitoring and enforcement costs of bank lending imply that there are limits to the
ability of offshore lending to substitute for local intermediation, except in the case of
very large firms that operate internationally, for whom access to local information is
less relevant.10 Thus, although “leakages” from all alternative sources of finance
could potentially offset the variation in loan supply that results from macro-prudential
9

There is a large empirical literature on the special characteristics of loans, beginning with James (1987).
Evidence that local, “soft” information is relevant for most bank lending is provided in various studies, including
Petersen and Rajan (2002), and Agarwal and Hauswald (2010).

10

8

regulation of affected banks, the most powerful potential substitute for regulated bank
lending is lending by local intermediaries that are not subject to domestic capital
regulation.11
The problem of “leakages” involving local intermediaries is particularly acute
for an economy like the UK, which is a global financial centre. Resident foreign
branches of banks headquartered abroad are not subject to FSA prudential regulation
(unlike domestically headquartered banks and resident foreign subsidiaries), but are
regulated by their home country regulatory authorities (which, during our period,
typically set capital ratio requirements uniformly at 8% of risk-weighted assets for all
banks, which was the minimum in the UK).12 That means that if the FSA decided to
raise capital requirements, foreign branches operating in the UK could be a significant
source of leakage.
Regulatory leakages have understandably been of great concern to
policymakers engaged in the construction of macro-prudential regimes. In the UK, for
example, Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor of Financial Stability at the Bank of
England, has frequently commented upon the potential problem of the “dilution” of
cyclical macro prudential policies, and how this underlines the need for international
co-ordination:
Co-operation will be especially important in the deployment of ‘cyclical’
instruments. If one country tightens capital or liquidity requirements on
exposures to its domestic economy, the effect will be diluted if lenders
elsewhere are completely free to step into the gap. Basel and the EU are
addressing how to handle that where the instrument is the Basel 3
Countercyclical Buffer. (Tucker (2011))
In Section 4, we investigate the extent to which Deputy Governor Tucker’s concerns
about dilution are warranted. Specifically, we ask whether foreign branches operating
11

Another aspect of the UK financial system that limited the potential leakages from sources of funding other than loans
on banks’ balance sheets was the limited use of loan securitization during our period. Data for the UK show that, prior to
2009, loan securitization was very small in the aggregate, and that the proportion of securitized loans relative to total
loans did not vary importantly at high frequency. In preliminary work, we also explored whether changes in individual
capital requirements predicts greater issuance of either corporate bonds or equity in sectors that the affected bank is
competing in. We did not find a statistically significant effect, which suggests that capital markets do not appear to be a
significant source of leakage in our data. This is consistent with the limited substitutability between bank and bond/equity
finance.
12
Such foreign branches account for the majority of banks resident in the UK; in our sample they comprise 173 out of
277 banks. Moreover, as described in Section 4, these branches account for a non-trivial share of lending to the UK real
economy, and are important in several sub-sectors of the real economy. See Aiyar (2011) for a more detailed account of
the structure of the banking industry in the UK, especially relating to the difference between regulated foreign
subsidiaries and unregulated foreign branches.

9

within the UK increase their lending to “step into the gap” when UK-regulated banks
experience increases in their capital requirements. We find that this dilution effect
from leakages is large and statistically significant.
In the remainder of the paper, we proceed as follows: Section 2 describes the
bank-specific UK data base that we employ to measure the relationship between
changes in capital requirements and changes in lending, reviews the process that
governed changes in capital requirements, reports summary statistics about changes in
capital requirements, and describes the relationship between capital ratio requirements
and capital ratios. We also show that, despite the absence of any explicit macroprudential mandate in FSA supervision, average capital requirements across the
banking system were in fact strikingly counter-cyclical.13
Section 3 focuses on the connection between capital requirement changes and
bank lending for the UK-resident banks that were subject to FSA capital regulation.
We report regression results that demonstrate a large and statistically significant
relationship between bank-specific changes in capital requirements and changes in
bank lending.
Section 4 estimates the loan supply response of foreign branches operating in
the UK (which are not subject to FSA capital regulations) to changes in the capital
requirements imposed on UK-owned banks and resident foreign subsidiaries (which
are subject to FSA capital regulation). We find evidence for large leakages, which
offset about a third of the effect of capital requirement changes on the lending of UKregulated banks. Section 5 concludes.

2

UK capital regulation, 1998-2007

Our empirical analysis of UK banks’ capital ratio and lending responses to bank
capital requirement changes is made possible by a regulatory policy regime that set
bank-specific, time-varying capital requirements. These mimimum capital
requirement ratios were set for all banks under the jurisdiction of the FSA, i.e. all UKowned banks and resident foreign subsidiaries. Bank capital requirements are not

13

On the other hand, this should not be entirely surprising, as the term ‘macro-prudential’ originated in the UK in the
early 1980s (Clement, 2010).

10

public information. We collect quarterly data on capital requirements, and other bank
characteristics, from the regulatory databases of the Bank of England and FSA. Our
sample comprises 104 regulated banks (48 UK-owned banks and 56 foreign
subsidiaries), and 173 unregulated foreign branches operating in the UK. Bank
mergers are dealt with by creating a synthetic merged data series for the entire period.
The variables included in this study are listed and defined in Table 1, and Table 2
reports summary statistics.14
Discretionary regulatory policy played a much greater role in the UK’s setting
of minimum bank capital ratios than in the capital regulation of other countries. A key
focus of regulation was the so-called “trigger ratio,”: a minimum capital ratio set for
each bank that would trigger regulatory intervention if breached.15 Changes in trigger
ratios were communicated to the Board of Directors of the bank in a formal letter.
According to Francis and Osborne (2009):
...the FSA inherited from the Bank of England the practice of supplementing
the Basel I approach with individual capital requirements, also known as
‘trigger ratios,’ based on analysis of firm-specific characteristics and
management practices, and this practice has been retained under Pillar 2 of
Basel II. These firm-specific requirements are periodically reassessed and,
where necessary, revised to reflect changing bank conditions and management
practices. As part of these reviews, the FSA have considered it to be good
practice in the financial services industry for a UK bank to hold an appropriate
capital buffer above the individual capital ratios advised by the FSA....
UK supervisors set individual capital guidance, also known as ‘trigger ratios,’
based on firm-specific reviews and judgments about, among other things,
evolving market conditions as well as the quality of risk management and
banks’ systems and controls. These triggers are reviewed every 18-36 months,
which gives rise to considerable variety in capital adequacy ratios across firms
and over time.

The authors further note that the unique, bank-specific, discretionary UK
capital regulation regime was intended to fill the gaps from the early Basel I system,
which did not consider risks related to variation in interest rates, or legal, reputational
and operational risks. Our empirical analysis below confirms that view; changes in
14

The data used in this study exclude outliers based on the following criteria: (1) trivially small banks (with total loans
less than £3000 on average), or (2) observations for which the absolute value of the log difference of lending in one
quarter exceeded 1.
15
The FSA also maintained a separate requirement for a “target ratio,” which was set above the trigger ratio and was
intended to provide a capital cushion to help prevent an accidental breach of the trigger ratio. In 2001, following the
Financial Services and Market Act, the FSA stopped setting target ratios, but even before then, the trigger ratio was the
primary focus of regulatory compliance.

11

capital ratio requirements do not appear to be associated with past or future changes in
the credit risk of loans (as measured by changes in the non-performing loan ratio).
Rather, cross-sectional differences in capital ratio requirements (shown in Table 3) are
associated with identifiable bank-specific characteristics (size, reliance on retail
deposits, sectoral loan concentration) that could proxy for a variety of other risk
differences.
An implication of the view that discretionary variation of bank-specific capital
ratio requirements set by the FSA reflected differences in operational and interest rate
risks may explain why capital ratio requirements in excess of 8 percent were viewed
as less necessary after the implementation of the Basel II system in 2007. The
introduction of Basel II in 2007 generally resulted in substantial reduction in riskweighted assets for a large number of UK banks.
When measuring the capital requirement (trigger ratio) for risk-based capital
that is assigned to the individual bank, some complications arise with respect to the
treatment of the “banking book” and the “trading book” of the bank. For banks that
had both a banking book and a trading book (which is a characteristic of larger, more
complex banks, comprising about one-third of the regulated banks in our sample), the
FSA often assigned different trigger ratios for the banking and trading book, and
uniformly, the trading book capital requirement is less than or equal to the trigger
ratio on the banking book. When we describe capital requirements in tables and
graphs, we will often refer to the “trigger ratio” and “capital requirement ratio,” but
we will always be referring to the banking-book trigger ratio, which is also the
measure used in our regression analysis. By focusing on the banking-book trigger
ratio to measure regulatory changes, our measure captures truly exogenous change, as
we avoid the distortions that result from endogenous changes in the proportion of
risk-weighted assets held in the trading book. It is also comparable across banks that
maintain trading books and those that do not.
As Table 2 and Figure 1 shows, the variation in capital ratio requirements is
large. The mean capital requirement ratio is 10.8, the standard deviation is 2.26 , the
minimum value is 8%, and the maximum value is 23%. Figure 2 displays the
distribution of changes in capital requirements, which are divided according to the
change in the size of the capital requirements that are imposed on the banks. When
defining capital requirement changes in Figure 2, and in the regression analysis
12

below, we exclude very small changes (changes of less than 10 basis points) which
result from errors in rounding, and which are reversed in subsequent quarters.16 Not
surprisingly, there are no observed changes in capital ratio requirements of between
10 and 30 basis points. The elimination of rounding errors results in 132 remaining
observations of changes in banking-book capital requirements in our sample. In
general, there are more small changes in capital requirements than intermediate or
large changes, although that pattern is more pronounced for UK-owned banks than
foreign subsidiaries. As Figure 3 shows, most banks either experienced zero or one
capital requirement change during our sample period, but 35 banks experienced two
or more changes.
Figures 4, 5 and 6 plot the average capital requirement ratio for the regulated
banking system, with “average” defined in three different ways, against GDP growth.
Figure 4 takes a simple (non-weighted) average of the capital requirement for all
regulated banks in the sample. Figure 5 weights these capital requirements by the
assets of each bank. Figure 6 weights by lending to the real economy rather than by
assets, and calculates the average capital requirement not directly in levels but by
cumulating across changes in the capital requirement over successive periods; the
latter is to ensure that the graph abstracts from changes in the sample of banks
between time periods due to entry or exit, and only reflects changes in capital
requirement ratios. All three measures are closely and positively associated with
movements in GDP (the simple correlation co-efficient is 0.44, 0.52 and 0.64
respectively, in figures 4, 5 and 6 respectively). The pattern of association is stronger
for weighted than for non-weighted capital requirements, although the range of
variation is smaller. Average non-weighted capital requirement ratios ranged from a
minimum of 10.2% in 2007 to a maximum of 11.2% in 2003.
This is a striking amount of counter-cyclical variation given that the sample
period was one of varying positive growth, but no actual recessions. By way of
comparison, the Basel III countercyclical buffer is to vary between 0 and 2.5% over
the entire business cycle inclusive of recessions.17 Thus, although the FSA lacked any
16

Our method of computing the trigger ratio requires that one divide required capital by risk-weighted assets, which
creates very small rounding errors that give rise to small implied “changes” in required capital ratios, which not
economically significant changes.
17
Furthermore, variation in the UK trigger ratio is a stricter embodiment of change over the cycle, given that the failure
to meet the trigger ratio can have dire consequences for a bank, while a failure to meet the new Basel III countercyclical
capital buffer has more limited consequences (i.e., limits on the distributions of earnings to shareholders).

13

explicit macro-prudential mandate over the period, the outcome of its decisions made
on a bank-by-bank basis was in fact macro-prudential in nature. This provides an ideal
testing ground for the likely efficacy of future explicitly macro-prudential regimes.
After 2006, around the time Basel II was introduced18, capital requirements
declined markedly, and this happened in spite of an acceleration of growth, which was
contrary to the previous pattern of counter-cyclical changes in requirements. That
pattern differs from the rises of prior expansionary periods, although the decline is
less pronounced for weighted capital requirements than for non-weighted capital
requirements (which actually fell during the 2006-2007 expansion). As noted above,
the introduction of Basel II (which was designed to provide a more comprehensive
measure of bank risks than the prior system) may have led to supervisors to place less
reliance on discretionary setting of bank-specific capital ratios above 8 percent.
To understand the FSA’s approach to setting capital requirements better, it is
useful to divide the sources of variation in capital ratio requirements into three sets of
factors: (1) capital requirement differences that reflect long-term cross-sectional
differences in bank type, operations or condition, (2) high-frequency cross-sectional
changes in bank operations or condition that capture, for example, sudden changes in
bank loan quality, and (3) variation over time in average minimum capital
requirements for banks that reflect what could be termed macro-prudential goals. Of
these, the variation over the cycle has already been discussed above; below we
document variation in the long-term cross-sectional characteristics of banks and high
frequency cross-sectional changes.
In Table 3, we report summary statistics for average long-term bank
characteristics and relate those to average capital ratios. The long-term bank
characteristics we examine are: size, liability mix, loan write-off ratio, and
concentration. Across the four quartiles of average required capital ratios, higher
capital requirements are monotonically associated with smaller bank size and a
smaller proportion of what could be termed “core” deposits (the sum of sight and time
deposits, which excludes repos, certificates of deposit, and all non-depository sources
of funding). Higher capital requirements are also monotonically increasing in sectoral
concentration, defined as a bank’s lending to the sector to which it has the greatest

18

Basel II was formally introduced on January 2007 in the UK, but the transition period most likely started before that.

14

exposure divided by the bank’s total lending.19 With respect to loan write-offs, banks
in the highest quartile of average capital requirements have substantially higher writeoffs, but within the first three quartiles of average capital requirements, banks do not
differ with respect to write-offs.
At high frequency—examining responses of capital requirements to quarterly
changes in bank behaviour over the prior four quarters—we found practically no
connection between changes in bank condition and changes in capital requirements.
High-frequency changes in write-offs were negatively correlated with capital
requirement changes that occurred within the same quarter, indicating that when some
banks experienced large write-offs (resulting in diminished capital) regulators
occasionally reduced those banks’ minimum capital ratios. It is possible that highfrequency increases in write-offs are moments when supervisors believe that ongoing
uncertainty about prospective bank losses has been resolved, in which case it may
make sense to reduce capital requirements accordingly. This high-frequency
connection between write-offs and capital requirements explained only about one
percent of the panel variation in capital requirements.20 In our regression results
reported below, we further investigate whether changes in minimum capital ratio
requirements are related to past or future changes in non-performing loan ratios, and
we find that minimum capital ratios are orthogonal to past or future non-performing
loan ratios.
Overall, therefore, we find substantial variation across banks and over time in
minimum capital requirements, and we find that changes in capital requirements are
correlated with long-term bank characteristics, as well as cyclical changes in
economic and market conditions, but not strongly associated with identifiable highfrequency changes in banks’ circumstances.
As a rough gauge of the extent to which capital requirements were binding on
bank behaviour, Figure 6 plots the co-movements between weighted capital ratios and
19

Lending here refers to non-financial sector, non-household lending. The household sector is excluded from the measure
of concentration because lending to households is not comparable in concentrating risk to lending to a particular sector.
For many banks lending to households is by far the biggest individual lending category. The large size of the household
sector means that a bank specializing in household lending may be well diversified within the sector, e.g. regionally or
across different types of consumer loans, and thus less risky. At any rate, this appears to have been the view of the
regulators: including household lending in the definition of concentration used here eliminates the monotonic relationship
between sectoral concentration and capital requirements.
20
If supervisors believe that write-offs resolve ongoing uncertainty about prospective bank losses, it may make sense to
reduce capital requirements accordingly.

15

weighted capital ratio requirements over time, with banks sorted into quartiles
according to the buffer over minimum capital requirements. For all four groups of
banks, the variation in capital requirements was associated with substantial comovement in capital ratios, confirming the conclusions of Alfon et al (2005) and
Francis and Osborne (2009) that capital ratio requirements were binding on banks’
choices of capital ratios for UK banks during this sample period.

3

The effect of minimum capital requirement changes on lending by affected
banks

In this Section, we estimate the effect of capital requirement changes on bank lending.
Our measure of bank lending is loans to the non-financial sector. We construct that
measure by aggregating all of the sectoral loan categories of a bank’s lending except
for its loans to financial institutions. As discussed in Section 1, changes in capital
requirements should affect lending by a regulated bank only when bank equity is
relatively expensive to raise, and when regulatory requirements are binding
constraints.21
When seeking to measure the effects on bank loan supply from increased
capital requirements it is important to recognize, and control for, variation in bank
lending due to changes in loan demand, which is also likely to vary across banks
(according to their sectoral specializations), and over the cycle. To identify loansupply responses to capital requirement changes, in this Section, we control for loandemand changes in several alternative ways. Following Aiyar (2011), the basic
strategy is to exploit differences in the sectoral concentration of lending by different
banks to identify cross-sectional differences in loan demand faced by different banks.
For each bank, we construct three different measures of sectoral loan demand
as follows: in any quarter, each sector’s total lending is measured by aggregating all
lending into that sector by other banks in the sample. Denote that variable as Ziqt ,
21

We model the effects of capital requirement changes on loan supply. We do not model the process through which
capital ratio requirements affect capital ratios, although our estimation of loan-supply effects does allow banks with
different “buffers” between minimum and actual capital ratios to respond differently to increases in capital requirements.
We focus on loan-supply effects for two reasons: First, loan-supply is the primary variable of interest. Second, as we
discuss further below, buffers vary substantially and persistently across banks, and banks with relatively large buffers
tend to exhibit greater responsiveness to capital ratio requirement changes, not less. Heterogeneity in buffers likely
reflects unobservable bank characteristics associated with the costs of raising capital.

16

where t indexes the quarter, q indexes the sector and i indexes the bank for which it is
constructed. Allowing small-case letters to denote logs, ∆ziqt represents percentage
changes in sectoral lending thus constructed. Then we aggregate across sectors,
weighting the change in lending in each sector by that sector’s importance to bank i;
thus zit= ∑q siqt-1∆ziqt, where siqt denotes the share of sector q in bank i’s lending
portfolio in period t.
The variable zit serves as our first measure of bank-specific loan demand.
However, the measure is imperfect because growth in aggregate lending by all other
banks may still reflect the common supply-side effect of macro-prudential policy. We
construct two additional measures designed to address that problem. First, for each
sector we simply subtract total (non-sectorally weighted) bank lending growth for all
banks from the bank-specific measure zit. This subtraction should remove supply-side
influences that are common to both total bank lending and sectorally-weighted bank
lending, leaving only the bank-specific weighted sectoral deviations of loan growth,
which should reflect demand-side influences. We call this measure “adjusted z”. Our
second approach is to regress zit on the time series average (asset-weighted) change
in bank capital requirements. The bank-specific time series residual from that
regression is a proxy for loan demand growth faced by that particular bank. We call
this measure “residual z”.
Thus the general specification is:
3

3

k 0

k 0

lit   i    t  k KRRit  k    t  k zit  k  X   it

where lit denotes lending growth in period t by bank i, KRRit denotes the
change in the capital requirement ratio,  i is a bank-specific fixed effect, and X is a
vector of controls. zit is the demand proxy discussed above, in any of its three
varieties.
Both the contemporaneous change in capital requirements and three lags are
included in the equation. On the basis of regulatory data we only observe a change in
the capital requirement when the trigger ratio in a particular report differs from the
trigger ratio in the preceding report from three months earlier; we do not know when,
17

within that three month period, the change in capital requirements was introduced.
Moreover, it is possible that FSA regulators—who maintain an ongoing dialogue with
the banks they supervise—might inform a bank in advance of a forthcoming change
in the capital requirement ratio. Both these considerations indicate the necessity for a
contemporaneous term of the dependant variable in addition to lags.
Table 4a reports five versions of our baseline loan-supply regressions. All
specifications are estimated in a panel fixed-effects framework, where the bankspecific fixed effect should capture heterogeneity in lending growth arising from
relatively long-run, time-invariant bank characteristics.22 The first column does not
include any controls. The second column introduces the raw value of z as a control,
together with the standard macroeconomic variables used as controls in other studies,
GDP growth and inflation.23 The third and fourth columns substitute the raw value of
z with, respectively, the adjusted z and residual z demand proxies discussed above.
The fifth column introduces bank-specific characteristics as additional controls.
Specifically, we include TIER1, RISK, SUB, and BIG. TIER1 is Francis and
Obsborne’s (2009) measure of a bank’s low cost of equity capital relative to other
banks (which is revealed by its relatively high dependence on tier 1 capital). RISK is a
measure of the riskiness of bank assets: the ratio of risk-weighted assets to total
assets. SUB is an indicator variable that captures whether the bank is a subsidiary of a
foreign bank. BIG is an indicator variable that captures whether the bank has assets in
excess of £10 billion.
We find that loan supply responds negatively to increases in capital
requirements. The parameter of interest is tightly estimated across the full range of
specifications. Summing across lags of the change in the capital requirement ratio
yields estimates between 0.065 and 0.072.That is, an increase in the capital
requirement ratio of 100 basis points induces, on average, a cumulative fall in lending

22

A fixed effects specification is preferred to random effects because we have no strong prior that the bank-specific effect
is not correlated with other explanatory variables—as required by random effects. Post-estimation Hausman tests reject
the null of a random effects specification.
23
A key macroeconomic variable that could potentially affect lending growth is monetary policy, and indeed, there is a
rich literature documenting this effect, such as the seminal Kashyap and Stein (2000). We have experimented extensively
with including monetary policy as an explanatory variable, but because of the subtlety of the issues raised, in particular,
possible interactions between monetary policy and changes in regulatory capital requirements, we defer these results to a
separate forthcoming working paper (Aiyar, Calomiris and Wieladek (2011)). Here we note only the most pertinent
finding from that work: while we find, in conformity with the literature, that monetary policy affects bank lending, its
impact appears to be orthogonal to the impact of regulatory capital requirements.

18

growth of between 6.5 and 7.2 percentage points.24 Higher GDP growth is
unsurprisingly associated with more rapid lending growth, while the (sector-based)
demand controls are insignificant, suggesting that demand conditions tend to vary
quite uniformly across sectors. Bank-specific balance sheet characteristics used as
controls in other studies (TIER1, RISK, SUB, and BIG) are not significant.
Two separate concerns regarding endogeneity arise for the specifications in
Table 4a. First, the relationship of interest might be subject to reverse causality. The
bank regulator could be responding to overly rapid loan growth by increasing the
responsible bank’s minimum capital requirement. However, if this were the case, our
results for the responses of loan supply are even stronger than reported, because such
behaviour by the regulator would tend to generate a positive co-efficient between loan
supply and changes in capital requirements.
Second, and of perhaps greater import, underlying changes to the quality of
the bank’s loan portfolio could be driving both regulatory changes in minimum capital
ratios and changes in credit supply, thereby generating a spurious correlation between
the latter two variables. To address this potential problem we examined the
contemporaneous correlation between a proxy for loan quality—write-offs—and
minimum capital requirements, and found none. Moreover, we found that the change
in capital requirements for a bank cannot be predicted by contemporaneous, lagged, or
future values of changes in write-offs. This suggests that poorly performing loan
books are not the main driver behind changes in capital regulatory requirements.
While banks which have relatively high write-offs over the whole time-series on
average have higher minimum capital requirements than banks which have relatively
low write-offs (as shown in Table 3), this systematic difference applies only to the
cross-section.
Of course, it may still be the case that changes in loan quality affect loan
supply for reasons unrelated to capital requirements, and indeed, we find evidence
that this is the case in our sample. Table 4b shows the same regressions as Table 4,
but with contemporaneous and lagged values of changes in write-offs introduced as
additional explanatory variables. If deteriorating loan books were driving both
changes in capital requirements and changes in credit supply, then we should find that
24

Strictly speaking, the cumulative impact on lending growth will differ from these estimates due to compounding.

19

the coefficients on the regulatory changes become insignificant, or diminish in
magnitude. In fact, the coefficients on capital requirement changes are almost
identical to those in Table 4, suggesting that changes in write offs and changes in
miminum capital ratios are orthogonal. We do find, however, that deteriorating loan
portfolios exercise a negative impact on credit supply (columns 4 and 5), but that
impact is independent of the impact of regulatory changes.
It is also possible that regulators change capital requirements in anticipation of
future deterioration in loan portfolio quality (and that banks reduce credit supply

motivated by the same anticipation). Table 4c accordingly shows the same regressions
as Table 4b, but with contemporaneous and leading values of changes in write-offs
(rather than lags) introduced as additional explanatory variables. But the impact of
leads of write-offs on credit supply is statistically insignificant, while the impact of
regulatory capital changes remains robust.
As a further robustness check, we estimated, but do not report, the
specifications in Table 4a with time dummies instead of macroeconomic controls. The
coefficient magnitudes on the capital requirement ratio variable were qualitatively
very similar. We also experimented with an autoregressive version of the specification
above, while omitting fixed effects. Using fixed effects in an autoregressive
framework introduces bias via the correlation between the lagged dependent variable
and the fixed effects. While this could in principle be addressed using GMM
techniques, the instrumentation schemes tend to be very data intensive, and we
believe are not appropriate for the sample studied here.25 Instead we follow recent
empirical contributions, such as the one-step procedure in Kashyap and Stein (2000)
and the internal capital markets specifications in Cetorelli and Goldberg (2008), in
omitting fixed effects in these specifications, using random effects instead. Again, the
results are very similar qualitatively.

25

GMM techniques are most useful in “large N, small T” settings. Under Difference and System GMM (Arellano and
Bond (1991), Blundell and Bond (1998)), the instrument count is quartic in the time dimension, which in our case
numbers slightly under 40 periods (relative to 104 regulated banks in the sample). A large set of instruments leads to
biased estimates through overfitting endogenous variables. Roodman (2000) suggests as a rule of thumb that the number
of instruments should never outnumber the panel’s individual units, and simulations indicate considerable bias even in the
presence of much smaller instrument sets relative to the number of panel units. Moreover, since the number of elements
in the estimated variance matrix of the moments is quadratic in the instrument count, it is quartic in T. So a finite sample
is unlikely to contain adequate information to estimate the matrix well for large T.

20

In a recent paper on fiscal policy, Romer and Romer (2010) argue that their
‘narrative’ measure of tax changes is exogenous with respect to output. They use both
a single equation approach, under the assumption that their tax measure is exogenous,
and a VAR, assuming that output and their measure are jointly endogenous, to
estimate the effect of changes in taxes on output. Based on the finding that estimates
from both methods are very similar, they conclude that their measure is indeed
exogenous with respect to output. We followed a similar procedure and estimated a
panel VAR to assess endogeneity is a serious problem in our application. These
results are presented in appendix B. In general, of course, coefficient magnitudes from
the single equation specifications reported here and the panel VAR will be different.
But, in the absence of endogeneity bias, conditional on a correct VAR identification
scheme, and other conditions (discussed in more detail in Appendix B), the VAR and
single-equation results should be similar. As we show in appendix B, all of these
restrictive conditions appear to be met since the cumulative value of the lending
growth impulse response to a capital requirements shock is 4.6%, similar to the single
equation cumulative sum of coefficients of about 6.4%. This suggests that the
restrictive assumptions necessary for the single equation model to provide an
unbiased estimate of the change in capital requirement on lending growth do not
appear to be rejected by data.
In the absence of strong instrumental variables, of course, it is not possible to
definitively rule out endogeneity. However, the fact that our results are robust to leads
and lags of writeoffs, along with the striking similarity between the panel VAR and
single-equation estimates, suggest that the estimates presented in Tables 4-6 are likely
not contaminated by serious endogeneity bias.
Table 5 looks more carefully at the role played by the capital buffer, and by
bank size, by introducing a term interacting the change in the capital requirement with
dummy variables for, respectively, banks in the lowest quartile of buffer size, banks in
the lower half of buffer size, banks in the highest quartile of bank size and banks in
the upper half of bank size. Column 1 suggests that the response of a bank in the first
quartile of capital buffers—i.e. a bank which has an average (over time) capital buffer
which is “low” relative to other banks—to a change in capital requirements is smaller
than the response of a bank which is not in this quartile. This effect is not statistically
21

significant. But, as shown in column 2, there is a significant difference in the
responsiveness of banks which have an average capital buffer below that of the
median bank.
This finding is consistent with recognizing the endogeneity of capital buffers
to bank-specific characteristics. Banks with relatively easy access to capital markets
choose to hold smaller buffers, and have a smaller loan supply response to changes to
capital requirements. On the other hand, banks which find it difficult to access capital
markets choose to hold larger buffers and also have a larger loan supply response to
changes in capital requirements. These results are analogous to a well-known
phenomenon in the investment literature: firms with larger cash holdings exhibit
greater cash flow sensitivity of investment, and even greater cash flow sensitivity of
cash (Calomiris, Himmelberg, Wachtel (1995), Almeida, Campello and Weisbach
(2004), Acharya, Almeida and Campello (2006)). Moreover, as illustrated by columns
3 and 4, it appears that bank size is a (noisy) indicator of capital buffers, with larger
banks tending to hold smaller capital buffers and vice-versa.26
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 show no statistically significant difference in the
responsiveness of loan supply by banks in the upper quartile of the size distribution.
This result is somewhat surprising, since one would expect larger banks to find it less
expensive to raise capital, and thus to reduce loan supply less in response to an
increase in capital requirements. In forthcoming work (Aiyar, Calomiris and Weiladek
(2012)) we find that, in some specifications, particularly when monetary policy and
capital requirement changes are modelled simultaneously, size interactions can matter
for the responsiveness of loan supply to capital requirement changes. Thus, the
“rejection” of size effects in Table 5 is not robust to more complicated specifications
of the policy environment.
Finally, it is worth noting that while we have presented strong evidence that
banks react to stricter capital requirements by adjusting credit supply, a regression of
changes in actual (nominal) capital on changes in the capital requirement ratio finds
no significant relationship. So it appears as though banks change their capital to risk-

26

This finding is consistent with (although not equivalent to) evidence that larger banks tend to hold less capital in a large
cross-country sample of banks (Cihak and Schaek (2007)).

22

weighted assets ratio in response to regulatory tightening by adjusting the
denominator rather than the numerator.

4

Leakages associated with foreign branches

In Section 3, we showed that UK-regulated banks exhibit a strong loan-supply
response to changes in required capital ratios. Here we explore the extent to which
those loan-supply effects are mitigated by endogenous loan-supply decisions by
foreign branches operating in the UK, which are not subject to domestic UK capital
regulation. As noted in Section 1, such branches may “step into the gap” created by
macro-prudential policy; when capital-regulated banks contract their loan supply,
unregulated banks operating in the UK may offer substitute sources of credit to
borrowers.
As Figure 7 shows, the aggregate amount of lending by foreign branches is
substantial, although smaller than the aggregate amount of lending by banks that are
subject to UK capital regulation. Moreover, branch lending is not confined to one or
two sectors, but is rather broad-based. In four sectors lending by branches accounts
for 40% or more of total sectoral lending.
Our empirical strategy is to regress foreign branch lending growth on the
instrumented lending of a “reference group” of regulated banks. The instrument is the
change in capital requirements that occurred for that reference group. We report
results for reference groups defined alternatively as the entire set of regulated banks,
or as a branch-specific reference group weighted by the sectoral exposures of the
branch. As before, we use the “residual of z” to proxy for loan demand.
Thus the specification is:
3

3

k 0

k 0

l BRN
  j    t  k l REF
jt
jt  k    t  k z jt  k  X  

where l BRN
denotes lending growth by the foreign branch j and l REF
denotes
jt
jt
lending growth by branch j’s reference group of regulated banks. Note that j indexes
is instrumented using
branches, while i is reserved to index regulated banks. l REF
jt
23

. And both l REF
and KRRREF
come in aggregate and
several lags of KRRREF
jt
jt
jt
branch-specific varieties, whose precise construction is described below.
Let

~
zqt denote the log of aggregate lending by all regulated banks to sector q

is constructed as: l REF
in period t. Then the aggregate variety of l REF
  q ~
z qt ,
jt
jt
and the branch-specific variety is constructed as: l REF
  q s jqt 1~zqt . Note that the
jt
is identical for all branches.
aggregate variety of l REF
jt
The aggregate variety of KRRREF
is simply defined as:
jt
KRR REF
  i  it 1KRRit , where  it denotes economy-wide lending by bank i as a
jt

share of economy-wide lending by all regulated banks in period t. Again, note that the
is identical for all branches.
aggregate variety of KRRREF
jt
Let KRRqt   i  iqt 1KRRit where  iqt denotes lending by bank i to sector q
as a share of lending by all regulated banks to sector q in period t. This is a measure of
the sector-specific change in capital requirements in each period. Then the branchis defined as: KRR REF
specific variety of KRRREF
  q s jqt 1KRRqt .
jt
jt
is defined in terms of weighted changes in regulated bank
Note that l REF
jt
lending, and that the weights—the sectoral exposure pattern of the branch—are taken
for the previous period. This is to ensure that that l REF
reflects actual changes in
jt
lending by relevant regulated banks, rather than simply changes in the sample of
regulated banks across time periods (because of entry or exit of some regulated banks
from the sample). Identical considerations apply to the construction of KRRREF
.
jt
Again, both the contemporaneous term and lags of the independent variable of
interest—reference group lending—are included in the specification. If banks are
made aware by the FSA of an impending increase in capital requirements, those banks
are in turn likely to inform loan customers of an intent to contract lending (e.g. by
reducing or eliminating lines of credit as they mature). Bank borrowers, therefore,

24

may seek new lending relationships that begin simultaneous with the contraction in
loan supply induced by changing capital requirements.
The instruments we use have considerable intuitive appeal in this application.
We have shown in the previous section that lending by regulated banks responds
strongly to changes in capital requirements. Moreover, it is hard to imagine any
channel through which changes in capital requirements could affect lending by
unregulated banks except via the impact on lending by regulated banks.
Table 6 presents results from instrumental variables regressions. Columns 1
through 3 report results using the aggregate reference group of all regulated banks,
while columns 4 through 6 report results from using a branch-specific reference group
as described above. Columns 1 and 4 include no controls. Columns 2 and 5 include
our preferred “residual z” demand control. Columns 3 and 6 include, in addition, GDP
growth, inflation, and three branch-specific variables: SIZE, KAR and WHL.27 SIZE
is the log of the bank’s total assets. KAR is a measure of leverage, the capital asset
ratio. WHL is a measure of reliance on wholesale funding, being the ratio of repo
liabilities to total liabilities.
We find that lending by foreign branches is strongly negatively related to
instrumented lending by the foreign branch’s reference group. That is, a reduction in
loan supply by regulated banks in response to tighter capital requirements indeed
induces an increase in loan supply by unregulated foreign branches. The result on
leakages holds for both the broad and narrow reference group specifications, but the
results are, unsurprisingly, stronger for the branch specific reference group. Table 6
also reports a set of post-estimation statistics. The Sargan-Hansen test of
overidentifying restrictions indicates that capital requirements weighted by branchspecific sectoral exposures are much better instruments than the unweighted change in
capital requirements. Conventional tests for weakness of instruments—for example
comparing the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic against critical values for an
“acceptable” level of bias—are not possible, because the relevant critical values have

27

Foreign branches do not file the BSD3 report on capital adequacy which we used to construct the bank-specific balance
sheet controls in Table 4. But they are required to report (less detailed) balance sheet data using the BT form, which are
used to construct the control variables here.

25

not been tabulated.28 However, to assuage concerns about weak instruments, we
report two tests for robust inference in the presence of weak instruments.29
What do these numbers say about the magnitude of leakages from prudential
regulation? The simple average of the coefficients estimated in the branch-specific
specifications 4 through 6 is 2.67. That is, the cumulative impact of a capital
requirement-induced reduction of 1% in lending growth by regulated banks is an
increase in lending growth of 2.67% by foreign branches. As noted earlier, regulated
banks are, on average, much bigger than foreign branches and lend more into the real
economy. Across the sample, quarterly lending by the average regulated bank was
£9.5 million, about 15 times larger than quarterly lending by the average foreign
branch, which stood at £630,000. On the other hand, there are more foreign branches
(173) in our cross section than regulated banks (104). The product of these ratios
between branches and regulated banks yields a rough estimate of leakages. Thus, over
our sample period, the regulatory leakage from foreign branches amounted to just
under one-third: 29.4% = (2.67*(63/950)*(173/104)*100).
It appears, therefore, that over the sample period leakages from non-UK
regulated banks operating in the UK were qualitatively and quantitatively important.30
Leakages substantially reduced, but did not fully offset, the contractionary creditsupply impact of a tightening in capital requirements. The estimates reported here
likely represent a lower bound on the size of total regulatory leakages, which could
also occur through cross-border lending or via capital markets, but, as noted earlier,
there are good reasons for believing that foreign branch lending comprises the major
element of such leakages. This evidence validates the focus on reciprocal
arrangements between financial regulators to prevent leakages from forthcoming

28

See Stock and Yogo (2002). The authors tabulate critical values for various combinations of number of endogenous
regressors and number of instruments.

29

Results are given for the Anderson-Rubin Wald test and Stock-Wright S test. The null hypothesis tested in both cases is
that the coefficients of the endogenous regressors in the structural equation are jointly equal to zero, and, in addition, that
the overidentifying restrictions are valid. Both tests are robust to the presence of weak instruments. The tests are
equivalent to estimating the reduced form of the equation (with the full set of instruments as regressors) and testing that
the coefficients of the excluded instruments are jointly equal to zero (see Stock, Wright and Yogo (2002) for further
discussion). Both tests indicate rejection of the null across all specifications.
30
As a robustness check we also estimated the “leakage” regressions in reduced form, i.e., we estimated various
specifications in which lending by branch j is regressed directly on contemporaneous and lagged values of changes in the
reference group’s minimum capital requirement. These results support the instrumental variables results noted here.

26

macro-prudential regimes, e.g. the reciprocity principle enshrined in the Basel III
counter-cyclical capital buffer.

5

Concluding Remarks

We consider the consequences for bank credit supply of macro-prudential capital
regulation, using a unique UK “policy experiment” (the practice of setting bankspecific, time-varying capital requirements) to gauge the potential effectiveness of
macro-prudential changes in bank capital requirements. We employ data on individual
banks operating in the UK from 1998 to 2007.
For macro-prudential policy to be effective in controlling the aggregate
amount of lending in an economy, three necessary conditions must be satisfied: (1) it
must be relatively costly to raise equity capital, (2) regulatory capital requirements
must bind on banks, and (3) macro-prudential “leakages” – substitutes for regulated
banks’ lending – must not be able to fully offset the loan-supply effects of variation in
capital requirements. The UK evidence suggests that all three conditions were
satisfied.
Banks that were subject to UK capital regulation display large and statistically
significant responses in their loan-supply behaviour to changes in regulatory capital
requirements. The loan-supply behaviour of banks that were not subject to UK capital
requirements – foreign bank branches operating in the UK – responded to increases in
UK capital requirements by increasing their loan supply, even as regulated banks
contracted lending. This leakage was large, amounting to about a third of the
aggregate change in loan supply that otherwise would have resulted. That conclusion
reinforces the need for macro-prudential regulators to coordinate changes in capital
requirements to prevent regulatory arbitrage by banks that can avoid domestic bank
regulation.
Our estimates of the effects of changes in capital requirements on lending
supply to the real economy may seem large, especially when compared to recent
estimates of this effect produced by the Bank of International Settlements (2011).31
31

We estimate an elasticity of loan supply for regulated banks with respect to the minimum capital ratio requirement of
roughly negative one, and the net effect (after taking account of foreign branches' partially offsetting response) is two-

27

But the BIS study is based on macroeconomic data. The econometric identification of
loan-supply responses is much more challenging in a macroeconomic context.
Macroeconomic aggregates would be affected by the leakages via foreign branches
analyzed in our study. They would also be affected by other potential regulatory
leakages, resulting in a smaller net effect on loan supply from any change in capital
requirements. Our results are therefore not necessarily inconsistent with estimates
from macroeconomic data, but they are more precise in delineating how individual
responses to regulatory change lead, in the aggregate, to changes in system-wide
credit supply. Our findings also emphasize that the effect of capital requirements on
aggregate lending may become stronger once the reciprocity agreement embedded in
Basel III becomes enforced and the branch leakage documented in this paper is
eliminated.
Finally, our results—based on the 1998-2007 UK sample—should not be
interpreted as providing a definitive measure of the size of loan-supply responses by
regulated banks, or leakages from other banks, either in the future for the UK, or in
other countries. The extent to which foreign branches constitute a leakage depends
upon their relative size, which has been growing over time in the UK. Furthermore,
differences across countries in the structure of their financial systems are likely to
play a fundamental role, as well, both for the loan-supply responses of regulated
banks and the relevant sources of leakage from other lenders.

thirds of that. These large magnitudes are consistent with another observation noted in our study: that capital does not
increase when capital ratio requirements are raised.

28

References

Admati, Anat R., Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer (2011),
“Fallacies, irrelevant facts and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: Why
bank equity is not expensive,” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Aikman, David, Haldane, Andrew and Nelson, Ben (2011), “Curbing the credit
cycle”, Speech at Columbia University.
Aiyar, Shekhar (2011), “How did the crisis in international funding markets affect
bank lending? Balance sheet evidence from the UK”, Bank of England Working
Paper, No 424.
Aliaga-Diaz, Roger, Powell, Andrew and Maria-Pia Olivero (2011), “The
Macroeconomic Effects of Anti-Cyclical Bank Capital Requirements: Latin America
as a Case Study”, Drexel University Working Paper.
Alfon, Isaac, Argimón, Isabel and Patricia Bascuñana-Ambrós (2005), “How
individual capital requirements affect capital ratios in UK banks and building
societies”. Bank of Spain working paper 515.
Arellano, M., and S. Bond (1991), “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte
Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations”, Review of Economic
Studies, 58: 277-97.
Assenmacher-Wesche, Katrin and Gerlach, Stefan (2008), “Financial Structure and
the Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices” Working Papers 2008-16, Swiss
National Bank.
Baer, Herbert and John McElravey (1992). “Capital adequacy and the growth of U.S.
banks.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago working paper 92-11.
Bagliano, Fabio and Carlo Favero (1998), “Measuring Monetary Policy with VAR
models: An Evaluation”European Economic Review. 42 (6), 1069 -1112.

Bernanke, Ben S. (1983), “Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the
propagation of the great depression,” American Economic Review 73, 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Cara S. Lown (1991), “The credit crunch,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2, 205-248.
Blundell, R., and S. Bond (1998), “Initial conditions and moment restrictions in
dynamic panel data models”, Journal of Econometrics 87: 11-143.
Brinkmann, Emile and Paul Horvitz (1995), “Risk-based capital standards and the
credit crunch”. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27, 848-863.

29

Calomiris, Charles, and Charles Kahn (1991), “The role of demandable debt in
structuring optimal banking arrangements.” American Economic Review 81, 497-513.
Calomiris, Charles, and Joseph R. Mason (2003), “Consequences of bank distress
during the Great Depression,” American Economic Review 93, 937-947.
Calomiris , Charles, and Joseph R. Mason, 2004. "Credit Card Securitization and
Regulatory Arbitrage," Journal of Financial Services Research, Springer, vol. 26(1),
pages 5-27, August
Calomiris, Charles and Berry Wilson (2004), “Bank capital and portfolio
management: The 1930s capital crunch and the scramble to shed risk,” Journal of
Business 77, 421-455.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Margarita Tsoutsoura (2011), “Underwriting costs of
seasoned equity issues: Cross-Sectional determinants and technological Change,
1980-2008,” Working Paper, Columbia Business School.
Campello, Murillo (2002), “Internal capital markets in financial conglomerates:
Evidence from small bank responses to monetary policy,” Journal of Finance 57,
2773-2805.
Canova, Fabio (2007), Methods for Applied Macroeconomic Research. Princeton
University Press.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg (2009), “Banking globalization and
monetary transmission,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 333.
Chiuri, Maria Concetta, Giovanni Ferri, and Giovanni Majnoni (2002), “The
macroeconomic impact of bank capital requirements in emerging economies: Past
evidence to assess the future”. Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 881-904.
Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin and Evans, Charles (1999), “Monetary
policy shocks: What have we learned and to what end?”, Handbook of
Macroeconomics, in: J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of
Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 2, 65-148, Elsevier.
Clement, Piet (2010), “The term “macroprudential”: origins and evolution”, BIS
Quartery Review, March 2010.
Diamond, Douglas (1984), “Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring”
Review of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan (2000), “A theory of bank capital” Journal
of Finance 55, 2431-2465.
Diamond, Douglas, and Ragharam Rajan (2001), “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation,
and financial fragility: A theory of banking”. Journal of Political Economy 109, 287327.

30

Ediz, T., I. Michael, and W. Perraudin (1998), “The impact of capital requirements on
UK bank behavior”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 4
(3), 15-22.
Francis, William and Matthew Osborne (2009), “Bank regulation, capital and credit
supply: Measuring the impact of Prudential Standards”, FSA Occasional paper no, 36.
Furlong, Frederick (1992), “Capital regulation and bank lending”. Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Economic Review, 23-33.
Galati, Gabriele and Richard Moessner (2011), “Macroprudential policy – A literature
review”, BIS Working Paper No. 337
Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig (1985), “Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The
one-period problem” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 52(4), October, 647-63.
Gambacorta, Leonardo, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli (2004), “Does Bank Capital
Affect Lending Behavior,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13 (4), October, pages
436-57.
Goodhart, Charles, and Boris Hofmann (2008), “House prices, money, credit, and the
macroeconomy” .Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24(1), 180-205.
Haubrich, Joseph, and Paul Wachtel (1993), “Capital requirements and shifts in
commercial bank portfolios”. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review,
29 (Quarter 1), 1-15.
Houston, Joel, Christopher James, and David Marcus (1997), “Capital market
frictions and the role of internal capital markets in banking, Journal of Financial
Economics 46, 135-164.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique Mendoza, and Carlos Végh, (2010), “How Big (Small?) are
Fiscal Multipliers?” NBER Working Papers 16479, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
James, Christopher (1987), “Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans,”
Journal of Financial Economics 19, 217-235.
James, Christopher and Peggy Wier (1990), “Borrowing relationships, intermediation,
and the cost of issuing public securities”, Journal of Financial Economics 28, 149171.
Jarocinski, Marek (2010), “Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks in the East and the
West of Europe”. Journal of Applied Econometrics 25(5), 838-868.
Jimenez, Gabriel, Jesus Saurina, Steven Ongena, and Jose-Luis Peydro (2011),
“Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers and Credit Supply:
Evidence from the Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiment,” Working paper,
October.

31

Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy Stein, (1995), “The impact of monetary Policy on bank
balance sheets,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, 151-195.
Lown, Cara and Stavros Peristiani (1996), “The behavior of consumer loan rates
during the 1990 credit slowdown”. Journal of Banking and Finance 20, 1673-1694.
Myers, Stewart and Nicholal Majluf, (1984), “Corporate financing and investment
decisions when firms have information that investors do not have” Journal of
Financial Economics 13, 187– 221.
Miles, David, Marcheggiano, Gilberto and Jing Yang (2011), “Optimal bank capital”,
External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No.31.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren (1995a), “The capital crunch: Neither a borrower nor a
lender be”. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27, 625-638.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren (1995b), “Bank regulation and the credit crunch,”
Journal of Banking and Finance 19, 679-692.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren (1997), “The international transmission of financial
shocks: The case of japan,” American Economic Review 87, 495-505.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren (2000), “Collateral damage: Effects of the japanese
bank crisis on real activity in the United States,” American Economic Review 90.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Ron Smith (1995), “Estimating long-run relationships from
dynamic heterogeneous panels.” Journal of Econometrics 68(1), 79-113.
Rebucci, Alessandro (2003), “On the heterogeneity bias of pooled estimators in
stationary VAR specifications.” IMF Working Papers 03/73, International Monetary
Fund, April.
Romer, Christina and David Romer (2010), “The Macroeconomic Estimates of Tax
Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, American Economic
Review, vol. 100(3), pages 763-801.
Roodman, D. (2006), “How to do xtabond2: An Introduction to Difference and
Syatem GMM in Stata”, CGD Working Paper, No. 103.
Sa, Filipa, Towbin, Pascal and Tomasz Wieladek (2011). "Low interest rates and
housing booms: the role of capital inflows, monetary policy and financial innovation,"
Bank of England working papers 411, Bank of England.
Schaeck, K and Cihak, M. (2007), “Banking competition and capital ratios”, IMF
Working Paper, No. 07/216.
Sims, Christopher (1980), “Macroeconomics and Reality.”Econometrica,
Econometric Society, vol. 48(1), 1-48, January.

32

Stock, J and Yogo, M (2002), “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression”,
Technical Working Paper 284, NBER.
Stock, J, Wright, J and Yogo, M (2002), “A survey of weak instruments and weak
identification in generalized method of moments”, Journal of Business and
Economics Statistics, Vol. 20, No. 4.
Suarez, Javier and Rafael Repullo (2009), "The procyclical effects of bank capital
regulation" CEMFI working paper.
Thakor, Anjan. (1996), “Capital requirements, monetary policy, and aggregate bank
lending: Theory and empirical evidence”. Journal of Finance 51, 279-324.
Towbin, Pascal and Sebastian Weber (2010), “Limits of Floats - The Role of Foreign
Currency Debt and Import Structure”, HEID Working Papers 01-2010, Graduate
Institute of International and Development Studies.
Tucker, Paul (2009), “The debate on financial system resilience: Macroprudential
instruments” Speech at Barclays Annual Lecture.
Tucker, Paul (2011), “Macroprudential policy: building financial stability institutions”
Speech at 20th Hyman P. Minsky conference.
Wagster, John (1999), “The Basel accord of 1988 and the international credit crunch
of 1989-1992”. Journal of Financial Services Research 15, 123-143.
Vanhoose, David (2008), “Bank capital regulation, economic stability, and monetary
policy: What does the academic literature tell us?” Atlantic Economic Journal, 36(1),
1-14.

33

Appendix A: Charts and Tables

Figure 1: Histogram of minimum capital
requirement ratio

25

20

15

10

5

0
8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

Capital requirement ratio (% of RWA)

34

Number of changes

80

Figure 2: Distribution of changes in
capital requirement ratios by
magnitude of change
Foreign subsidiaries

60

UK‐owned banks

40
20
0

Large Increases

Intermediate Increases

Small Increases

Small Decreases

Intermediate Decreases

Large Decreases

Large decrease = DKR<‐150bp
Intermediate decrease = ‐150bp<DKR<‐100bp
Small decrease = ‐100bp<DKR<‐10bp
Large increase = DKR>150bp
Intermediate increase = 150bp>DKR>100bp
Small increase = 100bp>DKR>10bp

35

Figure 3: Distribution of banks by
number of changes to capital
requirement ratio
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
5+ Changes

4 Changes

3 Changes

2 Changes

1 Change

0 Changes

Figure 4: Time series of average capital requirement ratio
11.4

5

11.2

4.5
4

11

3.5

10.8

3
10.6
2.5
10.4
2
10.2

1.5

10

1

9.8

0.5

9.6

0

Average capital requirement ratio

GDP y‐on‐y growth (RHS)

36

Figure 5: Time series of average weighted capital
requirement ratio
9.6

5

9.5

4.5

9.4

4
3.5

9.3

3

9.2

2.5
9.1

2

9

1.5

8.9

1

8.8

0.5

8.7

0

Average capital requirement ratio (weighted by assets)

GDP y‐on‐y growth (RHS)

Figure 6: Time series of average weighted
capital requirement ratio (cumulated
changes)
9.4

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

9.3
9.2
9.1
9
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.6

Average capital requirement ratio (cumulated changes weighted by lending)
GDP y‐on‐y growth (RHS)

37

Figure 7: Co-variation between average capital requirements and average
capital
Banks in 1st quartile of buffer

Banks in 2nd quartile of buffer

12.5

12.5

12

12

11.5

11.5

11

11

10.5

10.5

10
9.5

16
15.5
15
14.5
14

10

13.5

9.5

13
12.5

9

9

12

8.5

8.5

11.5

8
1998q4
1999q2
1999q4
2000q2
2000q4
2001q2
2001q4
2002q2
2002q4
2003q2
2003q4
2004q2
2004q4
2005q2
2005q4
2006q2
2006q4
2007q2

1998q4
1999q2
1999q4
2000q2
2000q4
2001q2
2001q4
2002q2
2002q4
2003q2
2003q4
2004q2
2004q4
2005q2
2005q4
2006q2
2006q4
2007q2

8

Average capital requirement ratio (% of RWA)

Average capital requirement ratio (% of RWA)

Average capital ratio (% of RWA)

Average capital ratio (% of RWA)

Banks in 4th quartile of buffer

Banks in 3rd quartile of buffer
12.5

1

12

1

11.5

1

11

12.5

5

12

4

11.5

4
3

11

3

10.5

1

10

1

10

1

9.5

8.5

1

9

1

8

1

8.5

5

8

0

2

Average capital requirement ratio (% of RWA)

2007q2

2006q4

2006q2

2005q4

2005q2

2004q4

2004q2

2003q4

2003q2

2002q4

2002q2

2001q4

2001q2

2000q4

2000q2

1999q4

1

1999q2

1998q4
1999q2
1999q4
2000q2
2000q4
2001q2
2001q4
2002q2
2002q4
2003q2
2003q4
2004q2
2004q4
2005q2
2005q4
2006q2
2006q4
2007q2

9

2

1998q4

9.5

10.5

Average capital requirement ratio (% of RWA)

Average capital ratio (% of RWA)

Average capital ratio (% of RWA)

All Banks
24

10

22

9.8

20

9.6

18

9.4
9.2

14

9

12

8.8

10

8.6

1998q4
1999q2
1999q4
2000q2
2000q4
2001q2
2001q4
2002q2
2002q4
2003q2
2003q4
2004q2
2004q4
2005q2
2005q4
2006q2
2006q4
2007q2

16

Average capital ratio (weighted by assets)
Average capital requirement ratio (wtd by assets)

38

39

10
8
6
4
2
0

50
40
30
20
10
0

Log total lending (RHS)

12

60

Share of lending by foreign branches

14

70

Figure 8: Sectoral pattern of lending by foreign branches

Table 1: Variables and data sources
Variable

Definition

Source
(Bank of England
Reporting Form)

Capital requirement FSA-set minimum
ratio
ratio for capital-torisk weighted
assets (RWA) for
the banking book.
Also known as
“Trigger ratio”.
Lending
Bank lending to
non-financial
sectors of the
economy
TIER1
Ratio of Tier 1
capital to RWA.
SIZE
Total assets

BSD3

BIG

Dummy variable =
1 when SIZE is in
highest decile.
Ratio of RWA to
total assets.
Dummy variable =
1 when bank is a
resident subsidiary
of a foreign bank.

BSD3

Difference between
actual capital and
the capital
requirement ratio,
divided by RWA.
Capital asset ratio
Ratio of repo
liabilities to total
liabilities

BSD3

RISK
SUB

BUF

KAR
WHL

Notes

AL

BSD3
BSD3 / BT

BSD3 for regulated
banks; BT for
foreign branches.

BSD3
Information from
the Bank of
England’s
Monetary and
Financial Statistics
Department.

BT
BT

40

41

Regulated banks
Regulated banks
Regulated banks
Foreign branches
Regulated banks
Foreign branches

Change in capital requirement ratio

Lending to real economy

Lending to real economy

Change in lending to real economy

Change in lending to real economy

Entity

Capital requirement ratio

Variable

%

%

£ million

£ million

Basis points

%

Units

0.3

0.8

630

9,483

‐1.4

10.8

Mean

Table 2: Summary Statistics

20.9

16.5

893

28,510

29.7

2.26

SD

‐98.7

‐98.3

0

0

‐500

8

Min

98.4

85.3

10,175

274,140

500

23

Max

3,792

2,503

3,976

2,630

2,524

2,630

Obs

Table 3: Average capital requirement ratio by various bank attributes 1/
Percentiles
Variable
25 <
25-50
50-75
> 75
Writeoffs 2/
10.36
10.44
10.15
11.57
(Mean value within quartile)

(0.00)

(0.13)

(0.48)

(2.48)

Size 3/

12.30

11.06

10.63

9.54

(Mean value within quartile)

(0.03)

(0.10)

(0.32)

(5.16)

Retail Deposits 4/

12.45

10.79

10.08

10.21

(Mean value within quartile)

(3.0)

(15.4)

(44.3)

(73.6)

Sectoral Specialisation 5/

10.51

10.87

10.90

11.25

(Mean value within quartile)

(16.1)

(39.4)

(59.3)

(89.4)

1/ The mean values of the variables within each quartile are provided in brackets below the
associated mean capital requirement.
2/ Defined as total amount written-off as a share of risk-weighted assets.
3/ Defined as asset size relative to total assets of the banking system.
4/ Defined as the sum of sight and time deposits as a fraction of total liabilities.
5/ Defined as lending to the sector to which the bank has the greatest exposure in percent of
total lending by the bank to all non-financial non-household sectors.

42

Table 4a: The impact of minimum capital requirements on bank lending 1/
Dependant variable: Rate of growth of lending
1
Change in capital requirement ratio (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.0676***
0.0021

2

3

4

5

‐0.0645***
0.002

‐0.0657***
0.002

‐0.0684**
0.013

‐0.0716***
0.0049

DEMAND (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Demand variable

0.268
0.545
z

0.238
0.697
Adjusted z

0.081
0.86
Residual z

0.087
0.85
Residual z

GDP growth (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.0597**
0.023

0.0575**
0.033

.0475*
0.063

0.0496**
0.05

Inflation (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.0014
0.948

‐0.0011
0.522

‐0.0054
0.803

‐0.004
0.851

TIER1
(p‐value)

‐0.0008
0.203

BIG
(p‐value)

0.005
0.8

RISK
(p‐value)

‐0.0003
0.117

SUB
(p‐value)

0.018
0.14

Observations

2135

2114

2114

1909

1909

1/ This table presents results from fixed effects panel regressions of regulated banks. The dependant variable
is the growth rate of bank lending to the real sector. Four lags each are used of the first four variables in
the table: the change in capital requirement, the demand proxy, GDP growth and inflation. The table
entries show the sum of coefficients for these lags, together with the probability that the sum of
coefficients is significantly different from zero. The remaining coefficients are shown together with
p‐values. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively. The same conventions
are followed in the remainder of the tables presenting regression results.

43

Table 4b: The impact of minimum capital requirements and loan quality on bank lending 1/
Dependant variable: Rate of growth of lending
1

2

3

4

5

Change in capital requirement ratio (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.0677***
0.0022

‐0.062***
0.003

‐0.0637***
0.002

‐0.0695**
0.013

‐0.0727***
0.01

Change in write‐offs (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.0172
0.264

‐0.0192
0.179

‐0.0195
0.198

‐0.036**
0.026

‐0.0358**
0.028

DEMAND (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Demand variable

0.289
0.504

0.292
0.63
Adjusted z

0.125
0.77
Residual z

0.135
0.757
Residual z

GDP growth (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.061**
0.021

0.059**
0.029

0.052**
0.043

0.0542**
0.035

Inflation (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0
0.999

‐0.011
0.543

‐0.002
0.904

‐0.001
0.96

z

TIER1
(p‐value)

‐0.0008
0.184

BIG
(p‐value)

0.005
0.807

RISK
(p‐value)

‐0.0003*
0.1

SUB
(p‐value)

0.017
0.164

Observations

2114

2114

2114

1909

1909

1/ This table is identical to Table 4 apart from the inclusion of four lags of the change in loan write‐offs, where write‐offs
are measured in percent of risk weighted assets.

44

Table 4c: The impact of minimum capital requirements and loan quality on bank lending 1/
Dependant variable: Rate of growth of lending
1

2

3

4

5

Change in capital requirement ratio (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.0534***
0.006

‐0.0488***
0.007

‐0.0508***
0.005

‐0.0593**
0.019

‐0.0608**
0.015

Change in write‐offs (summed leads)
(Prob > F)

0.0109
0.6

0.014
0.477

0.0129
0.0532

‐0.001
0.913

‐0.001
0.94

DEMAND (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Demand variable

0.604
0.241

0.626
0.336
Adjusted z

0.302
0.582
Residual z

0.262
0.647
Residual z

GDP growth (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.053*
0.057

0.0471*
0.085

0.0417*
0.1

0.0436*
0.093

Inflation (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.012
0.583

‐0.012
0.464

0.006
0.766

0.007
0.747

z

TIER1
(p‐value)

‐0.0001
0.705

BIG
(p‐value)

0.0056
0.837

RISK
(p‐value)

‐0.0005
0.371

SUB
(p‐value)

0.0204
0.246

Observations

1826

1812

1812

1635

1635

1/ This table is identical to Table 4 apart from the inclusion of four leads of the change in loan write‐offs, where
write‐offs are measured in percent of risk weighted assets.

45

Table 5: The interaction of minimum capital requirements with capital buffers and bank size
Dependant variable: Rate of growth of lending
1

2

3

4

Change in capital requirement ratio (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.083**
0.018

‐0.149***
0.006

‐0.079**
0.027

‐0.072**
0.020

DEMAND (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Demand variable

0.087
0.85
Residual z

0.033
0.94
Residual z

0.078
0.86
Residual z

0.073
0.88
Residual z

GDP growth (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.0473*
0.065

0.0512**
0.041

0.0483*
0.055

0.0492*
0.055

Inflation (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

‐0.005
0.821

‐0.007
0.756

‐0.005
0.81

‐0.004
0.822

BUF in 1st quartile (interaction) (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.057
0.287

BUF less than median (interaction) (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.119**
0.049

SIZE in 4th quartile (interaction) (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.0316
0.522

SIZE greater than median (interaction) (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Observations

0.0009
0.98
1909

1909

1909

1909

46

47

0.0011
0.808
11.1
0.03

38.04
0
55.25
0
53.17
0
2645

Change in average capital
requirement of all regulated banks

WHL
(p‐value)
Hansen J statistic
(Prob > chi‐squared)
Anderson‐Rubin Wald test statistic
(Prob > chi‐squared)
Stock‐Wright S statistic
(Prob > chi‐squared)
Observations
Instrument

2645

42.56
0

2645

18.18
0.019

18.42
0.018

‐0.0001
0.9

KAR
(p‐value)

44.42
0

‐0.0101
0.454

SIZE
(p‐value)

31.54
0

‐0.0701*
0.1

0.323***
0.006
Residual z

‐1.925*
0.1

Inflation (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

0.321***
0.002
Residual z

‐1.60*
0.065

3

0.0067
0.901

‐2.275***
0.009

Aggregate IV
2

GDP growth (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

DEMAND (summed lags)
(Prob > F)
Demand variable

Change in lending by all regulated banks (summed lags)
(Prob > F)

1

4

2490

35.06
0

37.05
0

4.677
0.32

0.292
0.186
Residual z

‐2.66***
0.003

6

2490

21.55
0.005

22.5
0.004

2.15
0.71

‐0.006
0.45

‐0.0002
0.846

‐0.023
0.478

‐0.094
0.16

‐0.21
0.14

0.087
0.74
Residual z

‐2.248**
0.049

Branch‐specific IV
5

Change in capital requirement of
regulated banks weighted by
sectoral exposures of branch

2490

41.85
0

43.88
0

2.6
0.63

‐3.12***
0.001

Table 6: Leakages from regulation of bank capital (Instrumental Variables)
Dependant variable: Rate of growth of lending of resident foreign branches

Appendix B: Panel VAR Estimation
In the main text we used the general specification:
∆l ,

∑

∆KRR

,

+∑

z,

(1)

,

to investigate the effect of a cumulative change in capital requirements on
quarterly real lending growth. Given the potential endogeneity problem, we
controlled for bank-specific conditions that could govern both regulatory changes
and lending decisions by introducing lags and leads of loan write-offs, and
demonstrated the robustness of the estimates to these controls.
A recent study on fiscal policy by Romer and Romer (2010) constructs
what the authors claim to be an exogenous measure of tax changes in the US. They
then estimate the effect of tax changes on real GDP growth, under the assumption
that their measure is indeed exogenous, with a single equation framework. They
subsequently estimate a VAR treating real GDP growth and their measure of tax
changes as endogenous variables. The estimated effects on real GDP growth from
the VAR and the single equation approach are very similar. Furthermore, they
find that an unexpected shock to output in their VAR does not affect their
measure of tax changes. Based on these findings, they then conclude that “the tax
shocks identified from narrative sources are indeed unrelated to past output
movements”. In this appendix, we follow a similar procedure andestimate a panel
VAR to assess whether the results differ from those obtained with the single
equation approach.
In particular, we estimate the following panel VAR model in reduced form:
∆KRR ,
∆ ,

∆KRR ,
∆ ,

∑

where ∆KRR

,

∆KRR ,
,
∆ ,
,

∆KRR ,
,
∆ ,
,

~

0,

(2)

and ∆l , enter in deviations from their unit-specific mean, which is
∆KRR

∆

,
and , , are
equivalent to removing the bank specific fixed effect. ,
reduced-form error terms which are jointly normally distributed with a mean of
zero and the variance-covariance matrix . To understand the effect of a change in
capital requirements, further assumptions need to be made. In Sims’s (1980)
seminal article he proposed the Choleski identification scheme, which consists of a
lower triangular decomposition of , with zeros above the diagonal, to give the
reduced form residuals a structural interpretation. A large literature in monetary
economics has used this identification scheme, arguing that so long as slow
moving variables, such as real GDP are ordered above fast moving variables such
as interest rates, the shock to the interest rate equation can be interpreted as a
monetary policy shock.32 We adopt this convention here and order the change in

32

See Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) for more details.

48

capital requirements above real lending growth. In other words we assume that
the change in capital requirements reacts to real lending growth with a lag:
∆KRR ,
,
∆ ,
,

1

0
1

∆KRR ,
,
∆ ,
,

We argue that this is an economically justified assumption, as regulators
typically only observe real lending growth with a lag. In addition, the procedures
necessary to change an institution’s capital requirement imply that regulators can
only react with a delay, even if they are able to observe real lending growth
contemporaneously. As a result, we can assign a structural interpretation to
∆KRR ,
,

1

and
0
1

∆ ,
,

. In structural form, the VAR can be written as:

∆KRR ,
∆ ,

∑

1

0
1

∆KRR ,
∆ ,

∆KRR ,
,
∆ ,
,

(3)

In general, impulse responses obtained from model (2) and the sum of
coefficients from the model (1)will not be similar.33 From a comparison of (1) and
(3) however, it is easy to see that the cumulative sum of coefficients in model (1)
∆KRR

,
, over
and the cumulative impulse response to a capital requirement shock, ,
the same horizon will be identical in population, if the following four
requirements are jointly satisfied: i) ∆l , is not autoregressive, meaning that
0
; ii) ∆l , does not granger cause ∆KRR , , meaning
0
; iii)
∆KRR , is not autoregressive, meaning that
0
; and iv)
,
meaning that the impact coefficient in model (1) is identical to the unbiased
impact coefficient in the VAR.

Prior to exploring whether the data suggest that these conditions are met, it
is useful first to discuss some methodological issues that arise in panel VAR
estimation. One option is to pool the autoregressive coefficients across units,
assuming identical autoregressive dynamics across all units.34 If that assumption is
violated, the resulting dynamic heterogeneity bias will typically lead to an upward
bias in the VAR coefficients (Canova, 2007), meaning that it is easy to mistake a
temporary effect of a shock for a permanent one. Alternatively, Pesaran and Smith
(1995) propose the mean group estimator as a solution to the problem of
heterogeneity in the lagged slope coefficients. This model is implemented by
estimating the VAR model bank by bank and then averaging the bank-specific
VAR estimates to obtain the panel estimate.35 But, as demonstrated in Rebucci
33

See Bagliano and Favero (1998) for an elaboration of this point in the context of monetary policy.
See Goodhart and Hoffman (2008), Lzzetzki, Mendoza and Vegh (2010) or Towbin and Weber (2010) for an
application of this approach.
35
See Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010) and Sa, Towbin and Wieladek (2011) for an application of this approach
in the panel VAR context.
34

49

(2003), with small time series, as in our case, mean group panel VAR estimates
may be subject to serious small sample bias. The nature of our application thus
means that either estimator will be subject to econometric bias.
Recent work by Jarocinski (2010) proposes a solution to this difficult
problem. He uses a Bayesian shrinkage approach to shrink every individual bank
coefficient to a common mean:
~ 0,
Where , is any of the individual VAR bank specific coefficients in model (2),
is the corresponding common mean and a stochastic error term, reflecting
the difference between the particular coefficient for bank i and the common
mean. The covariance matrix of is split into two parts, and . reflects the
differences in magnitudes among VAR coefficients and needs to be set by the
researcher.36 on the other hand is treated as a parameter and inferred from the
data. That is, the amount of shrinkage, and thus the degree of heterogeneity in the
lagged slope coefficients, is determined by the data.
If =0, then the estimates of this model will be equal to pooled estimates.
On the other hand, if
∞, then this approach will estimate completely separate
bank specific VAR models. The flexibility of this method thus means that both the
dynamic heterogeneity and small-sample bias will be minimised. We implement
this model with Gibbs sampling as in Jarocinski (2010).37 We sample 150,000
draws from the posterior, with 50,000 as burn in and retain every 100th draw to
reduce auto-correlation among the draws. This leaves us with 1,000 draws from
the posterior for inference. We plot the associated values of in Figure A1. One
can clearly see that is fairly small, suggesting a pooled model. Furthermore the
draws in Figure A1 are clearly uncorrelated, suggesting that each draw is an
independent draw from the posterior, making these draws therefore suitable for
inference.
,

36
But in contrast to the approach in Jarocinski (2010), who sets based on unit specific regressions, we set it
based on pooled panel regressions, as the time horizon for some banks is not long enough to implement his
approach.
37
Other than the difference in setting , we follow the approach in Jarocinski (2010) to the letter. Please see his paper for
more details.

50

Figure A1
LAMBDA
0.02
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Figure A2 plots the impulse responses to a 100 basis points change in capital
requirements shock and the associated 5th and 95thposterior coverage bands based
on the 1,000 retained draws. The growth rate in real lending to the real economy
falls by about 3.8% upon impact and declines back to zero fairly rapidly. In Figure
A3, we assess the impact of a shock to real lending growth on the change in the
capital requirement. The effect of a 100 basis point increase in lending growth is
not significantly different from 0. To investigate the extent to which estimates
from model (1) are biased, it is also instructive to investigate whether the four
conditions under which results from both models would be identical hold in the
population. In Figure A3, the response of real lending growth falls immediately
back to 0 and the change in capital requirements is not statistically significantly
different from 0. This suggests that conditions i) and ii) are satisfied. In Figure A2,
the response of the change in capital requirement declines immediately back to 0
following impact. Furthermore, the impact response of real lending growth is 3.82, almost identical to the impact response estimated in model (1) of -3.5.
Cumulating the real lending growth impulse response up to 3 quarters yields a
median value of 4.64 - with a 5th and 95th percentile of -9.89 and -.0067,

51

respectively, which is a very similar value to the sum of coefficients in model (1)
of between 6.4 to 7.16. These results suggest that all four conditions are satisfied.
In summary, the structural VAR model is less restrictive than model (1),
both in the dynamics of the variables, as well as, conditional on the correct
identification scheme, with respect to the exogeneity assumption regarding the
changes in capital requirements variable. The similarity of the estimates from this
approach to the single-equation approach suggest that, in fact the exclusion
restrictions necessary for model (1) to provide an unbiased estimate, of the effect
of the change in capital requirements on real lending growth, are not rejected by
the data.
Figure A2
Change in Capital Requirement

Real Lending Growth

1.2

0.04

1

0.02

0.8
0
0.6
-0.02
0.4
-0.04
0.2

-0.06

0

-0.2

0

2

4

6

8

10
Median

-0.08
5th

0

2

4

6

95th

52

8

10

Figure A3
Change in Capital Requirement

Real Lending Growth

0.1

1.2

1
0.05
0.8
0

0.6

0.4

-0.05

0.2
-0.1
0

-0.15

0

2

4

6

8

10
Median

-0.2
5th

0

2

4

6

95th

53

8

10

