                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     NUMERACY, FINANCIAL LITERACY, AND FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING

                                         Annamaria Lusardi

                                        Working Paper 17821
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17821


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




This paper was invited to be written for Numeracy, the open-access, peer-review journal of the National
Numeracy Network. I would like to thank Dorothy Wallace, from the department of Mathematics
at Dartmouth College, for encouraging me to write this review article. Audrey Brown provided excellent
research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Numeracy, financial literacy, and financial decision-making
Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 17821
February 2012
JEL No. D91

                                            ABSTRACT

Financial decisions, be they related to asset building or debt management, require the capacity to do
calculations, including some complex ones. But how numerate are individuals, in particular when
it comes to calculations related to financial decisions? Studies and surveys implemented in both the
United States and in other countries that are described in this paper show the level of numeracy among
the population to be very low. Moreover, lack of numeracy is not only widespread but is particularly
severe among some demographic groups, such as women, the elderly, and those with low educational
attainment. This has potential consequences for individuals and for society as a whole because numeracy
is found to be linked to many financial decisions. Now more than ever, numeracy and financial literacy
are lifetime skills necessary to succeed in today’s complex economic environment.


Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
1. Introduction
In the last few decades, financial markets around the world have become
increasingly accessible to the “small investor” as new products and financial
services have come on the market. Nonetheless, many of these products are
complex and difficult to grasp, especially for financially unsophisticated
investors. At the same time, changes in the pension landscape are encouraging
increased reliance on the individual, particularly in the United States. Prior to the
1980s, many Americans relied mainly on Social Security and employer-sponsored
defined benefit (DB) pension plans. Today, by contrast, Baby Boomers are
increasingly turning to defined contribution (DC) plans and Individual Retirement
Accounts (IRAs) to help finance their retirement years. Indeed, in 1980, about 40
percent of private-sector pension contributions went to DC plans; 20 years later,
almost 90 percent of such contributions went to personal accounts, mostly 401(k)
plans (Poterba, Venti, and Wise, 2008). The transition to the DC retirement saving
model has the advantage of permitting more worker flexibility and labor mobility
than in the past, yet it also imposes on employees a greater responsibility to save,
invest, and decumulate retirement wealth sensibly. Furthermore, the spread of DC
plans means that workers today are directly and immediately exposed to financial
market risks, a reality that was less evident in the old DB system. And, as many
DB plans have been frozen or terminated, the individually managed accounts will
increasingly become the mainstay of retirement. For this reason, individuals will
increasingly be called to “roll their own” retirement saving and decumulation
plans, and their retirement security will depend ever more on their own decisions
and behavior.
     How people borrow money and manage their liabilities has also undergone
major change of late. Prior to the current financial crisis, consumer credit had
expanded rapidly, as had mortgage borrowing. And consumers who borrowed via
credit cards or subprime mortgages are in the historically unusual position of
having been put in charge of deciding how much they can afford to borrow.
Alternative financial services such as payday lending have also become
widespread; more than one in five Americans had used a high-cost method of
borrowing (including payday loans, pawn shops, auto title loans, tax refund loans,
and rent-to-own shops) in the five years prior to the administering of the U.S.
2009 Financial Capability Study.1
     Financial decisions, be they related to asset building or debt management,
require the capacity to do calculations, including some complex ones. But how
numerate are adults, in particular when it comes to calculations related to
financial decisions? As the review of studies and surveys that have been

1
    See Lusardi (2011).




                                         2
implemented in both the United States and in other countries shows, the level of
numeracy among the population is very low. Moreover, lack of numeracy is not
only widespread but is particularly severe among some demographic groups. This
has potential consequences for both individuals and society as a whole because
numeracy is found to be linked to many financial decisions.
     This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of some
of the existing work on numeracy as it relates to financial literacy and financial
decision-making. Section 3 describes the demographic groups that are most
lacking in numeracy. Section 4 reports the relationship between numeracy and
financial decision-making. Section 5 provides some discussion and concluding
remarks.

2. Numeracy
Several data sets from the United States and other countries report information
about numeracy and financial decisions, making it possible to examine the link
between them. The 2004 U.S. Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a survey that
covers people 50 and older, contained questions measuring numeracy. These
questions were first used by Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a) to assess the impact of
numeracy on financial decision making. They focused on respondents 51–56
years old (Early Baby Boomers). The questions are as follows:
       1) “If the chance of getting a disease is 10 percent, how many people out
          of 1,000 would be expected to get the disease?”
       2) “If 5 people all have the winning number in the lottery and the
          prize is 2 million dollars, how much will each of them get?”
    Respondents who gave the correct answer to either the first or the second
question were asked:
       3) “Let’s say you have 200 dollars in a savings account. The account
          earns 10 percent interest per year. How much would you have in the
          account at the end of two years?”
     These variables are labeled “Percentage Calculation,” “Lottery Division,”
and “Compound Interest,” respectively. Table 1 summarizes how Early Baby
Boomers answered these questions. Over 80% got the Percentage Calculation
question correct, but only about half could divide $2 million by 5 to get the
Lottery Division question right. The Interest Compounding question was the most
difficult for respondents; only 18% correctly computed the compound interest. Of
those who got that question wrong, 43% erred by undertaking a simple interest
calculation, thereby ignoring the interest accruing on both principal and interest.
These three questions, and two additional questions described below, were also




                                         3
asked in the English Longitudinal Study on Aging (ELSA) (see Banks and
Oldfield, 2007):
       4) In a sale, a shop is selling all items at half price. Before the sale, the
          sofa costs $300. How much will it cost on the sale?
       5) A second hand car dealer is selling a car for $6,000. This is two-thirds
          of what it cost new. How much did the car cost new?
     Respondents in England, as in the United States, show a low level of
numeracy: only 11% of UK respondents are able to answer all five questions
correctly. Again, the question about interest compounding is the one that
respondents found more challenging. These five questions were also asked of a
sub-sample of U.S. sub-prime mortgage borrowers (more on this study below)
and very similar findings are seen when looking at this segment of the population:
Only 13% of the sub-prime borrower group were able to answer all five questions
correctly (Gerardi, Goette, and Meier, 2010). A set of similar numeracy questions
was asked in Sweden (Almenberg and Widmark, 2011). A similar set of questions
(but in different sequences and with some questions asked contingent on previous
correct answers) also appeared in the Survey of Health, Retirement and Aging in
Europe (SHARE), which surveys a representative sample of the population age 50
and older in 11 countries. The same findings are again reported: Numeracy is
low, in this case specifically among the older population, in many European
countries (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010). The countries with the highest
level of numeracy are Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland, while
the countries with the lowest level of numeracy are Italy and Spain, a finding
consistent with the latest data from the OECD’s Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA), which measures mathematical and numeracy skills
among 15-year-old students.
     There is evidence from research in psychology, marketing, and medicine that
people are not numerate and have difficulty performing calculations that involve
percentages (see Peters et al., 2007; Chen and Rao, 2007, and the references
therein). These findings confirm evidence from the health literature that patients
have difficulty doing simple calculations (Volk, 2007).
     These are pretty dismal findings, considering the complexities of the
calculations involved in many financial decisions. In fact, not just knowledge of
interest compounding but even the capacity to do a simple interest rate calculation
should not be taken for granted. Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) designed questions
for a special module on financial literacy for the 2004 Health and Retirement
Study. The exact question wording is reported below and, given that this is a
discussion of numeracy, the first question (designed to measure the capacity to do
simple calculations) will be examined in detail:




                                          4
       Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2%
       per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the
       account if you left the money to grow: more than $102, exactly $102, less
       than $102? Do not know; refuse to answer.
       Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year
       and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy
       more than, exactly the same as, or less than today with the money in this
       account? Do not know; refuse to answer
       Do you think that the following statement is true or false? “Buying a
       single company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual
       fund.” Do not know; refuse to answer.
     Findings from the HRS reveal a low level of numeracy among the older U.S.
population: only 67% of respondents age 50+ surveyed in this special module
picked the correct answer (more than $102), while one in five picked the incorrect
ones (exactly $102 or less than $102). These are particularly worrisome findings
because this segment of the population should have already dealt with many
financial decisions that required this sort of calculation.
     These three questions were thereafter incorporated into several other U.S.
national surveys, including the 2007–2008 National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY), which gathers information on individuals age 23–28 (see Lusardi,
Mitchell, and Curto, 2010, for details). They were also included in the RAND
American Life Panel (ALP), covering all ages (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009), and
more recently they were added to the 2009 U.S. Financial Capability Study
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011d).
     Numeracy is relatively high among the young; 79% of 23- to 28-year-olds in
the NLSY can do the 2% interest calculation correctly. The percentage is much
lower, however, when looking at the entire U.S. population, as seen in the most
recent data from the 2009 Financial Capability Study. Only 65% were able to
choose the right answer, and as many as 13.5% indicated that they did not know
the answer to this simple question.
     These financial literacy questions have been fielded in many other countries,
including Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Sweden, Russia, Japan, and New
Zealand. As will be discussed in more detail below, numeracy is seen to be low in
many of these countries, as well.2 For example, only 40% of respondents in Italy
are able to correctly answer the numeracy question, and as many as 28% indicated
that they did not know the answer (Fornero and Monticone, 2011). Results from
Japan are similar to those from the United States: about 70% of respondents are

2
 For an overview of the international comparison of financial literacy across eight
countries, see Lusardi and Mitchell (2011c).



                                        5
able to answer this question and 13% indicated that they did not know the answer
(Sekita, 2011). Among the countries studied, the highest percentage of correct
answers is found in Germany, the Netherlands, and New Zealand where the
percentage of correct answers is 82%, 85%, and 86%, respectively (see Bucher-
Koenen and Lusardi, 2011; Alessie, Van Rooij, and Lusardi, 2011; and Crossan,
Feslier, and Hurnard, 2011, respectively). These findings are again broadly in line
with the mathematics scores reported in the OECD’s PISA.
     In some countries, the numeracy question was asked in a different way,
requiring respondents to perform a more complex calculation related to interest
compounding. For example, the question in Sweden’s survey was formulated as
follows:
       Suppose you have 200 SEK in a savings account. The interest is 10
       percent per year and is paid into the same account. How much will you
       have in the account after two years? Respondent calculation (Do not know
       / Refuse to answer)
    The percentage of correct answers changes dramatically with this question
format: only 35% answered correctly, while about half (49%) gave an incorrect
answer (Almenberg and Säve-Söderbergh, 2011). We do not know what number
respondents came up with, but they may have done a simple interest calculation,
as U.S. respondents to the Health and Retirement Study did, not taking into
account that interest compounds on interest. Respondents in Russia were faced
with a similar question, worded as follows:
       Let’s assume that you deposited 100,000 rubles in a bank account for 5
       years at 10% interest rate. The interest will be earned at the end of each
       year and will be added to the principal. How much money will you have in
       your account in 5 years if you do not withdraw either the principal or the
       interest? More than 150,000 rubles / less than 150,000 rubles / I cannot
       estimate it even roughly.
     Even when respondents are presented with a selection of possible answers, as
they were here, rather than come up with a number, the proportion of correct
answers is very low. In Russia, only 36% of respondents picked the right answer
(more than 150,000 rubles), while 30% chose an incorrect answer, and 33%
indicated they could not estimate the answer even roughly (Klapper and Panos,
2011).
     These are important findings because calculations about compound interest
serve as the basis of most financial decisions. Most importantly, using credit
cards, engaging in a mortgage contract, or fully appreciating the benefits of
starting to save early requires some understanding of interest compounding and
how it works. Given the prevalence of debt among American families and




                                         6
frequent reliance on high-cost methods of borrowing, it is important to examine
how respondents do on questions that are related to debt (Lusardi, 2011, Lusardi
and Tufano, 2009a,b). The question below, taken from the survey from TNS
Global, uses yet another format to assess whether individuals have an
understanding of interest compounding:
       Suppose you owe $1,000 on your credit card and the interest rate you are
       charged is 20% per year compounded annually. If you didn’t pay anything
       off, at this interest rate, how many years would it take for the amount you
       owe to double?(i) 2 years; (ii) Less than 5 years; (iii) 5 to 10 years;
       (iv) More than 10 years; (v) Do not know;(vi) Prefer not to answer.
     Similar to respondents in other countries, when this question was asked of
U.S. respondents in 2008, fewer than 36% answered correctly (Lusardi and
Tufano, 2009a,b). This is a rather low percentage given how many individuals
have credit cards and maintain revolving balances. Moreover, about 20%
indicated that they did not know the answer to this question and as many as 40%
overestimated how long it would take for the debt to double when borrowing at an
interest rate of 20%. This tendency to underestimate the power of interest
compounding has been shown in other work, as well (Stango and Zinman, 2009;
Almenberg and Gerdes, 2011).

3. Who Knows the Least?
Financial illiteracy and lack of numeracy are not only widespread in the
population but are particularly severe in certain demographic groups. Below are
some findings about low-numeracy individuals, offered both to pinpoint the
groups that are less likely to possess financial knowledge and to discuss what is
known about the origins of financial illiteracy.
     As discussed in detail in Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b), in the 2004 HRS
module on financial literacy, numeracy was found to decline sharply with age.
While often not possible to disentangle age from cohort effects, either decline in
cognitive ability or low levels of knowledge among older cohorts was notable.
Interestingly, this seems to mimic the findings of Agarwal et al. (2009), which
show a greater prevalence of financial mistakes among older individuals as well
as less advantageous financial offers given to the elderly.
     Many countries exhibit large gender differences in financial literacy.
Differences between men and women are present not only for older cohorts but
also among younger respondents and in the population at large. The data show
that women are less likely to answer financial literacy and numeracy questions
correctly and also more likely to indicate that they “do not know” the answer to a
question. Given this finding, some of the sex differences that we see may result




                                        7
from lack of confidence in financial knowledge rather than lack of actual
knowledge. Interestingly, similar differences in financial literacy responses
between the sexes are found in countries as different as the United States,
Sweden, the Netherlands, Germany Italy, Russia, and New Zealand. In each of
these countries, women are disproportionately more likely to indicate that they do
not know an answer to a financial literacy question (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011c).
     There are large differences in financial knowledge across educational
attainment: numeracy, in particular, is especially lacking among those with low
educational attainment (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007a,b; Christelis, Jappelli, and
Padula, 2010). In some data sets, it is possible to correlate measures of financial
literacy with measures of cognitive ability, as measured by the Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery, which consists of several subtests that measure
vocational aptitude in twelve areas (Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010). While
there is a very strong correlation between financial literacy and numeracy and
cognitive ability among young respondents in the NLSY, ability hardly explains
the many differences that exist in numeracy in the data. In other words, there is a
lot of heterogeneity in numeracy, even when examining a narrow age group in the
population and when looking at those with similar levels of cognitive ability.
There are also large differences among racial and ethnic groups, with African
Americans and Hispanics displaying the lowest level of numeracy (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007a,b, 2011d).
     There are other findings that may explain the origins of financial literacy. For
example, financial literacy is correlated with family background. Using panel data
from the NLSY, Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2010) were able to link financial
literacy of 23- to 28-year-olds to certain characteristics of the households they
grew up in. They found that even after controlling for many demographic and
economic characteristics, respondents’ financial literacy is strongly and
significantly correlated with the education of their parents (in particular, their
mother). In other words, financial literacy may start in the family, perhaps by
observing parents’ saving and investing habits or by receiving financial education
directly from parents (see also Cude et al. 2006; Chiteji and Stafford, 1999; Li,
2009).

4. The Impact of Numeracy on Consumer Behavior
Many papers have documented a strong correlation between financial literacy and
a set of behaviors. Bernheim (1995, 1998) showed that most households lack
basic financial knowledge and cannot perform very simple calculations and that
the saving behavior of many households is dominated by crude rules of thumb.
Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverly (2003) found a strong link between financial
literacy and day-to-day financial management. Financial literacy has also been




                                         8
linked to a set of behaviors related to saving, wealth, and portfolio choice (see
Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a, for an overview). For example, several papers have
shown that individuals with greater financial literacy are more likely to participate
in financial markets and to invest in stocks (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010,
Almenberg and Widmark, 2011; Almenberg and Dreber, 2011; Yoong, 2011; Van
Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011). Moreover, more literate individuals are more
likely to be savvy in choosing mutual funds, including selecting those with lower
fees (Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008; Hastings and Mitchell, 2011; Hastings,
Mitchell, and Chyn, 2011).
     Focusing on numeracy alone, there are several studies documenting its
impact on important financial decisions. For example, Lusardi and Mitchell
(2011b) show that those who cannot do a 2% interest rate calculation (i.e.,
respond with “do not know”) are much less likely to plan for retirement and be
successful planners (i.e., figure how much they need to save, develop a plan, and
stick to a plan). Moreover, those who are not numerate are less likely to
accumulate wealth (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b). Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a)
further show that the capacity to do a more complex calculation related to interest
compounding is also linked to more retirement planning. This finding is not
specific to the United States, but is true in many other countries. For example, in
the Netherlands, those who can do a 2% calculation are much more likely to plan
for retirement, and in Italy, those able to do this calculations are more likely to
participate in private pension plans (Alessie, Van Rooij, and Lusardi, 2011;
Fornero and Monticone, 2011, respectively). Similarly, among Russians, those
who demonstrate an understanding of interest compounding are much more likely
to participate in pension funds (Klapper and Panos, 2011). This is perhaps
expected, as questions about retirement planning are related to whether people
have calculated how much they need to save for their retirement and, thus, the
capacity to do calculations, even rudimentary ones, is important. This finding
holds true even in countries with less developed financial markets or pension
systems. For example, Song (2011) shows that learning interest compounding
leads to a sizeable increase in pension contributions in China. Numeracy is linked
to other financial decisions, as well. For example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b)
report that those with higher numeracy are much more likely to own stocks.
Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula (2010) show that in many European countries,
higher numeracy among the older population is associated with owning stocks
directly or indirectly via mutual funds and with investment, in general and
Almenberg and Widmark (2011) find that numeracy is strongly linked to
participation in both the stock market and the housing market in Sweden. Most
importantly, Gerardi, Goette, and Meier (2010) show not just financial literacy but
numerical ability, in particular, is strongly associated with mortgage delinquency
and default. Using a rich data set of sub-prime mortgage borrowers, they find that




                                         9
borrowers who display lower numeracy are more likely to have experienced
foreclosure or to be behind on their mortgage payments. Lusardi and Tufano
(2009a) consider “debt literacy,” i.e., the capacity to do calculations relating to
household balance sheets and debt problems. They find that those who are more
debt literate—who grasp basic concepts relating to debt—are much more likely to
pay their credit cards in full, while those who are less numerate are more likely to
pay fees or use high-cost methods of borrowing (payday lenders, pawn shops, tax
refund loans, auto title loans, and rent-to-own shops). Interestingly, those who
demonstrate lack of understanding of interest compounding as well as
overestimate the number of years it takes for debt to double when borrowing at
very high interest rates are more likely to report having difficulty paying off debt.
Similarly findings are reported using data from the UK (Disney and Gathergood,
2011).

5. Concluding remarks
Findings from both the United States and other countries regarding the level of
numeracy in the adult population give reasons to worry: the level of numeracy is
very low and particularly severe among some already vulnerable groups in the
population, such as the elderly, women, and those with low educational
attainment. This is problematic because numeracy has been found to be linked to
financial decision making, and many governments and employers around the
world are increasingly shifting the responsibility for saving, investing, and
borrowing onto individuals. There are high returns on several dimensions to
improving numeracy and teaching mathematical skills in school and among the
young. Such skills can be useful not only in the job market but also in making
good financial decisions throughout one’s lifetime. The cost of college education
has been increasing at a rate faster than inflation, requiring students and their
families to be savvy about financial aid and to manage student loans effectively.
Not only are young people required to make one of the most important decisions
of their lifetime—whether to invest in higher education—during high school, but
they are also confronted with numerous decisions of economic consequence:
having a car, a cell phone contract, a bank account, and a debit or credit card.
Now more than ever, numeracy and financial literacy are lifetime skills that
everybody needs to have to be able to live and operate in today’s complex
economic environment.




                                         10
Table 1: Financial Literacy among Early Baby Boomers

  Question Type          Correct             Incorrect         Do Not Know
                          (%)                   (%)                (%)
    Percentage            83.5                 13.2                 2.8
    Calculation
      Lottery               55.9                 34.4                 8.7
     Division
    Compound                17.8                 78.5                 3.2
     Interest*
Notes: *Conditional on being asked the question. Percentages may not sum to 100
due to a few respondents who refused to answer the questions. Observations
weighted using HRS household weights. Adapted from Lusardi and Mitchell,
2007a. The number of observations is 1,984.




                                      11
6. References
Agarwal, S., J. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson. 2009. The age of reason:
    Financial decisions over the lifecycle with implications for regulation,
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2009, 51–101.
Alessie, R., M. van Rooij, and A. Lusardi. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement
    preparation in the Netherlands. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance
    10(4): 527–545.
Almenberg, J., and A. Dreber. 2011. Gender, financial literacy and stock market
    participation. Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Almenberg, J., and C. Gerdes. 2011. Exponential growth bias and financial
    literacy, IZA Discussion Paper n. 5814.
Almenberg, J., and J. Säve-Söderbergh. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement
    planning in Sweden. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 585–
    598.
Almenberg, J., and J. Widmark. 2011. Numeracy, financial literacy and
    participation in asset markets. Mimeo, Swedish Ministry of Finance.
Banks, J., and Z. Oldfield. 2007. Understanding pensions: Cognitive functions,
    numerical ability and retirement saving. Fiscal Studies 28(2): 143–170.
Bernheim, D. 1995. Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An
    analysis of actions, perceptions, and public policy. In Tax policy and
    economic growth, 1–30. Washington, DC: American Council for Capital
    Formation.
Bernheim, D. 1998. Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving. In
    Living with defined contribution pensions, eds. O. Mitchell and S. Schieber,
    38–68. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bucher-Koenen, T., and A. Lusardi. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement
    preparation in Germany. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4):
    565–584.
Chen, H., and A. Rao. 2007. When two plus two is not equal to four: Errors in
    processing multiple percentage changes. Journal of Consumer Research 34:
    327–340.
Christelis, D., T. Jappelli, and M. Padula. 2010. Cognitive abilities and portfolio
    choice. European Economic Review 54: 18–39.
Chiteji, N., and F. Stafford. 1999. Portfolio choices of parents and their children
    as young adults: Asset accumulation by African American families.
    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89: 377–380
Crossan, D., D. Feslier, and R. Hurnard. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement
    planning in New Zealand. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4):
    619–635.




                                        12
Cude, B., F. Lawrence, A. Lyons, K. Metzger, E. LeJeune, L. Marks, and K.
    Machtmes. 2006. College students and financial literacy: What they know
    and what we need to learn. Proceedings of the Eastern Family Economics
    and Resource Management Association, 102–109.
Disney, R., and J. Gathergood. 2011. Financial literacy and indebtedness: New
    evidence for UK Consumers. Mimeo, University of Nottingham
Fornero, E., and C. Monticone. 2011. Financial literacy and pension plan
    participation in Italy. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 547–
    564.
Gerardi, K., L. Goette, and S. Meier. 2010. Financial literacy and subprime
    mortgage delinquency: Evidence from a survey matched to administrative
    data. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2010-10.
Hastings, J., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011. How financial literacy and impatience
    shape retirement wealth and investment behaviors. NBER Working Paper
    16740.
Hastings, J., O. S. Mitchell, and E. Chyn. 2011. Fees, framing, and financial
    literacy in the choice of pension manager. In Financial literacy: Implications
    for retirement security and the financial marketplace, eds. Olivia S. Mitchell
    and Annamaria Lusardi. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 101–115.
Hastings, J., and L. Tejeda-Ashton. 2008. Financial literacy, information, and
    demand elasticity: Survey and experimental evidence from Mexico. NBER
    Working Paper 14538.
Hilgert, M., J. Hogarth, and S. Beverly. 2003. Household financial management:
    The connection between knowledge and behavior. Federal Reserve Bulletin:
    309–322.
Klapper, L., and G. Panos. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement planning: the
        Russian case. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 599–618.
Li, G. 2009. Information sharing and stock market participation: Evidence from
        extended families. Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Lusardi, A. 2011. Americans’ financial capability. NBER Working Paper 17103.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2007a. Baby boomers retirement security: The
    role of planning, financial literacy and housing wealth. Journal of Monetary
    Economics 54: 205–224.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2007b. Financial literacy and retirement
    preparedness: Evidence and implications for financial education. Business
    Economics: 35–44.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2009. How ordinary consumers make complex
    economic decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness. NBER
    Working Paper 15350.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011a. The outlook for financial literacy. In
    Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial




                                       13
    Marketplace, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi. Oxford,
    UK: Oxford University Press, 1–16
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011b. Financial literacy and planning:
    Implications for retirement wellbeing. In Financial literacy: Implications for
    retirement security and the financial marketplace, eds. Olivia S. Mitchell and
    Annamaria Lusardi. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 17–39.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011c. Financial literacy around the world: an
    overview. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 497–508.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011d. Financial literacy and retirement planning
    in the United States. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 509–
    525.
Lusardi, A., O. S. Mitchell, and V. Curto. 2010. Financial literacy among the
    young. Journal of Consumer Affairs 44 (2): 358–380.
Lusardi, A., and P. Tufano. 2009a. Debt literacy, financial experiences, and
    overindebtedness. NBER Working Paper 14808.
Lusardi, A., and P. Tufano. 2009b. Teach workers about the peril of debt.
    Harvard Business Review November: 22–24.
Peters, E., J. Hibbard, P. Slovic, and N. Dieckmann. 2007. Numeracy skills and
    the communication, comprehension, and use of risk-benefit information.
    Health Affairs 26(2): 741–748.
Poterba, J., S. Venti, and D. Wise. 2008. The changing landscape of pensions in
    the United States. In Overcoming the saving slump: How to increase the
    effectiveness of financial education and saving programs, ed. Annamaria
    Lusardi, 17–46. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sekita, S., 2011, Financial literacy and retirement planning in Japan. Journal of
    Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 637–656.
Stango, V., and J. Zinman. 2009. Exponential growth bias and household finance.
    Journal of Finance 64: 2807–2849.
Song, C. 2011. Financial illiteracy and pension contributions: A field experiment
    on compound interest in China. Mimeo, University of California-Berkeley.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie. 2011. Financial literacy and stock
    market participation, Journal of Financial Economics 101(2): 449–472.
Volk, R. 2007. Clarifying Values: Non-Numerical Approaches for Low Literacy
    Patients. Presentation to the 2007 Summer Institute on Informed Patient
    Choice, Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences. Hanover, NH:
    Dartmouth College.
Yoong, J. 2011. Financial illiteracy and stock market participation: Evidence from
    the RAND American Life Panel. In Financial literacy: Implications for
    retirement security and the financial marketplace, eds. Olivia S. Mitchell and
    Annamaria Lusardi. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 76–100.




                                       14
