NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DOES HUMAN CAPITAL DO? A REVIEW OF GOLDIN AND KATZ'S THE
RACE BETWEEN EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY
Daron Acemoglu
David Autor
Working Paper 17820
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17820
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We thank Lawrence Katz and Claudia Goldin for valuable and generous input. We are also indebted
to Janet Currie for excellent editorial suggestions, Matthew Rognlie for superb research assistance
and Andrew Garin for many thoughtful comments and edits. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Daron Acemoglu and David Autor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

What Does Human Capital Do? A Review of Goldin and Katz's The Race between Education
and Technology
Daron Acemoglu and David Autor
NBER Working Paper No. 17820
February 2012
JEL No. J30,J31,O14,O31,O33
ABSTRACT
Goldin and Katz’s The Race Between Education and Technology is a monumental achievement that
supplies a unified framework for interpreting how the demand and supply of human capital have shaped
the distribution of earnings in the U.S. labor market over the 20th century. This essay reviews the theoretical
and conceptual underpinnings of this work and documents the success of Goldin and Katz’s framework
in accounting for numerous broad labor market trends. The essay also considers areas where the framework
falls short in explaining several key labor market puzzles of recent decades and argues that these shortcomings
can potentially be overcome by relaxing the implicit equivalence drawn between workers’ skills and
their job tasks in the conceptual framework on which Goldin and Katz build. The essay argues that
allowing for a richer set of interactions between skills and technologies in accomplishing job tasks
both augments and refines the predictions of Goldin and Katz’s approach and suggests an even more
important role for human capital in economic growth than indicated by their analysis.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
David Autor
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Goldin and Katz’s magnum opus, The Race between Education and Technology, rivals Becker’s
Human Capital in ambition and potential in‡uence over the economics profession and beyond.
Becker formulated a new and empirically fruitful framework for economists and policymakers to
think about skills— how they are used, how markets price them and how and why workers and
…rms invest in them. The way most economists currently think about the supply and demand
for human capital is still largely shaped by Becker’s insights. Goldin and Katz’s book promises
to be equally transformative. It is erudite, well researched, well written and interesting. Most
importantly, it is a coherent and compelling account of how human capital has been the de…ning
factor for the “American century”— mostly for America, but also for much of the industrialized
world.
What is a reviewer to do? It is tempting to simply summarize the book’s arguments and
marvel at how well they are constructed. But not only would this make a tedious review, it
would constitute a missed opportunity. Based on the hope that transformative contributions
catalyze the literature in part by encouraging others to venture beyond their remit, we will take
an alternative path. We will attempt instead to do justice to Goldin and Katz’s accomplishment
by pushing their argument further to frame some of the important questions that lie ahead on
the agenda that they have established.
The Race between Education and Technology is a multilayered book with dozens of interesting
and useful ideas and hypotheses, all supported with historical evidence and data. But its core,
as we see it, is made up of the following four arguments:
1. U.S. leadership, which Goldin and Katz describe as U.S. ‘exceptionalism,’in educational
investments has visible economic, political and social roots that are related to speci…c
characteristics of American society at the turn of the 20th century.
2. Human capital is a central determinant of economic growth, both in general and in the
speci…c case of economic growth in the United States during the 20th century.
3. Investments in human capital can play a major equalizing role. Under the Tinbergian
assumption that technology is skill-biased, technological progress will necessarily widen
inequality among skill groups unless it is countered by increases in the supply of human
capital. The steady accumulation of human capital has thus been the main equalizer in
the U.S. labor market. The rise in inequality over the last three or so decades, in turn,
can be understood as the consequence of a slowing rate of accumulation of human capital,
which has not kept pace with skill-biased technological change.
1

4. The United States has, to a signi…cant degree, lost its educational leadership because its
educational institutions have become decadent. This problem can be redressed through
reform and re-investment.
We largely agree with all four of Goldin and Katz’s arguments, in part because they are
exposited so clearly and supported with compelling historical and econometric evidence. At the
same time, however, acknowledging the multifaceted nature of human capital and understanding
how it is allocated to a changing set of tasks broadens— in fact strengthens— the argument.
Underlying all four of Goldin and Katz’s main arguments is a theory of “what human capital does,” which is where the book connects closely with Becker’s contribution on the theory
of human capital. Human capital, according to this view, augments e¤ective units of labor,
thereby making workers more productive. Although human capital is potentially applicable to
all jobs, tasks, occupations and industries, the demand for human capital is not uniform across
all domains— that is, some activities are more skill-intensive than others. Consequently, increasing the supply of human capital to the economy will tend to increase the relative output of these
skill-intensive activities and hence reduce the skill premium that educated workers command.
These observations in turn undergird what we refer to as the ‘canonical model,’which is the
conceptual centerpiece of the Goldin and Katz analysis.1 The canonical model builds on seminal
contributions by Gary Becker, Jan Tinbergen— whose metaphorical race between education and
technology inspires the book’s title— Finis Welch, and, of course, the corpus of scholarship
created by Goldin and Katz over more than two decades. In this model, technological progress
raises the demand for skill, and human capital investments slake that demand. When demand
moves outward faster than does the supply of human capital, inequality rises, and vice versa
when supply outpaces demand.
The canonical model has withstood the test of time and has proven to be of ongoing relevance
in analyzing and interpreting a rich and diverse set of facts. Nevertheless, by confronting this
canonical model with the major developments in the U.S. economy and labor market over the
course of a century, Goldin and Katz’s analysis also underscores some of its limitations. What
the canonical model does not deny, though largely leaves out, is that human capital is multidimensional. Workers produce work by performing job tasks, and di¤erent tasks require di¤erent
types of skills. Workers with di¤erent types of skills have varying comparative advantages for
these tasks. Changes in technology and in the supply of skills a¤ect what types of tasks are in
demand and how the available set of skills are assigned to these di¤erent tasks. This, we will
argue, creates a rather di¤erent and more nuanced picture of “what human capital does.” By
1

Atkinson (2008) refers to this as the ‘Textbook Model’.

2

implication, it also leads to a somewhat di¤erent perspective on many of the developments in
the United States’and other advanced nations’labor markets.
In Section 2, we start with a discussion of the …rst and second of their arguments and
argue that Goldin and Katz’s analysis can be extended further by placing more emphasis on
the political economy of education in the United States and going beyond the standard growth
accounting framework for measuring the contribution of human capital to U.S. economic growth.
The bulk of our review will focus on the third argument, which centers around Goldin and Katz’s
synthesis of the standard model. This is presented in Section 3. In this section, we also present
a review of several recent trends in the U.S. labor market which are challenging to this canonical
model. In Section 4, we develop the argument that a theoretical framework based on the
allocation of di¤erent types of human capital to distinct tasks may be a useful starting point for
analyzing the patterns that are challenging for the canonical model.2 To do this, we provide a
sketch of a baseline framework that incorporates these aspects, and we explain how this re…ned
framework may contribute to a more holistic explanation for some of the empirical patterns
motivating Goldin and Katz’s synthesis and also strengthen their emphasis on the central role
played by human capital in 20th-century U.S. growth. We conclude in Section 5 with a discussion
of Goldin and Katz’s fourth argument centering around the causes of— and potential remedies
to— the decline in the U.S. education system, and how the task-based approach potentially
complements their conclusions.

2

The Human Capital Century

Goldin and Katz forcefully argue that the 20th century was the “human capital century” for
the United States and the world, and the United States’ exceptional leadership in investing
in the skills of its workforce was a major driver of economic growth. This is an important
and compelling argument, though more remains to be said about why the United States was
exceptional and how its investments in human capital contributed to growth.

2.1

American Exceptionalism

Goldin and Katz summarize American exceptionalism in schooling as follows:
“By the early twentieth century America educated its youth to a far greater
extent than did most, if not every, European country. Secondary schools in America
2
Notably, Goldin and Katz explore closely related ideas in other recent publications, for example, Autor, Katz
and Kearney (2006, 2008) and Goldin and Katz (2007), but given their intended broad audience, focus on the
canonical model in the book.

3

were free and generally accessible, whereas they were costly and often inaccessible
in most of Europe. Even by the 1930s America was virtually alone in providing
universally free and accessible secondary schools.” (page 12)
“The United States expanded its lead in education in the twentieth century by
instituting mass secondary schooling and then establishing a ‡exible and multifaceted
higher education system.” (page 18)
Their Table 1.1 shows the striking contrast between the United Kingdom and the United
States. In the late 1930s, only about 38 percent of 14-year-olds and 4 percent of 17-year-olds
were enrolled in school in the United Kingdom, while almost 68 percent of 14 to 17-year-olds were
enrolled in school in the United States. Goldin and Katz are absolutely correct to emphasize
how consequential this mass schooling system was for U.S. society, and Chapter 4 of the book
usefully pinpoints the several pillars that have supported this system: public funding, public
provision, local decentralization, separation of church and state, gender neutrality, and the open
and forgiving nature of the system. Their account also highlights the proximate factors that
allowed mass schooling to thrive, including the presence of …scally independent, mostly small
districts, local property taxation, and local control over schools.
Nevertheless, the book does not provide a fully compelling answer to the question of why
America became exceptional. In Chapter 1, Goldin and Katz suggest that a pivotal factor may
have been the greater importance of general training based on formal schooling in America at
a time when much of Europe relied on speci…c training on the job for investing in the skills
of much of its non-elite population. While this characterization is no doubt accurate, it is not
entirely clear why this distinction should by itself lead to substantially greater levels of public
investment in the United States as well as greater openness and forgivingness of the educational
system, particularly for non-elite students. The other factors Goldin and Katz emphasize, such
as locally decentralized and independent school districts, and gender neutrality, also appear
important in the development of the American education system. But why these choices have
been made in the United States, and not elsewhere, is less clear.
A seemingly central factor that receives less attention than it deserves is political economy—
or, more crudely, politics. The unique educational institutions that are indigenous to the United
States may have resulted not from optimal or even intentional design, but from a con‡ict in which
the masses— the non-elite elements of society— were particularly successful in resisting elite
designs. For example, setting up a society based on principles of equality, governed by the people
through general assemblies and investing in their education through a mass schooling system,
could not have been further from the plans of the leading members of the Virginia Company

4

when they set about colonizing Jamestown. It was only when their strategy of capturing and
enslaving locals and their next best alternative, putting the lower strata of the settlers brought
in as indentured servants to work in gangs for the bene…t of the elites and the Company, failed
and was met with …erce resistance, that the beginning of U.S. institutions as we recognize them
today started taking shape. The attempts to coerce the settlers were replaced by the ‘headright
system,’granting them land in 1618 and a General Assembly for the settlers to govern themselves
in 1619. Similar events played out in Maryland, the Carolinas and elsewhere, with remarkably
similar outcomes. The United States was …rst ahead of Europe not in its schooling system or
other aspects of economic institutions, but in its politics.3 In the early 20th century, the United
States was again ahead of Europe in its responsiveness to the political wishes of the majority
of the population. The Populist and Progressive movements contributed to the emergence of
an era in which the government took actions against the monopoly of the Robber Barons and
attempted to limit the extent to which the playing …eld had become highly uneven.4
Though more research is needed to determine the role of political factors in shaping the
American schooling system, it seems plausible that the General Assemblies of the early colonial
period were the mainstay of the open American schools, and the active involvement of the masses
was a major contributor to the spread of mass schooling in the 20th century. Whether this is so
is not merely of antiquarian interest. The answer bears on the critical contemporary question of
whether the current barriers to upgrading schooling quality in the United States and elsewhere
today are primarily …scal and technological— i.e., realigning teacher incentives or selecting good
principals— or whether they are fundamentally political in nature, an issue we return to below.

2.2

The Contribution of Human Capital to Growth

Goldin and Katz begin the book by stating:
“That the twentieth century was both the American Century and the Human
Capital Century is no accident. Economic growth in the modern period requires
educated workers, managers, entrepreneurs, and citizens. Modern technologies must
be invented, innovated, put in place, and maintained. They must have capable
workers at the helm.” (pages 1-2, italics in the original).
3

The other important factor emphasized by Goldin and Katz, the separation of church and state, probably
also has political roots, related both for the factors emphasized here and the religious dissenters’ impact on the
development of these institutions. It is also possible, though speculative, that independent school districts and
gender neutrality might also be a consequence of the same political and institutional developments.
4
The discussion in this and the previous paragraph draws on Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) and Galenson
(1996). These ideas are consistent with Goldin and Katz’s discussion of the ‘grassroots’ nature of the early
American education system.

5

They are right both in emphasizing the importance of human capital for U.S. growth and
identifying some of the mechanisms through which this has likely operated.
They also provide a careful accounting exercise to measure the extent to which increases
in the human capital of the workforce have contributed to U.S. growth. This is based on the
common approach in the growth literature, which posits an aggregate production function
Y = F (K; X; A) ;

(1)

summarizing the relationship between aggregate output, Y , the stock of physical capital, K,
the stock of human capital, X (e.g., measured as e¢ ciency units of labor), and technology,
A, measured as the residual from the accounting exercise. Here Goldin and Katz follow the
economic growth literature in assuming that all forms of human capital enter the aggregate
production function simply through the aggregate X. Moreover, the standard assumption in
growth accounting exercises is that the function F exhibits constant returns to scale in K and
X. Under these and additional assumptions that all factor markets are competitive and there
are no technological (or human capital) externalities in production, and denoting the growth
rate of variable Z by gZ and the rental rate of capital by R, the growth rate of aggregate output
can be expressed as (e.g., Acemoglu, 2009, Chapter 3):
gY = gA +

wX X
RK
gK +
gX ;
Y
Y

(2)

where X is computed as the total stock (‘e¢ ciency units’) of human capital. Finally, gA is
interpreted as the contribution of technological change to economic growth, typically computed
as the residual in such growth accounting exercises using data on the other variables in (2).
Goldin and Katz assume that F takes a Cobb-Douglas form with the share of labor/human
capital, X, equal to 0.7, which implies that wX X=Y = 0:7 and RK=Y = 0:3. They are more
careful than many in the way they measure the stock of human capital in the economy, which
they accomplish by aggregating micro data on hours across groups of workers with di¤erent
education and demographic characteristics using observed wages as weights. This is the correct
approach based on their assumptions, which are the standard assumptions in the literature. We
discuss and critique the economic foundations of these assumptions in 4.3 below.
Nevertheless, Goldin and Katz’s accounting exercise does not provide answers that are fully
consistent with their emphasis on the role of human capital. Their Table 1.3 shows that on
average less than 15 percent of U.S. growth is accounted for by the increase in the human capital
of American workers according to this methodology, i.e., by the term (wX X=Y ) gX . This does
not look like the sort of number that would deserve the title “Human Capital Century”. So why
the discrepancy?
6

Our view is that Goldin and Katz are right in emphasizing the centrality of human capital
to economic growth, but the vehicle they use for measuring the contribution of human capital
to this process does not do justice to the multifaceted role that human capital plays. The …rst
problem, as Goldin and Katz make clear in the above-quoted passage and discuss further in
the book, is that human capital is a major contributor to creation and adoption of frontier
technologies. U.S. technological leadership in the world would not have been possible without
the participation of a broad segment of the population in high-tech industries. U.S. workers
were able to play this role because they had access to high-quality education by the standards
of the time. But the growth accounting framework implicitly ignores the role of human capital
investments in fostering technological change. To be clear, this is a limitation of the growth
accounting model, not its end users. Goldin and Katz are acutely aware of this limitation
and emphasize throughout the book the indirect contribution that education makes to growth,
writing on page 40 that, “Although it is di¢ cult to quantify these indirect contributions of
education to economic growth, they are bound to have been quite large.”5
The second potential problem, which is intimately linked to the set of issues we highlight in
our discussion in Section 4, relates to the impact of human capital on the productive use of new
technologies. The root of this problem is again that the standard growth accounting framework
does not allow for a rich interaction between the implementation and spread of new technologies
and human capital. It is plausible that certain types of human capital are particularly useful
when combined with the most advanced technologies. Formally, the degree of complementarity
or substitutability between technologies and human capital may di¤er among technologies and
over time. The canonical model that Goldin and Katz use for interpreting the relationship
between human capital and the structure of wages, which we discuss in the next two sections,
allows for this possibility but only in a limited form as we will argue in Section 4. Going
beyond the canonical model to formally study these richer interactions may signi…cantly enrich
our understanding of the contribution of human capital to growth— in particular by explicitly
linking the economic value of human capital to the set of tasks demanded in the economy.
But before we attempt to amend the canonical model, we …rst highlight its power and utility.
5

Though the relationship between human capital and technological progress— the creation and adoption of
new technologies— is beyond the scope of our review, it is useful to note that it operates at least through three
channels. First, the human capital and access to education of the most talented individuals in society is probably
the most important factor underpinning technological progress. Second, the human capital of the workforce may
in‡uence the pace of technological change both because of human capital externalities and because it changes
the incentives for overall technological progress (as many technologies may not be pro…table without the requisite
skills from the workforce). Third and relatedly, the composition of human capital of the workforce potentially
a¤ects the direction of technological progress (e.g., Acemoglu, 1998). We will return to this issue brie‡y in the
last section.

7

3

The Canonical Model and the Data

Pronounced changes in the distribution of earnings and the returns to college over the last several
decades have motivated a large literature exploring the relationship between technical change
and wages. The starting point of this literature is the observation that the return to skills, as
measured by the wages of college graduates relative to high school graduates, for example, has
increased over multiple decades despite the large secular increase in the relative supply of college
educated workers. This suggests that concurrent with the increase in the supply of skills, there
has been an increase in the (relative) demand for skills. Following Tinbergen’s pioneering (1974)
work, the relative demand for skills is then linked to technology, and in particular to the skill bias
of technical change. These ideas are elegantly and powerfully operationalized in the canonical
model, which we present next. We then outline how the canonical model can be used to explain
the evolution of skill in college premia and earnings inequality, and then we summarize some of
the empirical trends that are challenging to interpret through the lens of this model.

3.1

The Canonical Model

The canonical model includes two skill groups performing two distinct and imperfectly substitutable occupations (or producing two imperfectly substitutable goods).6 Technology is assumed to take a factor-augmenting form, and thus complements either high or low skill workers.
Changes in this factor-augmenting technology capture skill-biased technical change. In this approach, the college/high-school log wage ratio serves as a summary index of the premium that
high skill workers command relative to low skill workers, and this premium is determined by the
relative supply and demand for skills. The relative demand for skills increases over time because
changes in technology are assumed to be ‘skill biased,’in the sense that they demand relatively
more, or are more complementary to, high skill workers. The steady increase in the relative
supply over the last century and a half, due to both greater public investments in schooling and
greater willingness of families and individuals to obtain schooling, leads to Tinbergen’s famous
race between education and technology (and the eponymous title of Goldin and Katz’s book).
Suppose that the total supply of low skill labor is L and the total supply of high skill labor is
H. In particular, let us assume that workers are in one of two mutually exclusive groups, the set
of low skill workers, L, and the set of high skill workers, H, and that there is heterogeneity in skills
R
R
or e¢ ciency units of labor. Then total supplies are given by L = i2L li di and H = i2H hi di,
6
Early applications of this model to U.S. labor market include Welch (1974), Katz and Murphy (1992) and
Goldin and Margo (1992). In many cases, this model is extended to more than two skill groups (see., e.g., Katz
and Murphy, 1992, Card and Lemieux, 2001, and Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle, 2004).

8

where li (hi ) denotes the e¢ ciency units of low (high) skill labor that worker i possesses.7
The production function for the aggregate economy takes the following constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form
Y =
where

h

(AL L)

1

+ (1

) (AH H)

1

i

1

;

(3)

2 [0; 1) is the elasticity of substitution between high skill and low skill labor, AL and AH

are factor-augmenting technology terms, and

is a distribution parameter that determines the

relative importance of low skill labor in the production function. The elasticity of substitution
between high and low skill workers plays a pivotal role in interpreting the e¤ects of di¤erent
types of technological changes in the canonical model.8 In this framework, technologies are
factor-augmenting, meaning that technological change serves to either increase the productivity
of high or low skill workers (or both), so there are no explicitly skill-replacing technologies.9
Assuming that factor markets are competitive, unskilled and skilled wages, wL and wH ,
are given by their marginal products, and can be obtained by di¤erentiating (3). Combining
these wages, we can also obtain the skill premium— the high skill wage divided by the low skill
wage— as
1

1

1
AH
H
wH
=
;
(4)
!=
wL
AL
L
which can be rewritten conveniently by taking logs,
1
AH
1
H
ln ! = constant +
ln
ln
:
(5)
AL
L
This equation shows the two key forces in the Tinbergen model: changes in the skill-bias of
technology, re‡ected in the evolution of AH =AL ; and changes in the relative supply of skills,
re‡ected in the evolution of H=L.
The (log) skill premium is important in part because it is a key market outcome, re‡ecting
the relative price of skills in the labor market. The evolution of this skill premium is also the key
yardstick in Goldin and Katz’s analysis of the race between education and technology. Equation
(5) shows that there is a simple log-linear relationship between the skill premium and the relative
supply of skills as measured by H=L. Equivalently, equation (5) implies:
@ ln !
1
=
< 0:
@ ln H=L
7

The important assumption is that workers do not have a choice on whether to supply high or low skill labor
to the market depending on prices or sets of tasks being performed in the economy.
8
In studying the college/high-school premium, Goldin and Katz parameterize this elasticity as …xed. In
studying the high-school graduate/dropout premium, they use a time-varying elasticity to allow high school
graduate and high school dropout labor to become more substitutable over time.
9
Shifts in can be thought of as skill-replacing technical changes in that they directly change the demand for
one skill group at the expense of the other, and Goldin and Katz allow to be time-varying. This reduced-form
method of modeling skill-replacing technical change is serviceable but does not have clear microfoundations and
so is not commonly used in practice.

9

This relationship corresponds to the second of the two forces in Tinbergen’s race. For a given
skill bias of technology, captured here by AH =AL , an increase in the relative supply of skills,
H=L, reduces the skill premium with an elasticity of 1= .
The downward-sloping relationship between relative supply and the skill premium implies
that if technology, in particular AH =AL , had remained roughly constant over recent decades,
the remarkable increase in the supply of skills that occurred in the U.S. throughout the 20th
century would have led to a signi…cant decline in the skill premium. The lack of such a decline
is a powerful piece of evidence for Goldin and Katz’s conclusion that the …rst force in Tinbergen’s race— changes in technology that raised the demand for skills— must have been important
throughout the 20th century.
Formally, di¤erentiating (5) with respect to AH =AL yields:
1

@ ln !
=
@ ln(AH =AL )
Equation (6) implies that if

:

(6)

> 1 (i.e., high and low skill labor are gross complements), then

relative improvements in the high skill augmenting technology (i.e., in AH =AL ) increase the skill
premium. This can be seen as a shift out of the relative demand curve for skills.10
The key equation of the canonical model, (5), links the skill premium to the relative supply
of skills, H=L, and to the relative technology term, AH =AL . This last term is not directly
observed. Nevertheless, we can make considerable empirical progress by taking a speci…c form
of Tinbergen’s hypothesis. For example, one can assume, as is generally done in the literature,
that there is a log linear trend increase in the demand for skills over time caused by ongoing
technological change, so that ln (AH;t =AL;t ) =

0

+

1 t,

where t is calendar time (and variables

written with t subscript refer to these variables at time t). Substituting this equation into (5),
we obtain:
ln ! t = constant +

1
0

+

1

1t

1

ln

Ht
Lt

:

(7)

Equation (7) implies that ‘technological improvements’ take place at a constant proportional
rate, while the supply of skilled workers may grow at varying rates at di¤erent points in times.
10

The converse is obtained when < 1: that is, when < 1, an increase in AH , relative to AL , shifts the relative
demand curve inward and reduces the skill premium. Consider, for example, how factor-augmenting technology
change a¤ects the wages of the augmented factor when the production function is Leontief (…xed proportions).
In this case, as AH increases, high skill workers become more productive, and hence the demand for low skill
workers increases by more than the demand for high skill workers. This observation raises an important caveat. It
is tempting to interpret improvements in technologies used by high skill workers, AH , as ‘skill biased’. However,
when the elasticity of substitution is less than 1, it will be advances in technologies used with low skill workers,
AL , that increase the relative productivity and wages of high skill workers, and an increase in AH relative to AL
will be ‘unskilled labor biased’. While the case of < 1 is interesting, in the context of the substitution between
college and non-college workers, a relatively high elasticity of substitution is both plausible and consistent with
many studies. Most estimates put in this context to be somewhere between 1.4 and 2, so we focus on this case
throughout this essay.

10

Changes in the skill premium will result when the growth rate of the supply of skills di¤ers from
the pace of technological progress: when H=L grows faster than the rate of skill-biased technical
change, (

1)

1,

the skill premium will fall; when the supply growth falls short of this rate,

the skill premium will increase.
Though most analyses of the canonical model focus on its implications for the skill premium,
the model also has sharp predictions on the levels of wages. In particular, it can be veri…ed
easily that the model implies @wL =@AL > 0 and @wL =@AH > 0 (and similarly for @wH =@AH
and @wH =@AL ). That is, factor-augmenting technical change increases wages of both low skill
and high skill workers (except in the limiting cases where

= 0 and

= 1 in which case

these inequalities can be weak). This result is intuitive. It will also turn out to be important:
technological improvements of any sort will lead to higher wages for both skill groups in the
canonical model. Thus unless there is ‘technical regress,’the canonical model does not predict
a decline in the real wage of a factor whose relative supply is not shifting outward.

3.2

The Power of the Canonical Model

To demonstrate the power and utility of the canonical model, we begin by replicating the in‡uential analysis of Katz and Murphy (1992). Katz-Murphy used data from the Current Population
Survey for earnings years 1963 through 1987 to explore the relationship between the relative
supply of skills in the U.S. economy and the evolution of the skill premium. Speci…cally, they …t
equation (7) to time-series measures (calculated from the CPS microdata) of the college/highschool relative wage and college/high-school relative labor supply for the years 1963 through
1987. Following their methods as closely as possible, the …rst column of Table 1 presents an
OLS regression of the composition-adjusted college/high-school log weekly wage premium on a
linear time trend and the log supply of college relative to high-school labor for years 1963–1987.
We obtain the estimate:
ln ! t =

constant

+ 0:027
(0:005)

t

0:612 ln

Ht
Lt

:

(0:128)

As shown in Figure 1 as well as the …rst column of Table 1, this simple speci…cation performs
quite well in capturing the broad features of the evolving college premium between 1963 and
1987. Most notably, thete is a sharp reversal of the trajectory of the college premium coinciding
with the deceleration in the growth of college relative supply in the late 1970s. The power
of the model is underscored by Figure 2, which plots the college premium and college relative
supply measures by year, each purged of a linear time trend. The robust inverse relationship
between these two series demonstrates the key role played by the decelerating supply of college

11

workers in driving the college premium upward in recent decades. More precisely, the estimates
suggest that the evolution of the college premium during the period 1963 through 1987 can be
characterized by an elasticity of substitution between college graduate workers and non-college
workers of about ^ = 1=0:61

1:6, and an annual increase of about 2:7 percent in the relative

demand for college labor.11
Column 2 of Table 1 includes 21 additional years of data beyond 1987 to extend the KatzMurphy estimate to 2008. When …t to this longer time period, the model yields a substantially
higher estimate of the elasticity of substitution, ^

2:9; and a slower trend rate of demand

growth (1:6 percent annually).12 The proximate cause of this change in the model’s estimated
parameters can be seen in Figure 1, which, following Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008), plots
the out-of-sample …t of the Katz-Murphy model for the years 1987-2008. The …t of the model
remains quite good through the year 1992, …ve years out of sample. But the model systematically
deviates from the data thereafter, predicting a sharper rise in the college premium than occurs.
While the observed college premium rose by 12 points between 1992 and 2008, the model predicts
a rise of 25 log points.
Without further re…nements to the model, the discrepancy between the observed and predicted growth of the college premium suggests that either the trend in relative demand decelerated after 1992 or the elasticity of substitution rose. Subsequent columns of Table 1 explore
the …rst possibility by freeing up the linear time trend with less restrictive parameterizations:
a linear spline that allows the time trend to deviate from its initial trajectory after 1992; a
quadratic time trend; and a cubic time trend. When …t to the data, all three of these variants
suggest a signi…cant deceleration in the trend for the relative demand for college workers occurring sometime during the 1990s. Conditional on the more ‡exible time trend, the elasticity
of substitution in these estimates returns to the range of 1:6 to 1:8. At face value, this model
suggests that relative demand for college workers decelerated in the 1990s, which does not accord
with common intuitions regarding the nature or pace of technological changes occurring in this
era.
The simple exercise above highlights several strengths and limitations of the simple education
race model. A key strength is parsimony. Using only two time series, one of relative wages, the
other of relative supplies, Goldin and Katz show that the model does a remarkably good job
of explaining the evolution of the skill premium over nine decades (from 1915 to 2005) and, by
implication, quantifying the contribution of skill-biased technical change to this phenomenon.
11

Our estimates are very similar, though not identical, to those of Katz and Murphy, who …nd an elasticity of
substitution of 1:4 and a time trend of 3:3 percent.
12
This point is explored by Card and DiNardo (2002), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008), and Goldin and Katz
(Table 8.2).

12

Moreover, a host of careful studies, reviewed in Goldin and Katz and in Acemoglu and Autor
(2010), con…rm the explanatory power of this simple supply-demand framework for explaining
trends in the college-versus-high-school earnings gap across other industrialized economies (most
notably, the United Kingdom and Canada), among age and education groups within countries,
and across birth states and birth cohorts within the United States.
But the data also reveal some puzzles for the model, which we highlight next. We then
consider whether these puzzles can be potentially better addressed by an extended conceptual
framework that permits a richer set of interactions among available skill supplies, technological
change, and the assignment of both labor and capital to the set of tasks in use in the economy.

3.3

Challenges for the Canonical Model

Observed versus Predicted Wage Inequality
A …rst puzzle, already visible from Table 1 and Figure 1, is that from the early 1990s to the
present, wage inequality (as measured by the college/high-school log wage gap) rose substantially
less than predicted by the model. This divergence may or may not be important in its own
right— after all, the model is still qualitatively on target— but it raises the question of what
has changed. A second notably divergent pattern, seen in Figure 5 and highlighted in earlier
work by Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006 and 2008), is that since the early 1990s, wages in the
top, middle and bottom of the income distribution have evolved in quite distinct and somewhat
unexpected directions. Most notably, while both the 90th and 10th percentiles of the weekly
and hourly wage distributions diverged rapidly from the median from the early 1980s to the
early-1990s— consistent with a rising return to skill in the canonical model— the gap between
the 10th percentile and the median substantially contracted over the next 15 years even as the
90/50 gap continued to rapidly expand. This suggests that, at the very least, it may be useful
to distinguish between high, middle and low skill workers rather than just between high and low
skill workers as is typically done in the canonical model.
Falling Real Wages of Low Skill Workers
Another fact that underscores the shortcomings of the canonical model is the surprising evolution of real (rather than relative) wage levels. The canonical model of factor-augmenting
technical change robustly predicts that demand shifts favoring skilled workers will raise the skill
premium and boost the real earnings of all skill groups (e.g., college and high school workers),
as highlighted above. This prediction appears strikingly at odds with the data, as …rst reported
by Katz and Murphy (1992) and shown in Figure 3.13 This …gure plots the evolution of real
13

For compactness, we plot data for male workers only.

13

log earnings by gender and education for the same samples of full-time, full-year workers used
above. Each series is normalized at zero in the starting year of 1963, with subsequent values
corresponding to the log change in earnings for each group relative to the base year. All values
are de‡ated using the Personal Consumption Expenditure De‡ator produced by the U.S. Bureau
of Economic Analysis.
Figure 3 reveals three key facts about the evolution of earnings by education groups that
are not evident from the earlier plots of the college/high-school wage premium. First, a sizable
share of the increase in college relative to non-college wages in 1980 forward is explained by rising
wages of post-college workers, i.e., those with post-baccalaureate degrees. Real earnings for this
group increased steeply and nearly continuously from at least the early 1980s to present. By
contrast, earnings growth among those with exactly a four-year degree was much more modest.
For example, real wages of males with exactly a four-year degree rose 13 log points in the three
decades between 1979 and 2008. This appears paltry when compared to the 20 log point increase
in male college wages in the …rst ten years of the sample.
A second fact evident from the …gure is that a major proximate cause of the growing
college/high-school premium is steeply declining wages among less educated workers— especially
less educated males— rather than rising wages among college workers. Real earnings of males
with less than a four year college degree fell steeply between 1979 and 1992, by 12 log points
for high school and some-college males, and by 20 log points for high school dropouts. Low skill
male wages modestly rebounded between 1993 and 2003 but never reached their 1980 levels. For
females, the picture is qualitatively similar but the slopes are more favorable. While wages for
low skill males were falling in the 1980s, wages for low skill females were largely stagnant; when
low skill male wages increased modestly in the 1990s, low skill female wages rose approximately
twice as fast.14
The third key fact evident from Figure 3 is that while the earnings gaps between somecollege, high school graduate, and high school dropout workers expanded sharply in the 1980s,
these gaps stabilized thereafter. In particular, the wages of high school dropouts, high school
graduates, and those with some college moved largely in parallel from the early 1990s forward.
Polarization of Earnings Growth
The net e¤ect of these three trends— rising college and post-college wages, stagnant and falling
real wages for those without a four-year college degree, and stabilizing wage gaps among some14

A potential concern with the interpretation of these results is that the measured real wage declines of lesseducated workers mask an increase in their total compensation after accounting for the rising value of employer
provided non-wage bene…ts such as healthcare, vacation and sick time. This concern is discussed in Acemoglu
and Autor (2010) and dismissed drawing largely on Pierce (2001 and 2010) and Hamermesh (1999).

14

college, high school graduates, and high school dropout workers— is that starting in the past
two decades, earnings growth has become increasingly non-monotone in skill and wage levels,
with more rapid growth at the upper and (surprisingly) lower deciles of the wage distribution
than at the median.
This pattern is seen in Figure 4, which plots changes in hourly wages relative to the change
at the median by earnings percentile among male workers between 1974 and 2008.15 We divide
the sample into two time intervals that roughly capture the changing dynamics of earnings
inequality. During the initial period of 1974 through 1988, the monotonicity of wage changes
by percentile is evident. Equally visible is the U-shaped (or ‘polarized’) growth of wages by
percentile in the 1988 through 2008 period. Interestingly, the steep gradient of wage changes
above the median is nearly parallel for these two time intervals. Thus, the key di¤erence between
these periods turns on the evolution of the lower tail, which fell steeply in the 1980s and then
regained ground relative to the median thereafter.
This U-shaped growth of wage levels over the last two decades is clearly di¢ cult to interpret
in a model with only two skill groups. One can of course posit that the levels and distribution of
h and l— the distribution of e¢ ciency units of high and low skill labor within the population—
shifted in a manner that generates apparent non-monotonicity even with only two underlying
skill prices. But without supporting evidence, this explanation appears ad hoc.
Occupational Polarization
Accompanying the wage polarization depicted above is a marked pattern of job polarization, by
which we mean the simultaneous growth of employment in high skill, high wage occupations and
low skill, low wage occupations. Figure 5 illustrates this phenomenon by plotting the change
over each of the last three decades in the share of U.S. employment accounted for by 318 detailed
occupations encompassing all of U.S. employment and ranked (on the x -axis) by their skill level
from lowest to highest. Here, an occupation’s skill rank is proxied by the average wage of its
workers in 1980. The y-axis of the …gure corresponds to the change in employment at each
occupational percentile as a share of total U.S. employment during the decade. Since the sum
of shares must equal one in each decade, the change in these shares across decades must total
zero.16
The …gure reveals a striking reversal of occupational employment changes between the early
15

Consistent hourly earnings data are available for the period 1973 through 2008 from the Current Population
Survey. To increase precision, we pool three adjacent years of data for each series.
16
These series are smoothed using a locally weighted regression to reduce jumpiness when measuring employment
shifts at such a narrow level of aggregation. Due to smoothing, the sum of share changes may not integrate precisely
to zero.

15

and later years of the sample, paralleling the polarization of earnings. Between 1979 and 1989,
occupational employment growth was nearly monotone in occupational skill; occupations below
the median declined as a share of employment and occupations above the median increased.
Between 1990 and 2007, relative employment growth was again most rapid at high percentiles
but it was also strongly positive at lower percentiles, with the growth of occupational employment
shares almost as rapid at the 10th percentile as at the 80th percentile.
Figure 6 documents the broad changes in occupational structure that drive job polarization
in the United States by plotting the change in employment by decade for the years 1979 through
2010 for 10 major occupational groups encompassing all of U.S. non-agricultural employment.
We separately plot the three recession years of 2007 through 2010 so as not to con‡ate cyclical
with secular changes.
The occupations depicted in the …gure cluster into three broad groups. On the right-hand
side of the …gure are managerial, professional and technical occupations. These are highlyeducated and highly-paid occupations. Employment growth in these occupations was robust
throughout the three decades plotted. Even in the years 2007 through 2010, during which U.S.
employment fell by approximately 7 million workers, these occupations experienced almost no
absolute decline in employment.
Moving towards the center of the …gure, the next four columns display employment growth
in ‘middle-skill occupations,’ comprised of four categories: o¢ ce and administrative support
occupations; sales occupations; production, craft and repair occupations; and operator, fabricator and laborer occupations. The …rst two categories are white-collar occupations that are
disproportionately held by women with a high school degree or some college. The latter two
categories are blue-collar occupations that are disproportionately held by males with a high
school degree or lower education. While the headcount in these occupations rose in each interval
depicted between 1979-2007, their growth rate lagged the economy-wide average and, moreover,
generally slowed across decades. These occupations were hit particularly hard after 2007, with
absolute declines in employment ranging from 7 to 17 percent.
Finally, the left-most three columns of Figure 6 depict employment trends in service occupations, which the Census Bureau de…nes as jobs that involve helping, caring for or assisting others.
The majority of workers in service occupations have no post-secondary education, and hourly
wages in these occupations are generally below the other seven categories depicted. Employment
growth in service occupations has been consistently positive over the past three decades. Indeed,
Autor and Dorn (2011) show that rising service occupation employment accounts for most of the
upward twist of the lower tail of Figure 5 during the 1990s and 2000s. All three subcategories of
service occupations— protective services, food preparation and cleaning services, and personal
16

care— expanded by double digits in the 1990s and the pre-recession years of the past decade
(1999 through 2007). Protective service and food preparation and cleaning occupations also
expanded rapidly during the 1980s. Notably, even after 2007, employment growth in service
occupations was modestly positive despite the deep recession— more so, in fact, than the three
high skill occupations on the right-hand side of the …gure.17
This pattern of employment polarization is not unique to the United States. Goos, Manning
and Salomons (2009, Table 1) show that for each of 16 European Union countries for which data
were available for the years 1993 through 2006, employment in low-wage occupations increased
relative to employment in middle-wage occupations, with a mean gain in employment in low
relative to middle wage occupations of 10 percentage points. This cross-country analysis suggests
that job polarization is at least as pronounced in the European Union as in the United States.
Cumulatively, these two trends— rapid employment growth in both high and low-education
jobs— have substantially reduced the share of employment accounted for by ‘middle skill’jobs.
In 1979, the four middle skill occupations— sales, o¢ ce and administrative workers, production
workers, and operatives— accounted for 58.9 percent of employment. In 2007, this number was
47.5 percent, and in 2010, it was 44.5 percent.
Challenges for the Canonical Model: Summing Up
We believe that these discrepancies between the data and the predictions of the canonical
model— speci…cally, the heterogeneous behavior of the top, middle and bottom of the earnings distribution, falling real wages of some skill groups, polarization of earnings growth, and
polarization of occupational growth— are su¢ ciently important to warrant enriching the canonical model to gain leverage on these trends. We turn to this task next. Subsequently, we brie‡y
revisit these facts to ask whether the enhanced model can in fact o¤er leverage.

4

Beyond the Standard Model

Many of the shortcomings of the canonical model can, we believe, be overcome by relaxing the
implicit equivalence between workers’skills and their job tasks in the model. In our terminology,
a task is a unit of work activity that produces output. A skill is a worker’s stock of capabilities
for performing various tasks. Workers apply their skills to tasks in exchange for wages. Thus,
the task-based approaches emphasize that skills are applied to tasks to produce output— skills do
not directly produce output. The distinction between skills and tasks is irrelevant if workers of
a given skill always perform the same set of tasks. The distinction becomes important, however,
17

The employment share of service occupations was essentially ‡at between 1959 and 1979. Their rapid growth
since 1980 marks a sharp trend reversal.

17

when the assignment of skills to tasks is evolving with time, either because shifts in market prices
mandate reallocation of skills to tasks or because the set of tasks demanded in the economy is
altered by technological developments, trade, or o¤shoring.
To highlight how a task-based approach can enrich and strengthen the emphasis of Goldin
and Katz, we summarize a simple task-based framework proposed in Acemoglu and Autor (2010),
which builds on Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) and Costinot
and Vogel (2010). Goldin and Katz have also explored closely related ideas in other recent publications, for example, Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006, 2008) and Goldin and Katz (2007), but
have chosen not to focus on them in the book given their intended broad audience.18 Distinct
from the canonical model, this framework explicitly incorporates the possibility that technological change or international trade will cause some tasks previously performed by domestic
workers to either be replaced by capital or substituted by workers abroad. This provides a
natural mechanism through which technological advances— importantly even factor-augmenting
technological change— can lead to real declines in the wages for certain groups of workers as well
as non-monotone changes in the structure of employment by occupation.
The model also has two foundational features that we view as particularly useful. First,
it nests the canonical model as one parametric case; thus, this model builds upon rather than
dispenses with the many strengths of the canonical model. Secondly, the model removes what
we think of as an arti…cial set of distinctions typically made between labor, capital, and trade (or
o¤shoring) in canonical models of production where di¤erent factors of production play distinct
and often incommensurate roles. In the current model, the fundamental units of production are
job tasks, which are combined to produce output. Tasks can be supplied by domestic labor,
foreign labor, or capital, the capabilities of which may change over time. The allocation of both
labor and capital to tasks is determined in equilibrium by comparative advantage, which is in
turn a function of factor-task speci…c productivities and the market clearing price of each factor.

4.1

A simple model of tasks and skills

We consider a static environment with a unique …nal good. For now, the economy is closed and
there is no trade in tasks (a possibility we allow for later). The unique …nal good is produced
by combining a continuum of tasks represented by the unit interval, [0; 1]. Suppose, to simplify
the analysis, that the technology combining the services of tasks is a constant elasticity of
18

They have instead gone some way towards incorporating the notion of skill-replacing technical changes we
focus on here by making the distribution parameter in the CES production function (3), , time-varying. As
commented in footnote 9, this is somewhat ad hoc as it is unclear what sorts of changes in technology would a¤ect
.

18

substitution aggregator, so that the …nal good is produced as
Y =

Z

1

1

1

y(i)

di

;

(8)

0

where Y denotes the output of a unique …nal good, y (i) is the ‘service’or production level of
task i, and

is the elasticity of substitution between tasks. Acemoglu and Autor (2010) studied
R1
the ‘Cobb-Douglas’ case where = 1, or equivalently, ln Y = 0 ln y(i)di. For our discussion
here, it is su¢ cient to focus on this case.

Suppose that there are three types of labor, high, medium and low skill workers, who inelastically supply L, M and H units of labor respectively. At any given point in time, a subset
I

[0; 1] of the potentially feasible tasks is available (the remaining tasks cannot be produced).

Each of the available tasks has the following production function
y(i) = AL

L (i) l(i)

+ AM

M

(i) m(i) + AH

H

(i) h(i) + AK

where A terms represent factor-augmenting technology, and

L (i),

M

K

(i) k(i);

(i) and

H

(9)
(i) are the

task productivity schedules, designating the productivity of low, medium and high skill workers
in di¤erent tasks. In particular,

L (i)

is the productivity of low skill workers in task i, and l (i) is

the number of low skill workers allocated to task i. The remaining terms are de…ned analogously.
Similarly,

K

(i) is the task productivity schedule of capital and k (i) is the amount of capital

allocated to task i: Analogously to the canonical model, we can think of AL ; AM and AH as
low, medium and high skill factor, factor-augmenting technological changes. Distinct from the
canonical model, however, a factor-augmenting technological change need not increase the wages
of all factors in this setup, as we subsequently discuss.
Though each task can be performed by low, medium or high skill workers or by capital, the
comparative advantage of skill groups di¤ers across tasks, as captured by the

terms. These dif-

ferences in comparative advantage are central to understanding the interplay of tasks and skills.
In particular, we impose the following simple structure of comparative advantage:
and

M

(i) =

H

L (i) = M

(i)

(i) are (strictly) decreasing. This assumption can be interpreted as stating that

higher indices correspond to ‘more complex’ tasks in which high skill workers are better than
medium skill workers and medium skill workers are better than low skill workers. Though
not very restrictive, this assumption ensures a particularly simple and tight characterization
of equilibrium in this economy. We ignore for the moment the task productivity schedule of
capital.19
19
The canonical model can be nested within this framework trivially by ignoring middle skill workers and
assuming that L (i) = L > 0 and H (i) = 0 for all i
{ and L (i) = 0 and H (i) = H>0 for all i > {.
Acemoglu and Autor (2010) discuss other ways in which the model admits special cases similar to the canonical
model.

19

Factor market clearing requires
Z
Z 1
l(i)di L,
0

1

m(i)di

M and

Z

1

h(i)di

H:

(10)

0

0

The structure of the model’s equilibrium is derived in Acemoglu and Autor (2010), and we
provide only minimal details here. Because of the simple structure of comparative advantage
outlined above, the equilibrium of the model involves a partition of the continuum of tasks into
three adjacent sets: the least complex set of tasks, those on the interval 0
supplied by L workers; an intermediate set of tasks on the interval IL < i
by M workers; and the remaining highest skill set on the interval IH < i

i

IL , will be

IH will be supplied
1 will be supplied by

H workers. Crucially, IL and IH , which are the cut-points of the task partition, are endogenously
determined in the model.
Competitive labor markets require that the law of one price for skill applies. Each unit
of L labor will receive a wage WL , and similarly for units of M and H labor. Additionally,
since each task can potentially be performed by any skill group, the allocation of tasks to skill
groups is governed by a no arbitrage condition: for the marginal task located at IL , the cost of
performing this task must be identical in equilibrium whether it is supplied by L or M workers.
Similarly, the cost of performing task IH must in equilibrium be equated between M or H
workers. For tasks on the interior of these sets (i < IL ; IL < i < IH , and i > IH ), however,
workers of the relevant skill groups hold strict comparative advantage. Using these conditions,
it is straightforward to demonstrate that there will exist a unique IL and IH that jointly satisfy
the law of one price, the no arbitrage condition, and the market clearing condition in (10).

4.2

Implications for Interpreting Patterns of Wages and Employment

A key strength of the model presented above is that it facilitates a more nuanced view of the
nature of technological shifts, which, together with changes in the supply of skills, underlie the
bulk of the changes in the earnings distribution over the last several decades. At a basic level,
the distinction between high, middle and low skills adds an important degree of freedom to the
model, allowing for non-monotone movements in wage levels and wage inequality as seen in the
data.
A second distinction is that, while factor-augmenting technological improvements always
increase the real earnings of both skilled and unskilled workers in the canonical model, this may
not be so in the presence of endogenous allocation of workers to tasks. Acemoglu and Autor
(2010) show that a factor-augmenting technological improvement (e.g., an increase in AH ) can
reduce the wages of middle skill workers. In particular, this happens when new technologies,
by increasing the productivity of high skill workers, encourage some of the tasks previously
20

performed by middle skill workers to be shifted to high skill workers, but a corresponding shift
of low skill tasks to middle skill workers is not pro…table.20
Arguably the most important innovation o¤ered by this task-based framework is that it can
be used to investigate the implications of capital (embodied in machines) directly displacing
workers from tasks that they previously performed. In general, we expect that tasks performed
by all three skill groups are subject to machine displacement. Based on the patterns documented
in the data above, as well as the general characterization of machine-task substitution o¤ered
by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), however, we believe the set of tasks most subject to
machine displacement in the current era are those that are routine or codi…able.21 Such tasks
are primarily, though not exclusively, performed by medium skill workers (e.g., high school
graduates and those with less than a four-year college degree). For this reason, let us suppose
that there now exists a range of tasks [I 0 ; I 00 ]

[IL ; IH ] for which

K

(i) increases su¢ ciently

(with …xed cost of capital r) so that they are now more economically performed by machines
than middle skill workers. For all the remaining tasks, i.e., for all i 2
= [I 0 ; I 00 ], we continue to

assume that

K

(i) = 0.

What are the implications of this type of technological change for the supply of di¤erent types
of tasks and for wages? We answer this question formally in Acemoglu and Autor (2010). Even
without such a formalization, however, it is straightforward to see why this form of technological
change has the potential to generate the patterns of wage changes and polarization documented
above: a task-replacing technological change can directly reduce wages of a skill group even as
it raises total output. Intuitively, a task-replacing technological change squeezes out the type of
worker previously performing these tasks, thereby creating ‘excess supply.’ Consequently, these
workers are reallocated to tasks for which they have lower comparative advantage, which pushes
their wages down. Simultaneously, by reducing the cost, and hence increasing the intensity of
use, of the newly automated tasks, the task-replacing technological change complements each of
the remaining tasks performed by labor.
Though these countervailing e¤ects imply that the real wage of the group that is directly
displaced by technology in a subset of its original tasks does not have to fall in real terms, such
an outcome is possible— perhaps even likely— in realistic cases. In consequence, the task-based
framework sketched above can readily rationalize falling real wage levels for some skill groups.
This set of observations explains why middle-skill task-replacing technological change can
lead to wage polarization. By eroding the initial comparative advantage of the middle-skill group
20

Loosely, this happens when IH shifts down considerably while IL does not change by much.
Tasks with these attributes may also be particularly well suited to o¤shoring since their coda…ability makes
them readily tradeable as the price of communications falls (also a technological change).
21

21

in a given set of tasks, the technological shift in e¤ect shunts the displaced skill group into a
set of tasks in which it was initially less productive. This depresses the group’s wage relative to
both L and H workers.22
The polarization of occupational employment also follows from this mechanism. As demonstrated in the plots above, the occupations that have contracted most rapidly as a share of
total employment over the last three decades are reasonably well characterized as routine taskintensive activities. Speci…cally, many of the tasks historically performed by production, clerical,
administrative support and sales workers have become fallow for automation as the cost of computer hardware has declined and the sophistication of software has advanced. Notice, however,
that this process does not imply that these displaced tasks are obsolete— in fact, just the opposite. As the cost of performing routine tasks has declined by orders of magnitude, their use
in production has grown explosively— think, for example, of the amount of processing power
that goes into a single Google query. However, because these tasks are now performed by capital rather than labor, the consequences for the earnings power of workers who previously held
comparative advantage in these tasks are at best ambiguous.
This process potentially catalyzes labor market polarization because as workers are displaced
from routine task-intensive occupations, a greater mass of skills is reallocated towards the tails
of the occupational distribution— both towards high skill analytic, reasoning and problem solving tasks and, ironically, towards traditionally low skill, in-person service tasks. Hence, this
conceptual framework can readily accommodate what computer scientists refer to as Moravec’s
paradox, speci…cally, that “it is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and di¢ cult or impossible to give them the
skills of a one-year-old when it comes to perception and mobility” (Moravec, 1988, p. 15).
We do not wish to suggest that this model resolves the puzzles posed above; to some degree,
it was purpose-built to interpret them. Our claim— or at least our hope— is that this framework
is a productive conceptual tool for confronting key facts that currently lie beyond the canonical
model’s scope. We next ask whether this same framework redresses any of the limitations of the
standard growth accounting exercise above.
22

As detailed in Acemoglu and Autor (2010), there are also interesting general equilibrium e¤ects on other skill
groups. As the middle-skill group is displaced, the task boundaries will change, encroaching on the other two skill
groups. The relative degree of encroachment on L versus H workers depends on the shape of the comparative
advantage schedules in the neighborhood of the initial set boundaries. If H workers have strong comparative
advantage relative to M in their initial tasks, then the upper boundary will move little. If L workers have
relatively weak comparative advantage in their initial tasks, then the predominant direction of task reassignment
will be that tasks previously performed by L workers are reallocated to M workers.

22

4.3

Rethinking the Contribution of Human Capital to Growth

As we saw above, Goldin and Katz quantify the contribution of human capital to economic
growth using an accounting framework with human capital represented as a single aggregate
factor. This choice may at …rst appear at odds with Goldin and Katz’s emphasis on the canonical
model in which there is a central distinction between skilled and unskilled labor (e.g., the
aggregate production function (3)). Nevertheless, their approach is justi…ed under the standard
assumptions used in the literature, as we now explain. As is well known, Solow-type growth
accounting recovers the contribution of di¤erent factors of production and technology under
three conditions: the aggregate production function exhibits constant returns to scale; there
are no production externalities (so that market prices capture social marginal products); and
changes in each factor are small.
Under these assumptions, one can indeed use an aggregate of human capital, X, constructed
as e¢ ciency units of labor, in place of separate measures of skilled and unskilled workers. This
follows because the growth accounting approach uses a …rst-order approximation to the aggregate
production function, and this approximation is arbitrarily close to the underlying function when
we consider small enough changes in factor supplies. To illustrate this point in greater detail,
consider a hybrid of (1) and (3) with capital and skilled and unskilled labor, L and H:
h
Y = F~ K; (AL L)

1

+ (AH H)

1

i

1

;

(11)

where the production function F~ exhibits constant returns to scale. The growth accounting
equation in this case, with a logic similar to (2), can be written as
gY = gA +

RK
wL L
wH H
gK +
gL +
gH ;
Y
Y
Y

(12)

where gZ again denotes the growth rate of variable Z, and gA is the contribution of technological
progress, driven, for example, by changes in AL and AH , again computed as the residual from
the growth accounting exercise.
Instead of entering the supply of unskilled and skilled labor, L and H, directly into the growth
accounting exercise, however, one can aggregate them into a single stock of human capital using
the following measure of the aggregate stock of human capital,
X =L+

wH
H = L + !H:
wL

(13)

This approach will …nd an identical contribution of human capital to growth as in the full
accounting framework in (12) for small enough changes in factor supplies.23 In consequence,
23

To see this equivalence result, recall that X denotes total e¢ ciency units of labor as de…ned in (13). From this

23

Goldin and Katz’s use of an aggregate human capital measure in the place of separate skill
groups in the growth accounting exercise does not cause their analysis to underestimate the
contribution of human capital to growth.
Nevertheless, one of the assumptions upon which the growth accounting exercise relies is
potentially problematic: speci…cally, that changes in the factors of production over time are
small so the …rst order approximation in equation (12) is stable. This assumption is formalized
in the growth accounting framework and in the above treatment by considering derivatives with
respect to continuous time, so changes over time are arbitrarily small. If, however, there are
large changes in factor supplies or technologies that alter the shares of factors in national income,
all of these equations become rough approximations that can in principle go wrong.24
Given the rapid increase in the supply of di¤erent types of human capital and the consequent
changes in prices, which Goldin and Katz themselves comprehensively document, this assumption of factor share stability may not be a good approximation to reality. In this case, correctly
specifying the functional form of the aggregate production function, including the exact form of
substitution between di¤erent types of skills, becomes crucial.25 Using an aggregate production
function that does not distinguish between skilled and unskilled labor may then understate (or
overstate) the contribution of human capital to growth.
This concern becomes more salient when the multifaceted nature of human capital and the
endogenous allocation of this human capital to tasks is taken into account. This is not only
because the pattern of substitution between di¤erent types of human capital becomes richer,
but also because the value of di¤erent types of human capital crucially depends on the set of
(evolving) tasks.
To elaborate on this point, let us return to the task-based framework introduced in this
section and suppose, as seems plausible, that in the U.S. economy, the increase in educational
attainments went hand in hand with expansions in the set of tasks It — e.g., from 0; It to
0; It+1 , where It+1 > It . This simultaneous increase in human capital and the complexity

of job tasks employed in the economy implies that changes in the prices of di¤erent skills will
de…nition, it follows that if X is properly measured, wX will be the same as the unskilled wage, wL — essentially
all labor is remunerated as di¤erent e¢ ciency units of unskilled labor. Now di¤erentiating (13), and rearranging,
we also have
L
!H
gX = gL +
gH :
X
X
Substituting this into (2), the growth accounting equation from Section 2, and using the fact that wL = wX , we
recover (12), the growth accounting equation from the production function explicitly distinguishing skilled and
unskilled labor.
24
In fact, Goldin and Katz do impose the Cobb-Douglas functional form between physical and human capital,
as a further functional form restriction.
25
See Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001), where this point is raised in the context of the use of similar techniques
in cross-country data.

24

depend on the changes in the set of tasks in use. For instance, if the periods in which there are
large increases in the supply of the highest type of human capital are also those in which there
is a large expansion in the set of tasks (i.e., It+1 is signi…cantly greater than It ), then using
an approximation to the production function that keeps the set of tasks at [0; It ] may seriously
underestimate the contribution of human capital to growth.

4.4

Some Initial Evidence from U.S. States

The ideas discussed in the previous subsection are speculative and there is no hard evidence as
yet to suggest that they are empirically relevant. In this section, we take a …rst step towards
exploring them empirically, and we provide suggestive evidence they are a productive avenue
for understanding the interaction between human capital and economic growth. To do this, we
extend the regression framework proposed by Krueger and Lindahl (2001) for estimating the
role of human capital in cross-national development. Our extension of their approach allows
for interactions between the set of tasks in use in the economy and the contribution of human
capital to growth. If indeed the contribution of human capital to growth crucially depends on
the set of tasks in use, we would expect such interactions to be signi…cant and quantitatively
important. Applying this framework to U.S. states, for which we have access to high quality data
on schooling and measures of tasks (occupations) in use, we …nd evidence that the contribution
of human capital to state-level output and growth does importantly depend on the set of tasks
currently in use.
Krueger and Lindahl quantify the cross-country relationship between human capital and
economic growth by estimating OLS models of the following form:
Yj;t =
In this equation,
interval t,

1

Sj;t +

2 Sj;t 1

+

3 Yj;t 1

+

4 Ij;t 1

+

t

+ "j;t :

(14)

Yj;t is the change in the logarithm of GDP per capita in country j over time

Sj;t is the change in country j’s average years of completed schooling, Sj;t

level of schooling at the start of period t, Yj;t

1

is the start of period GDP, and

t

1

is the

denotes a

full set of time e¤ects. This speci…cation is motivated by a macroeconomic aggregation of the
micro-founded Mincerian worker-level earnings equation, which derives a log-linear relationship
between years of completed schooling and hourly earnings.26 Initial GDP is included in the
macroeconomic estimating equation to allow for income convergence among countries (implying
26

The log-linear speci…cation arises because workers must be compensated for foregone labor earnings while
attending school, meaning that the (net) return to schooling must be roughly equal to the real rate of interest
(see, e.g., Acemoglu, 2009, Chapter 10). The quadratic function in years of potential experience typically used
in microeconomic wage equations is excluded from the macro-level model at the country level because years of
potential experience are highly correlated with expected lifespan, which is itself a function of economic development
and hence GDP.

25

that

3

< 0), while inclusion of initial schooling allows for the possibility that a larger stock of

human capital may facilitate innovation and use of new technologies that boost GDP (implying
that

2

> 0).27

Fitting several variants of this simple model to a panel of countries, Krueger and Lindahl
conclude that both the change in and start-of-period level of schooling are robust predictors
of GDP growth, and that measurement errors in cross-national measures of average schooling
levels tend to substantially attenuate estimates of
in measures of

1.

To increase the signal to noise ratio

Sjt and reduce this attenuation problem, Krueger and Lindahl recommend

estimating equation (14) in long di¤erences of 5, 10 or 20 years.
In Table 2, we apply this approach to estimating the relationship between education and
economic growth for the time interval of 1960 through 2007. Following the cross-country growth
literature, our dependent variable is the change in the log of state per-capita income (PCI),
which we obtain from decennial Census estimates for the years 1960 through 2000 and from the
American Community Survey pooled samples from 2006 through 2008.28 We calculate years of
schooling for state residents ages 18 through 65 using Census and ACS samples available from
IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010). In addition to the regressors used by Krueger and Lindahl, we
construct a proxy for the range of tasks in use in each state, denoted by It above, measured

as the start-of-period fraction of state employment in professional, managerial and technical
occupations. Higher values of this occupational specialization measure, Ij;t in our model, would
imply that states produce with a larger range of tasks.
The …rst column of Table 2 presents an estimate of (14) for pooled, state-level changes in
log GDP over (approximately) two-decade intervals between 1960 and 2007. Consistent with
Krueger and Lindahl’s cross-country results, column (1) of Table 2 shows a strong, positive
relationship between growth of average schooling and PCI across states. A one year increase in
school attainment predicts 9:7 log points of PCI growth, which is comparable both to Krueger
and Lindahl’s estimates (Table 3, page 1119) and to recent microeconomic estimates of the return
to a year of schooling in the United States and other English-speaking countries (Oreopoulos and
Salvanes, 2011). Additionally, the column (1) estimate shows that PCI growth was considerably
more rapid in states with initially higher GDP and with a greater share of initial employment
in complex occupations.
The next three columns of Table 2 extend the Krueger and Lindahl framework to investigate
the complementarities between human capital and the set of tasks in use by estimating the
27

When the rate of return to schooling increases over time, 2 will also be positive.
Sources: The Census data are available at http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/state/state3.html.
The ACS data were obtained from the American FactFinder http://fact…nder.census.gov.
28

26

following augmented version of (14)
Yj;t =

1

Sj;t +

2 Sj;t 1

+

3 Yj;t 1

+

4 Ij;t 1

+

5

Sj;t Ij;t

1

+

t

+ "j;t ;

(15)

where we have added an interaction term between growth of state schooling levels and initial
state task complexity,

Sjt Ij;t

29
1.

Consistent with our expectations founded on the task-based framework presented above,
in column (2) we …nd that this interaction term is estimated at 1:43 and is highly signi…cant
(standard error = 0:42). This suggests that a one year increase in average educational attainment
leads to about 7 log points additional growth in PCI over two decades in a state that has 5
percentage points higher initial share of employment in complex occupations (relative to a state
with mean task complexity).30 This gain is over and above the 8:6 log points increase in PCI
per year of education for the average state.
In columns (3) and (4), we also include the interaction between PCI and the change in
schooling,

Sj;t Yj;t

1,

either by itself or together with our variable of interest,

Sj;t Ij;t

1.

We

…nd no signi…cant interaction between the change in schooling and initial state per capita income,
suggesting that it is not simply wealthier states that appear to gain more from schooling but
rather states specialized in more skill-intensive activities.
The last four columns of Table 2 extend the estimating equation by allowing for di¤erent
slopes on years of post-secondary schooling and years of primary plus secondary schooling.31
An intriguing pattern that emerges from this extended model is that growth in schooling below the post-secondary level is a strong predictor of state level PCI growth whereas growth
in post-secondary schooling has an economically small and statistically insigni…cant predictive
relationship to state growth. Conversely, the interaction term between initial task-complexity
and growth in years of post-secondary schooling is large and highly signi…cant, while the interaction between initial task-complexity and growth of lower years of schooling is essentially zero.
This pattern again suggests that, consistent with our task-based framework, the value of human
capital investments appears to be conditional on the set of tasks in use, with greater gains for
higher levels of schooling where task complexity is higher.32
29
We de-mean each of the variables used to construct the interaction terms to eliminate the mechanical covariance between the main e¤ects of these constituent variables and the resulting interaction terms.
30
The mean of the complex occupation share variable rises from 0.21 in 1960 to 0.38 in 2007. Its cross-state
standard deviation is between 0.036 and 0.049 per decade.
31
The primary plus secondary measure is calculated as the mean years of schooling completed in grades 1
through 12, while the post-secondary measure is the mean years of schooling completed in grades higher than 12.
32
Recent work by Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) emphasizes the role of school quality rather than quantity
in fostering cognitive skills that raise productivity and hence incomes. Viewed through this lens, one might
conjecture that the task complexity measure in our regressions serves as a proxy for school quality and, similarly,
the positive interaction between increased schooling and task complexity indicates that schooling raises income by

27

Though we o¤er these estimates as preliminary evidence on potential complementarities
between job task demands and worker skills, we have carried out a number of tests to con…rm the
basic robustness of these patterns. When these models are …t using 10-year rather than 20-year
long di¤erences, we obtain qualitatively comparable results. Additionally, we have estimated
these models using two alternative measures of state income other than the Census per-capita
income measure. These are state personal income per capita from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis and state level log weekly wage and salary income, calculated from Census and ACS
microdata. Both alternative measures lead to similar results.33 The general pattern of results is
also not sensitive to whether regressions are weighted by state population or whether each state
is accorded equal weight, as in our estimates above.34
In net, we take these results to suggest that the relationship between human capital and
economic growth may be richer and also more contingent than the simple growth accounting
model suggests. These …ndings are in the spirit, if not the letter, of the emphasis in Goldin
and Katz’s book, as underscored by the quotation at the beginning of subsection 2.2. While
they do not explore these dynamics in depth, they go beyond the simplest application of the
growth accounting framework and highlight that allowing for a richer set of interactions between
education and technology (re‡ected in the range of tasks in use) may provide additional insights
into the role of human capital in economic growth.

5

What the Future May Hold

The …nal part of Goldin and Katz’s argument is about the erosion of the forces that had fueled
the rapid growth of education and underpinned the “American Century.” In this section, we
summarize their arguments on the challenges facing the United States and their policy recommendations. We then discuss the implications of the task-based approach to human capital
about what the challenges are and what the future might hold.
more when school quality is higher. One reason for skepticism about this interpretation, however, is that we fail
to detect any similar positive interaction between increases in schooling and per capita income in Tables 2 and 3.
Since we would expect per capita income to be a stronger proxy for worker productivity— and hence educational
quality— than task complexity per se, we suspect that the task complexity measure is not primarily serving as a
proxy for school quality.
33
We prefer the PCI measure to the wage income measure; PCI is closely related to the outcome measure, GDP,
used in the education and growth literature. We prefer the Census PCI to the BEA PCI measure because the
construction of the Census measure is more transparent, and involves fewer imputations and (to our knowledge)
no …ltration.
34
Similarly, estimates are little changed by dropping Hawaii and the District of Columbia.

28

5.1

Challenges to the U.S. Human Capital Machine

Goldin and Katz give a characteristically detailed and nuanced account of how the United States
has fallen behind in the quantity and quality of schooling, and what could be done to counteract
this trend.
Two distinct but related problems are apparent. First, whereas the United States was the
leader in high school graduation and then college graduation for much of the 20th century, over
the last 30 years it has become something of a laggard in both as compared to other industrialized
nations. Figure 7, which plots U.S. secondary school completions from 1930 through 1992, shows
that American high school graduation rates peaked in the early 1960s and have stagnated since.35
Figure 8, which plots the supply of young (0 to 9 years of potential experience) male and female
college relative to high school graduates in the U.S. labor market between 1963 and 2008, shows
that the trends in college completion are equally discouraging. Despite the surge in the college
premium, which Goldin and Katz document in detail and which is also visible in Figure 2 above,
there has not been a robust supply response among recent cohorts. The net e¤ect of these trends
is that the United States is in the middle of the OECD pack both in terms of high school and
college graduation— and this, from a country that surpassed almost all others in both categories
as late as the 1960s.
Second, the United States is also lagging behind in terms of school quality, particularly in
K-12. Goldin and Katz are careful to note that AP calculus students in the United States
compare favorably with the advanced mathematics students in almost any country, while the
average U.S. student lags behind the average student in most OECD countries in math and
science. This quality de…ciency is almost as worrying as the lack of progress in the high school
and college graduation margin.
Goldin and Katz rightly emphasize the role of the slowdown in the quantity and quality of
schooling in the surge in the U.S. earnings inequality: both the canonical model and variations
thereof along the lines of our task-based framework suggest that without this slowdown, the
college/high-school earnings gap and various other skill premia would have risen by less, and
thus inequality in the U.S. labor market may not have become as pronounced. They also correctly
dismiss claims that high school and college completion rates may have reached a natural plateau
or that the return to additional human capital accumulation in the United States is low. Most
likely, American youth are failing to get a su¢ cient amount and quality of schooling despite— not
because of— the rewards to higher skills in the U.S. labor market.
So what can be done to reverse the U.S.’s educational decline?
35
This …gure is comparable to Figure 9.2 of Goldin and Katz but additionally includes separate series for
graduation rates by sex for the years for which these data are available (1930 through 1982).

29

Goldin and Katz identify the root of the problem to be the failure of the U.S. school system to
ensure high quality education for more disadvantaged Americans. The U.S. school system is not
performing well overall, but it is failing particularly for poor, minority and immigrant children.36
The problem is not necessarily that the U.S. school system has declined in absolute quality, but
that the skill requirements of the workplace have risen and, simultaneously, the challenges that
schools face in managing the diversity and poor school preparedness of a substantial fraction of
the student population have mounted. The net result is that the average U.S. high school student
graduate has only modest preparation in core subject areas— reading, writing, mathematics and
analytical reasoning— and this in turn reduces U.S. college enrollment and completion rates, and
likely compromises the quality of the human capital acquired in college.
Goldin and Katz suggest three sets of policies to set U.S. education back on the right track.
The …rst is to devote additional resources to programs such as Head Start that would invest in
the health and education of disadvantaged preschoolers, and improve the preparedness of these
students before they enter the K-12 schooling system. The second is to channel more resources
into K-12 schooling–for example, to reduce class size, particularly in school districts serving
disadvantaged families. The third is to make …nancial aid for students seeking higher education
more broadly available, more generous, and more transparent.
They also note that one of the great virtues of the U.S. schooling system, its decentralized
and local structure, may have become a barrier to some of these changes. In recent decades,
this decentralization has arguably increased the racial and income segregation of U.S. students
while making it more di¢ cult to orchestrate national e¤orts to “lift all boats.” Finally, they
also rightly note that even if their proposed policies were highly e¤ective, they would do little
to limit income inequality at the top. Hence, to the extent that the social objective is to create
more equitable growth, not just to increase economic growth, Goldin and Katz suggest that a
return to more progressive taxation would also be necessary.
While Goldin and Katz’s proposed policies are, in our view, sound ones, their diagnosis of the
maladies facing the U.S. human capital machine may be unduly narrow, focusing almost entirely
on the educational system itself, and not su¢ ciently on the inputs on which this system draws
and the political infrastructure that underpins it. Indeed, there are several facts revealed by
Goldin and Katz’s analysis that broadly hint that the U.S. educational system cannot be the sole
cause of the waning educational stature of the United States. One such clue is found in Figure
7 (as well as Figure 9.2 of Goldin and Katz). The stagnation of U.S. K-12 graduation rates did
not slowly take root over decades, as one would expect from an educational system in secular
36

This is not to deny that the quality of education for many middle-class children can also be increased substantially, but it is the most disadvantaged students who are most badly served.

30

decline. Rather, 75 years of improving U.S. secondary school graduation rates came to a sudden
and nearly complete halt in the mid-1960s and remained more or less …xed at that plateau for
the next three decades. It seems implausible that this sudden stop in U.S. educational progress
is attributable exclusively to a discontinuous, permanent deterioration in the quality of the U.S.
secondary school system in the mid-1960s. Other factors are thus likely to be at play.
A similarly jarring picture of discontinuous change is seen in the evolution of U.S. college
completion rates one decade later. Figure 8 shows that America’s rising college completion rate
sharply decelerated in the mid-1970s, with this deceleration concentrated among U.S. males. In
the ensuing 35 years, male four-year college completion rates have increased only very modestly.
Meanwhile, after losing momentum during the 1970s, female four-year college completion rates
have surged in the most recent two decades. Notably, the slight aggregate decline in the U.S.
high school graduation rate since the early 1960s is driven almost exclusively by a declining
male high school completion rate. The female graduation rate has remained nearly constant
throughout the past forty years (Heckman and LaFontaine 2010).
As with the ‘sudden stop’in U.S. secondary school graduation rates a decade earlier, it seems
implausible that the U.S. higher education system became abruptly dysfunctional for males in
1974 even as its prowess at educating females improved. The fact that the ‡agging output of
the U.S. educational machine a- icts primarily one of its two product lines— males— and that
this fall-o¤ takes place virtually discontinuously across birth cohorts suggests to us that the
causal forces are broader and more pervasive than can be reasonably explained by discontinuous
changes within the U.S. educational system itself. What are these broader causal forces? We do
not believe that social science has so far produced an adequate account of what went wrong with
the U.S. human capital machine. Our claim is therefore a modest one: the deterioration of the
U.S. K-12 educational system is unlikely to be a su¢ cient explanation for the sharp stagnation
of high school completion rates in the early 1960s and the slowdown in male post-secondary
attainment commencing in the mid-1970s.
While we do not fully agree with Goldin and Katz’s diagnosis of why the United States
is losing the educational race, we concur that the additional human capital investments that
they propose have some potential to improve matters— particularly by increasing the school
preparedness of U.S. children prior to their entering K-12. But this brings us to a second
barrier to reversing America’s educational slide which does not receive su¢ cient attention from
Goldin and Katz’s analysis: politics. As it was politics that largely underpinned American
schooling exceptionalism, fundamental reforms and signi…cantly expanded investments in the
U.S. education system would only be possible if the political will is found to support them.
Research by political scientists and economists alike (e.g., summarized in Bartels, 2008) suggests
31

that the U.S. political system has been giving much more weight to the rich and wealthy and
much less to the poor. If the political voice of minority and low-income Americans remains
limited, it is unlikely that the sort of broad-based and far-reaching investments in the schooling
of the most disadvantaged that Goldin and Katz advocate will be undertaken.

5.2

Implications and Caveats from a Complementary View

Goldin and Katz highlight the decaying state of the U.S. education system and the challenge that
this poses to U.S. leadership in human capital and economic performance. They suggest that
bold action is necessary and could reverse the tide. As we discussed in the previous subsection,
there is much to agree with in this assessment. We now conclude with a brief discussion of how
an approach that emphasizes the multifaceted nature of human capital and how it is allocated to
di¤erent and changing set of tasks may lead to further ideas and some re…nements. Since much
of our discussion below follows from an as-yet-untested perspective, it is inevitably speculative,
and we will just list some of the ideas as potential directions for further thoughts rather than
conclusive implications backed up by a body of evidence.
1. Goldin and Katz stress the importance of increasing the supply and quality of human
capital as a way of ensuring more rapid and more equitable growth. This is likely to be
the right emphasis, though the framework outlined in Section 4 also underscores that it
is particularly important to distinguish the growth implications of this predicament from
its distributional consequences. In particular, if new technologies are indeed replacing
many tasks previously performed by middle skill workers and are also expanding the set
of tasks that high skill workers can perform, then the most important type of investments
for U.S. economic growth might be those at the top of the human capital distribution. In
terms of the framework presented above, a decline in the quality of schooling may reduce
the e¢ ciency units of labor supplied by low and medium skill workers, but in a world
in which there is a rapid expansion of the set of advanced tasks demanded, combined
with o¤shoring of middle and lower skill tasks, economic growth may still continue apace
as long as the supply of very highly skilled labor to the economy continues to expand.
Since, as Goldin and Katz mentioned and we noted above, U.S. elite high schools and
(even more so) elite colleges remain among the best in the world, and assuming that the
United States retains its ability to attract the best and brightest from other countries,
the country could plausibly continue to generate substantial innovation and technological
progress and achieve relatively high rates of economic growth even in the face of ongoing
mediocrity in ‘average’schooling.

32

Thus, if our only policy objective was to ensure the fueling of the U.S. ‘engine’ of
economic growth, the educational state of the Union might not be as alarming as it
…rst appears. But on this path, the U.S. economy may quite plausibly fail to create
high-paying, rewarding and stable jobs for a large fraction of its population. In this
view, the most alarming problem posed by the current educational system for the U.S.
economic model is not one of stagnating economic growth but rather one in which a rising
tide fails to raise all boats. As new technologies continue to replace the tasks performed
by medium and low skill labor, the gap between economic growth and equitable growth
may widen— unless a larger share of U.S. workers is prepared to perform the work that is
made particularly valuable as the competencies of contemporary technologies continue to
improve.
2. These considerations suggest the need for a two-pronged approach. First, we have to ensure
that the U.S. system does not invest too little at the top, missing out on providing the best
human capital and most attractive entrepreneurial environment for the next generation
of innovators. Stated bluntly, the ‘elitism’ of the U.S. educational system is a strength
that we would not sacri…ce, even in the service of the worthy goal of improving the system
on average. Simultaneously, the United States must strive to improve the e¢ cacy and
e¢ ciency of K-12 and pre-K education to provide the bulk of the workforce the skills
needed to prosper in a rapidly changing environment. Whether or not this is essential for
economic growth, it is indispensable for ensuring a more equitable distribution of (pre-tax)
incomes and, arguably, a well-functioning democracy.
3. Relatedly, technological change and increases in incomes may create more jobs in services
and in the ‘ecosystem’ related to new products rather than in assembly and actual production. These may not take us back to a world in which high school graduates can have
generous bene…ts through union jobs and high wage growth, but may still create opportunities for workers who make appropriate vocational investments. As noted above, one of
the ironies of the computer era is that information technology has increased labor’s comparative advantage in traditionally low skill service tasks, such as food preparation and
personal care, relative to its value in traditional middle skill tasks such as computation, information processing, and repetitive production activities. Improving workers’capabilities
to add value in these tasks is therefore more important than ever. While one may legitimately be skeptical that education can do much to improve productivity in labor-intensive,
technologically-lagging tasks, it is well worth noting that workers with post-secondary ed33

ucation appear to earn more in essentially all walks of life— including mundane service
occupations— than do those with a high school or lesser education (Carnevale, Rose and
Cheah, 2011). This suggests that increasing the skills and capabilities of even workers that
will perform the lower skill tasks in the economy— the li ’s or the e¢ ciency units of labor
of low skill workers— may be both bene…cial for the e¢ ciency of the aggregate economy
and for containing inequality.
4. One potential misreading of the implications of the task framework is that the U.S.
should give up on ‘middle skill’ education because there is no future for middle skill
jobs. This inference is mistaken for two reasons. First, education is cumulative; students
cannot attain high skills (e.g., proving theorems) without …rst mastering middle skills
(e.g., arithmetic). Not providing such skills to all students would mean foreclosing their
higher education options at an early age— an idea that is profoundly antithetical to
the foundational virtues upon which Goldin and Katz argue America’s educational and
economic preeminence were built.
A second reason why middle skills will remain important is that while many middle skill tasks are susceptible to automation, many non-college jobs demand a mixture
of tasks from across the skill spectrum. To take one prominent example, medical paraprofessional positions— radiology technicians, phlebotomists, nurse technicians, etc.— are
a numerically signi…cant and rapidly growing category of relatively well-remunerated,
middle skill occupations. While these paraprofessions do not require a college degree,
they do demand one to two years of post-secondary vocational training— and mastery
of ‘middle skill’ mathematics, life sciences, and analytical reasoning is indispensable for
success in this training. While important subsets of middle skill occupations are on the
wane (e.g., clerical and repetitive production positions), we do not forecast the demise
of all or even most middle skill jobs soon. The simple reason is that the many of the
tasks currently bundled into these jobs will not readily be unbundled into separate labor
and capital components with machines performing the ‘middle skill tasks’ and workers
performing the residual. In numerous occupations, the coordination costs entailed by
such an extreme division of labor are likely to be formidable. Thus, there will remain an
important stratum of non-college jobs that demand the foundational ‘middle’ skills that
a high quality secondary education provides.
5. The response of technologies to other labor market trends also needs to be considered
in formulating forecasts and remedies about the problems of the U.S. education system.
34

Models of endogenous, directed technological change— as discussed in footnote 5— suggest
that technologies will tend to become biased in favor of factors that are becoming more
abundant and/or more pro…table to utilize (Acemoglu, 1998, 2007). This suggests that as
U.S. workers become more educated, the direction of technological change may adjust to
demand more of those skills available in the market. The implications of this endogenous
technology response could cut both ways. If the lowest-skill workers become a declining
minority, technological change may pass them by, diminishing the likelihood that economic
growth will bene…t the bottom of the income distribution. However this is not the only
possibility. As pointed out above, a responsive and successfully reformed education system
would increase the skills of even the workers performing the lower skilled tasks (e.g., the
li ’s). But if so, fostering technological change that complements the growing numbers
of workers with the education and capability to utilize new technologies may become an
attractive channel by which all boats may be lifted.
6. Finally, if our emphasis above that the U.S. human capital century was underpinned by
politics is correct, then it becomes particularly important to consider how the United
States will form the political coalitions needed to support a renewed focus on investing in
the quality of education, both at the top and the bottom of the distribution.

6

References
Acemoglu, Daron. 1998. “Why do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-

nical Change and Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4), 1055–1090.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2007. “Equilibrium Bias of Technology.”Econometrica 75(5), 1371–1410.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2009. Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor and David Lyle. 2004. “Women, War and Wages: The E¤ect
of Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-Century.”Journal of Political Economy
112(3), 497–551.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2010. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
Employment Earnings.”In: Ashenfelter, O., Card, D. (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor Economics,
vol. 4b. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1043-1171.
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: Origins of Power, Poverty
and Prosperity. (Forthcoming).
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2001. “Productivity di¤erences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), 563–606.
35

Atkinson, Anthony B., 2008. The Changing Distribution of Earnings in OECD Countries
(The Rodolfo De Benedetti Lecture Series). Oxford University Press, New York.
Autor, David and David Dorn, 2011. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market.” MIT Working Paper, June.
Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the U.S.
Labor Market.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2),
Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Trends in US Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 300–323.
Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4),
1279–1334.
Bartels, Larry. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Card, David and John DiNardo. 2002. “Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20(4), 733–783.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to
College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2),
705–746.
Carnevale, Anthony, Stephen Rose and Ban Cheah. 2011. “The College Payo¤: Education, Occupations, Lifetime Earnings.” Georgetown University Center on Education and the
Workforce.
Costinot, Arnaud and Jonathan Vogel. 2010. “Matching and Inequality in the World Economy.” Journal of Political Economy 118(4), 747–786.
Galenson, David, 1996. “The Settlement and Growth of the Colonies: Population Labor, and
Economic Development.” In Engerman, S. L., Gallman, R.E (Eds.), The Cambridge Economic
History of the United States. Cambridge University Press, New York, 135-207.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure:
Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 135-165.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure
in the United States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 1–34.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning and Anna Salomons. 2009. “The Polarization of the European
Labor Market.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99(2), 58–63.
Hammermesh, Daniel, 1999. “Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(4), 1085–1123.

36

Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic
Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(3), 607-668.
Heckman, James, and Paul LaFontaine. 2010. “The American High School Graduation
Rate: Trends and Levels.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2), 244–262.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35–78.
Krueger, Alan and Mikael Lindahl. 2001. “Education for Growth: Why and for Whom?”
Journal of Economic Literature 39(4), 1101–1136.
Moravec, Hans. 1988. Mind Children. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Bene…ts of
Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1), 159-184.
Pierce, Brooks, 2001. “Compensation Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4),
1493–1525.
Pierce, Brooks, 2010. “Recent Trends in Compensation Inequality.”In Abraham, K., Harper,
M., Spletzer, J. (Eds.), Labor in the New Economy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 63–98.
Ruggles, Steven J., Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
and Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machinereadable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1974. “Substitution of Graduate by other Labour.” Kyklos 27(2), 217–226.
Welch, Finis. 1973. “Black-White Di¤erences in Returns to Schooling.”American Economic
Review 63(5), 893–907.

37

Table 1. Regression Models for the Change in the College/High-School Log Wage Gap,
1963-2008
1963-1987
(1)

(2)

1963-2008
(3)
(4)

Δ CLG/HS
Relative Supply

-0.612
(0.128)

-0.339
(0.043)

-0.644
(0.066)

-0.562
(0.112)

-0.556
(0.094)

Time

0.027
(0.005)

0.016
(0.001)

0.028
(0.002)

0.029
(0.006)

0.020
(0.006)

-0.013
(0.006)

0.036
(0.012)

-0.010
(0.002)

Time X post-1992
Time2/100
Time3/1000
Constant
Observations
R2

(5)

-0.007
(0.002)
-0.217
(0.134)

0.059
(0.039)

-0.254
(0.066)

-0.189
(0.122)

-0.145
(0.103)

25

46

46

46

46

0.558

0.935

0.961

0.941

0.960

Source: March CPS data for earnings years 1963-2008. Labor supply is calculated using all
persons ages 16-64 who reported having worked at least one week in the earnings years,
excluding those in the military. The data are sorted into sex-education-experience groups of two
sexes (male/female), five education groups (high school dropout, high school graduate, some
college, college graduate, and greater than college) and 49 experience groups (0-48 years of
potential experience). Number of years of potential experience is calculated by subtracting the six
(the age at which one begins school) and the number of years of schooling from the age of the
individual. Labor supply for college/high-school groups, by experience level, is calculated using
efficiency units. Efficiency units are the mean labor supply for broad college (including college
graduates and greater than college) and high-school (including high school dropouts and high
school graduate) categories, weighted by fixed relative average wage weights for each cell. The
labor supply of the “some college” category is divided equally between the broad college and
high-school categories.
Log weekly wages for full-time, full-year workers are regressed in each year on four education
dummies (high school dropout, some college, college graduate, greater than college), a quartic in
experience, interactions of the education dummies and experience quartic, and two race
categories (black, non-white other). The composition-adjusted mean log wage is the predicted
log wage evaluated for whites at the relevant experience level (5, 15, 25, 35, 45 years) and
relevant education level (high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college
graduate, greater than college). The mean log wage for college and high school is the weighted
average of the relevant composition adjusted cells using a fixed set of weights equal to the
average employment share of each group.

Table 2. Pooled 20-Year Changes in Log Per Capita Income, with Detailed Education Categories and
Interactions with Initial Income or Fraction of Skilled Jobs
(1)
-0.401
(0.059)

(2)
-0.415
(0.057)

(3)
-0.401
(0.059)

(4)
-0.435
(0.056)

(5)
-0.343
(0.058)

(6)
-0.312
(0.055)

(7)
-0.312
(0.057)

(8)
-0.330
(0.057)

School (yrs)-1

-0.011
(0.032)

-0.022
(0.031)

-0.012
(0.033)

0.003
(0.032)

0.125
(0.045)

0.117
(0.042)

0.135
(0.045)

0.126
(0.043)

Task Complexity-1

1.391
(0.261)

1.295
(0.254)

1.391
(0.262)

1.231
(0.249)

0.826
(0.286)

0.480
(0.272)

0.610
(0.285)

0.503
(0.274)

Δ School (yrs)

0.097
(0.032)

0.072
(0.032)

0.097
(0.033)

0.084
(0.031)

Δ Primary+Secondary School

0.354
(0.070)

0.311
(0.065)

0.346
(0.068)

0.315
(0.066)

Δ Post-Secondary School

-0.040
(0.046)

-0.090
(0.043)

-0.076
(0.047)

-0.079
(0.044)

log PI-1

1.427
(0.423)

Δ School × Task Complexity-1

2.462
(0.549)
0.014
(0.128)

Δ School × log PI-1

-0.458
(0.160)

Δ Primary+Secondary School
× Task Complexity-1

-0.460
(0.688)

0.441
(1.163)

Δ Post-Secondary School ×
Task Complexity-1

3.028
(0.573)

3.107
(0.827)

Δ Primary+Secondary School
× Log PI-1

-0.099
(0.130)

-0.216
(0.205)

Δ Post-Secondary School ×
Log PI-1

0.625
(0.210)

-0.158
(0.275)

0.48

0.54

R2

0.38

0.42

0.38

0.45

0.44

0.53

n=153 pooled changes. Standard errors in parentheses. Unweighted OLS regressions. Dependent variable is stacked
changes in state per-capita income (PCI) between 1960-1980, 1980-2000, and 2000-2007 (normalized for period
length). State PCI is from Census Bureau Income Surveys reports for 1960 through 2000 and American Community
Survey data for years 2006-2008. All righthand side variables are calculated from Census IPUMS and American
Community Survey data sources following the procedures in Acemoglu and Autor (2010). Task Complexity measure
equals the start-of-period fraction of state employment in professional, managerial and technical occupations. Models
also include an intercept and time period dummies.

Figure	  1	  

.35

.45

.55

.65

Log Wage Gap

.75

.85

Katz-Murphy Prediction Model for the College-High School Wage Gap

1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009

Observed CLG/HS Gap

Katz-Murphy Predicted Wage Gap: 1963-1987 Trend

	  

Source:	  March	  CPS	  data	  for	  earnings	  years	  1963-­‐2008.	  Log	  weekly	  wages	  for	  full-­‐time,	  full-­‐year	  workers	  are	  regressed	  in	  
each	   year	   on	   four	   education	   dummies	   (high	   school	   dropout,	   some	   college,	   college	   graduate,	   greater	   than	   college),	   a	  
quartic	   in	   experience,	   interactions	   of	   the	   education	   dummies	   and	   experience	   quartic,	   and	   two	   race	   categories	   (black,	  
non-­‐white	   other).	   The	   composition-­‐adjusted	   mean	   log	   wage	   is	   the	   predicted	   log	   wage	   evaluated	   for	   whites	   at	   the	  
relevant	   experience	   level	   (5,	   15,	   25,	   35,	   45	   years)	   and	   relevant	   education	   level	   (high	   school	   dropout,	   high	   school	  
graduate,	  some	  college,	  college	  graduate,	  greater	  than	  college).	  The	  mean	  log	  wage	  for	  college	  and	  high	  school	  is	  the	  
weighted	   average	   of	   the	   relevant	   composition	   adjusted	   cells	   using	   a	   fixed	   set	   of	   weights	   equal	   to	   the	   average	  
employment	  share	  of	  each	  group.	  The	  ratio	  of	  mean	  log	  wages	  for	  college	  and	  high	  school	  graduates	  for	  each	  year	  is	  
plotted.	   See	   Data	   Appendix	   for	   more	   details	   on	   treatment	   of	   March	   CPS	   data.	   The	   Katz-­‐Murphy	   predicted	   wage	   gap	   are	  
the	  predicted	  values	  from	  a	  regression	  of	  the	  college/high-­‐school	   wage	   gap	   on	   time	   trend	   term	   and	   log	   labor	   supply,	   as	  
measured	  in	  efficiency	  units,	  for	  years	  1963-­‐1987.	  	  	  

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  2	  

.1
.05
0
-.05
-.15

-.1

Log Change Relative Supply

-.12

-.09

-.06

-.03

0

Log Change Relative Wage

.03

.15

.06

Detrended Changes in College/High-School Relative Supply and Relative Wages

1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009

Log Change Relative Wage

Log Change Relative Supply

	  

Source:	  March	  CPS	  data	  for	  earnings	  years	  1963-­‐2008.	  See	  notes	  to	  Figure	  1.	  The	  detrended	  supply	  and	  wage	  series	  are	  
the	  residuals	  from	  separate	  OLS	  regressions	  of	  the	  relative	  supply	  and	  relative	  wage	  measures	  on	  a	  constant	  and	  a	  linear	  
time	  trend.	  	  

	  
	  

	  

Figure	  3	  

0

.2

.4

Composition-Adjusted Real Log Weekly Wages

.6

Real, Composition-Adjusted Log Weekly Wages for Full-Time Full-Year Workers
1963-2008 Males

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

Year

HSD
SMC
GTC

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

HSG
CLG

Source:	  March	  CPS	  data	  for	  earnings	  years	  1963-­‐2008.	  See	  note	  to	  Figure	  1.	  The	  real	  log	  weekly	  wage	  for	  each	  education	  
group	   is	   the	   weighted	   average	   of	   the	   relevant	   composition	   adjusted	   cells	   using	   a	   fixed	   set	   of	   weights	   equal	   to	   the	  
average	  employment	  share	  of	  each	  group.	  	  

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  4	  

-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05

0

.05

.1

Relative log earnings change

.15

.2

Changes in Male Log Hourly Wages by Percentile Relative to the Median

5

20

35
50
65
Hourly Earnings Quantile
1974-1988

80

95

1988-2008

	  

Source:	  May/ORG	  CPS	  data	  for	  earnings	  years	  1973-­‐2009.	  The	  data	  are	  pooled	  using	  three-­‐year	  moving	  averages	  (i.e.	  the	  
year	  1974	  includes	  data	  from	  years	  1973,	  1974	  and	  1975).	  For	  each	  denoted	  time	  period,	  the	  change	  in	  the	  5th-­‐95th	  
percentile	  of	  log	  weekly	  wages	  is	  calculated.	  

	  
	  

	  

Figure	  5	  

-.05

100 x Change in Employment Share
0
.05
.1
.15

.2

Smoothed Changes in Employment by Occupational Skill Percentile 1979-2007

0

20

40
60
80
Skill Percentile (Ranked by Occupational Mean Wage)
1979-1989

100

1990-2007

	  

	  

Source:	  Census	  IPUMS	  5	  percent	  samples	  for	  years	  1980,	  1990,	  and	  2000,	  and	  Census	  American	  Community	  Survey	  for	  
2008.	   All	   occupation	   and	   earnings	   measures	   in	   these	   samples	   refer	   to	   prior	   year’s	   employment.	   The	   figure	   plots	   log	  
changes	  in	  employment	  shares	  by	  1980	  occupational	  skill	  percentile	  rank	  using	  a	  locally	  weighted	  smoothing	  regression	  
(bandwidth	   0.8	   with	   100	   observations),	   where	   skill	   percentiles	   are	   measured	   as	   the	   employment-­‐weighted	   percentile	  
rank	  of	  an	  occupation’s	  mean	  log	  wage	  in	  the	  Census	  IPUMS	  1980	  5	  percent	  extract.	  Mean	  education	  in	  each	  occupation	  
is	   calculated	   using	   workers’	   hours	   of	   annual	   labor	   supply	   times	   the	   Census	   sampling	   weights.	   Consistent	   occupation	  
codes	  for	  Census	  years	  1980,	  1990,	  and	  2000,	  and	  2008	  are	  from	  Autor	  and	  Dorn	  (2011).	  

	  
	  

	  

Figure	  6	  

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

Percent Change in Employment by Occupation, 1979-2010

n
Ma
ag
er
s

s

a ls

n
icia

n
sio
fe s

s

n
ch

o
Pr

Te

le
Sa

n
mi
/Ad
fice
Of

La
r s/

n
ctio

a to

du

er

o
Pr

Op
bo
re

e
vic

e
vic

rs

er
gS

e

n in

r
Ca

r
Se
tive
te c

al

ea
/Cl

n
so

od

o
Pr

Fo

r
Pe

1979-1989
1999-2007

1989-1999
2007-2010

Source:	  May/ORG	  CPS	  files	  for	  earnings	  years	  1979-­‐2010.	  The	  data	  include	  all	  persons	  ages	  16-­‐64	  who	  reported	  having	  
worked	   last	   year,	   excluding	   those	   employed	   by	   the	   military	   and	   in	   agricultural	   occupations.	   Occupations	   are	   first	  
converted	   from	   their	   respective	   scheme	   into	   326	   occupation	   groups	   consistent	   over	   the	   given	   time	   period.	   All	   non-­‐
military,	  non-­‐agriculture	  occupations	  are	  assigned	  to	  one	  of	  ten	  broad	  occupations	  presented	  in	  the	  figure.	  	  

	  

	  

	  

0.1

0.2

Graduation rate
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure	  7.	  U.S.	  High	  School	  Graduation	  Rate	  	  
Overall	  and	  by	  Sex,	  1930-­‐1991	  

0.0

Males
Females

Males + Females

1930 1934 1938 1942 1946 1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  8	  

-1.25

-1

Log Relative Supply Index
-.75 -.5 -.25
0
.25

.5

.75

College/High-School Log Relative Supply, 1963-2008

1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009

Year

Male 0-9 Yrs Experience

Female 0-9 Yrs Experience

Source:	  March	  CPS	  data	  for	  earnings	  years	  1963-­‐2008.	  See	  note	  to	  Figure	  1.	  Log	  relative	  supply	  for	  0-­‐9	  and	  20-­‐29	  years	  
of	  potential	  experience	  is	  plotted	  for	  males	  and	  females.	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

