NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RAISING THE BARCODE SCANNER:
TECHNOLOGY AND PRODUCTIVITY IN THE RETAIL SECTOR
Emek Basker
Working Paper 17825
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17825
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

Comments welcome to emek@missouri.edu. This paper was written while I was an ASA/NSF/Census
Bureau Fellow visiting the Center for Economic Studies (CES) at the U.S. Census Bureau. I thank
the funding agencies for their generous support and the economists at CES for their hospitality. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. I thank John Meisel and Sue Wilkinson for help obtaining the Food Marketing
Institute reports. Thanks also to Saku Aura, Roger Betancourt, Bill Chrisco, Teresa Fort, Lucia Foster,
Shane Greenstein, John Haltiwanger, Shawn Klimek, Mark Lewis, Jeff Lin, David Matsa, Guy Michaels,
Javier Miranda, Jim Mulligan, Justin Pierce, Bill Selmeier, Haleem Shehadeh, Tim Simcoe, David
Weil, seminar participants at U.S. Census Bureau, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, UNC-Greensboro, UT-Arlington, the 2011 IIOC (Boston) and the 2011 NBER Standards,
Patents and Innovation pre-conference. All remaining errors and omissions are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Emek Basker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Raising the Barcode Scanner: Technology and Productivity in the Retail Sector
Emek Basker
NBER Working Paper No. 17825
February 2012
JEL No. D22,L81,O33
ABSTRACT
Barcodes and barcode scanners transformed the grocery industry in the 1970s. I use store-level data
from the 1972, 1977, and 1982 Census of Retail Trade, matched to data on store scanner installations,
to estimate scanners' effect on labor productivity. I find that early scanners increased a store's labor
productivity, on average, by approximately 4.5 percent in the first few years. The effect was larger
in stores carrying more packaged products, consistent with the presence of network externalities. Short-run
gains were small relative to fixed costs, suggesting that the impediment to widespread adoption of
the new technology was profitability, not coordination problems.
Emek Basker
Department of Economics
118 Professional Building
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
emek@missouri.edu

1

Introduction

This paper takes a first step towards achieving a better understanding of the effect of technology on the retail sector by investigating the impact of barcode scanners, which were first
installed in the mid-1970s, on productivity in supermarkets. Scanners represent a discrete,
easy-to-measure form of technological innovation, providing a clean laboratory to study their
impact on productivity. After decades in the “idea” (pre-commercial) phase, once scanners
commercialized, they caught on quickly: about a third of U.S. supermarkets adopted scanners within ten years of the first commercial installation.
Productivity in the retail sector is notoriously hard to measure and not well understood.
The link between chains and productivity is made most convincingly by Foster, Haltiwanger,
and Krizan (2006), who find that virtually all productivity growth in retailing in the 1990s
was due to store entry (particularly through chain expansion) and exit (particularly of nonchain stores). This finding is consistent with a technology gap between chains and “Mom
and Pop” retailers, although data limitations prevent the authors from determining whether
this productivity gap is due to technology, management, economies of scale, or some other
factor. Doms, Jarmin, and Klimek (2004) come the closest to linking retail productivity
and technology adoption by showing that retail firms reporting high levels of informationtechnology (IT) investment in 1992 also experienced high labor productivity growth between
1992 and 1997. In this paper, I go even further by locating a “smoking gun” (more accurately,
a smoking scanner) in IT investment and linking it directly to store-level productivity growth.
Because scanners diffused over time, I use the panel dimension of the data to rule out some
omitted-variable and endogeneity concerns.
I trace the impact of scanners on store-level productivity by matching data from the
Food Marketing Institute on store scanner installations in the 1970s and early 1980s to
Census Bureau records at the establishment (store) level. I use data from the Census of
Retail Trade for 1972, 1977, and 1982 in a difference-in-difference specification and find that
productivity increased by an average of 4.5% in stores that installed barcode scanners before

1982. This average effect masks variation both over time and across stores: gains in the year
of installation were smaller, and varied even in later years with the products sold by each
store. To address endogeneity bias, I use only stores that installed scanners by the end of
1984. Even in this sample, my identification depends on the standard difference-in-difference
assumption that the timing of treatment (in this case, scanner adoption) is independent of
the error term. While this assumption is not directly testable, specification tests show no
evidence of sample-selection or omitted-variable bias.
Investigating the skill bias of scanner adoption, I find some suggestive evidence that
scanners were an unskilled-biased technology, at least in the long run. In the short run
scanners appear to have reduced labor costs by reducing the demand for both skilled and
unskilled labor, although not necessarily in the same proportions.
I use my estimates to perform two back-of-the-envelope calculations. In the first, I
provide a ballpark estimate of the increase in the productivity boost due to scanners from
having one more barcoded product on a store’s shelves. This increase turns out to be the
equivalent of about $28 per year, per store, giving some sense of the magnitude of network
externalities in the implementation of scanning. A second calculation totals up the costs,
pecuniary and non-pecuniary, and benefits from scanning, and concludes that the early
scanners probably did not provide a positive return on investment. This finding suggests
that limited short-run profitability, not coordination costs, was the salient barrier to early
adoption of this new technology.
The large gap between the short-run private returns and the long-term social return on
the investment in scanners can be explained by the emergence over time of complementary
technologies that would not have been possible in the absence of scanners. In the short run,
the limited number of products bearing Uniform Product Code (UPC) symbols was a binding
constraint on the potential for productivity gains. At the time of the first scanner installations, only 2,000 food and beverage manufacturers had signed up to print barcodes on their
products; by the end of 1984, nearly 13,000 manufacturers had signed up, greatly increasing

2

the value of scanners (Dunlop and Rivkin, 1997). Longer-run developments included inventory management, which, in turn, made possible electronic data interchange (EDI) between
retailers and their suppliers, including electronic payments (Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond,
and Weil, 1999).
This paper builds on a small literature on scanner installations. Levin, Levin, and Meisel
(1985, 1987, 1992) and Das, Falaris, and Mulligan (2009) have used different subsets of the
scanner installation data to study, respectively, the reasons for variable early diffusion rates
across U.S. metropolitan areas, the role of market concentration and firm size in scanner
adoption, differences in the speed of intra-firm diffusion across supermarket chains, and
changes in the diffusion process with the emergence of new vintages of the technology. Beck,
Grajek, and Wey (2011) use aggregate data on scanner adoption in ten European countries
to estimate country-specific diffusion parameters and relate them to the structure of the
retail market in each country. I depart from this literature on scanner installations in two
important regards. First, my focus is on the effects of scanners rather than on their diffusion
pattern. Second, merging the scanner data with store-level information from the Census of
Retail Trade allows me to construct a control group for adopting stores at each point in
time, and compare their outcomes with a counterfactual.
The paper also contributes to the broader discourse on the impact of technology on
productivity (for a flavor of this literature, see Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003; Jorgenson, Ho,
and Stiroh, 2008; Marrano, Haskel, and Wallis, 2009). Unlike most of that literature, which
has focused on the 1990s, my study uses data from an earlier era of rapid technological
innovation, and from a sector — retailing — that has been largely under-studied. A final
twist in this case study is the presence of two-sided network externalities. Scanner installation
can only increase a supermarket’s productivity if the products on its shelves are equipped
with UPC symbols (barcodes). Although I do not have data on the food-manufacturer side
of the market, my calculations suggest that network externalities were substantial.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the

3

grocery sector and on the history of barcode scanners. Section 3 describes the data sources
used in this study. Sections 4–6 attempt to answer the following questions: What was the
impact of scanners on store-level productivity? How was this productivity gain achieved?
And did scanners’ benefits justify their costs? Section 7 concludes.

2

Background

The barcode, or UPC, originates with Wallace Flint’s 1932 Harvard Master’s thesis. Norman Joseph Woodland and Bernard Silver applied for a patent on a similar innovation in
1949. Implementation took more than two more decades and an organization, the Ad Hoc
Committee on a Uniform Grocery Product Identification Code, that brought together food
manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers, with the help of consulting company McKinsey &
Co., to agree on a standard. By this point, Wallace Flint was himself a Vice President of
the National Association of Food Chains, and Norman Joseph Woodland was employed as
an engineer by IBM and was a leader of IBM’s efforts to get into the checkout business. The
Ad Hoc Committee included representatives of one independent grocer and one cooperative,
along with executives of the largest supermarket chains: Kroger, A&P, and Super Value
(Haberman, 2001, p. 145).
Scanning became a reality in June 1974 at a Marsh supermarket in Troy, Ohio.1 Over
the next ten years, the publication Scanning Installation Up-Date by the Food Marketing
Institute (FMI) regularly reported the number of grocery stores that installed or upgraded
their scanners. At first, scanner installation was slow, but it picked up in the early 1980s.
In January 1985 the publication Marketing News reported that 29% of supermarkets in the
U.S. were using the technology (reported in Das, Falaris, and Mulligan, 2009). Figure 1
shows the timeline of scanner installations based on the FMI data; by the end of 1984, more
1
Coincidentally, 1974 is the year that Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997) cite as a watershed, the year in
which the pace of technological change in the efficiency of new equipment increased.

4

than 10,000 supermarkets had installed scanners. The shaded regions show the periods on
which the present study focuses.
Scanners improved over time. The main improvements in scanning technology before
the mid-1980s were, first, an increase in scanners’ ability to read small bar codes, and second,
the introduction of a holographic technique that allowed optical scanning of damaged or wet
barcodes (Das, Falaris, and Mulligan, 2009). These innovations, combined with a general
trend of increasing UPC adoption by food manufacturers, resulted in better UPC coverage
across the food sector. Bill Selmeier, who worked for IBM during the 1970s, reports that
when scanners were first installed, “very few items [...] had the symbol included in their
brand packaging,” limiting the scanners’ benefits (Selmeier, 2008, p. 223). As time went on,
however, packages were increasingly likely to include barcodes. According to one account,
by 1980 more than 90% of grocery products had UPC registrations (Harmon and Adams,
1984, p. 7). Zimmerman (1999) reports that between May 1974 and November 1980, the
number of grocery manufacturers that had adopted UPCs increased almost tenfold, from
869 to 7,570 (p. 45).
The technology was originally intended to speed up customer check-out and reduce labor
costs at the cash register as well as on the store floor, for example for price changes. The
main reason early adopters gave for implementing the new technology was their interest in
assessing “the labor-saving potential of the equipment” in a realistic setting (Shaw, 1977,
p. 54). Few initial adopters conducted proper assessments of the technology, either because
they had no baseline against which to measure productivity or because they implemented
other changes in conjunction with scanner installation (Shaw, 1977, p. 51). Instead, they
relied on McKinsey’s forecasts and the equipment manufacturers’ estimates to justify the
expense.2
Early results of scanner installations were mixed if not disappointing. After interviewing
2

Brown (1997, p. 44) notes that McKinsey “was far from a disinterested, neutral observer in the process.
It saw its role as that of a leader and advocate [for scanning], and was not shy about exercising it.”

5

50 retailers that adopted scanners by November 30, 1976, Shaw (1977, p. 233) concludes,
“23 firms ... [reported] improved speed of throughput due to scanning at the checkout, while
12 ... [claimed] unchanged or reduced productivity. The results achieved by the remaining
15 were indeterminate.” There are some reports from the late 1970s and early 1980s on the
productivity gain from these scanners, but none are convincingly documented. Harmon and
Adams (1984, p. 204), for example, report that the grocery industry realized productivity
gains of 40% over manual price entry, but cite no source for this figure.
Today, scanners provide previously unimaginable data. Store managers report using
scanner data primarily for promotions and price setting (Bucklin and Gupta, 1999), but
scanners can also provide detailed worker-level productivity information — items scanned
per second — which may be used in promotion or compensation decisions. Mas and Moretti
(2009) use such detailed productivity data to study the effect of peers on checkout speed.
Scanner data also helps track consumer demand through so-called “loyalty” cards, and
scanner-enabled inventory management has improved in-stock rates (Matsa, 2011). Many
authors have speculated that barcode scanners — and the IT revolution in inventory management that scanning made possible — provided the foundation for the increased product
selection and the growth of stores we have observed in recent decades (see, e.g., Holmes,
2001; Basker, Klimek, and Van, forthcoming).

3

Data

Data on scanner installations come from the Food Marketing Institute (FMI) publication
Scanning Installation Up-Date and provide the month and year of installation by store,
from the first scanner installation at a Marsh supermarket store in Troy, Ohio, in June
1974, until the end of 1984. The data were compiled by FMI through regular phone calls

6

to scanner manufacturers, including IBM and National Cash Register (NCR).3 More than
12,000 installations are listed in these files by the end of 1984, approximately a quarter of
which are specified to be “upgrades.” I focus my attention on de novo installations. Figure 2
show the locations of scanners in the 48 contiguous states as of December 1977 and December
1982.
For the period 1976–1984, the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) maintained by
the Census Bureau lists, with few exceptions, all business establishments with paid employees in the United States. (Exceptions include most government-owned or -operated
establishments, establishments operated by religious organizations or schools, and agricultural establishments.) The LBD is described in detail in Jarmin and Miranda (2002), but I
describe the most relevant features here. The LBD records the existence of an establishment
and provides the establishment’s industrial classification. Establishments are linked over
time through a unique identification number, and are matched to the owning firm, which
may be a single-establishment firm or a multi-establishment firm. In the retail context, a
multi-establishment firm is usually a chain, although it can also be a firm operating one
retail outlet and one or more non-retail outlets (manufacturing facilities, warehouses, etc.).
Since scanners were initially installed exclusively in grocery stores and supermarkets, I use
only establishments coded with SIC 541: grocery stores, food stores, and supermarkets.
My analysis critically depends on correctly matching scanner installation with stores in
the LBD. The name(s) and locations (city and state) of all establishments in the LBD are
obtained from the Business Register (BR), which relies on a mix of administrative records
(e.g., tax filings) and Census collections (surveys and censuses). I match the FMI data,
which include store name, city and state, with the LBD/BR. To maximize the match rate,
I spent considerable effort standardizing names of stores and cities and correcting errors in
3

I thank Sue Wilkinson from FMI for describing the collection process to me. FMI continued to publish
reports through December 1985, but later reports appear less reliable, with some companies lagging several
months in their reporting. I use the reports through 1985 to identify installations that took place during or
before 1984.

7

spelling and geography in both datasets. Despite these efforts, only 3,683, or about 35%,
of new scanner installations through 1984 in the FMI data can be matched with certainty
to stores in the LBD. Figure 3 shows the number of installations per year in the matched
sample. The match rate ranges from 27% (in 1978) to 42% (in 1982).
Non-matching stores fall into three categories. Despite my efforts to standardize city
names (e.g., “Saint” vs. “St.”), a small number (a couple of hundred) of stores in the FMI
data cannot be matched because the city in which they are listed does not match any known
city in the LBD. Of the remaining non-matches, approximately half do not match because
the FMI publication lists only the store name, city, and state, and there are multiple possible
matches in the LBD for that store. (Whenever possible, I use the store number to resolve
such matches.) The other half do not match because the LBD does not include a store of that
name in that city, due to a variety of data issues. First, store names vary due to differences
in spelling, hyphenation, etc. I have made efforts to correct typos and standardize names,
but inevitably, some differences remain. Mismatches also occur because stores change their
names or are called by different names in the two files, for example because the legal name
of the business, which appears in the LBD, differs from the store’s name. Second, there
are some mismatches due to having different cities listed in the two files, either because the
cities are adjacent and the store is located near the boundary between them, or, in some
cases, because the FMI file lists the nearest large metropolitan area and not the physical
location of the store. Whenever the discrepancy can be resolved unambiguously, I reassign
the city based on the LBD information. Third, some stores with scanner installations are not
coded by Census as food stores (SIC 541) and do not match for this reason. Finally, since
the LBD includes only establishments with paid employees, any non-employers installing
scanners cannot be matched. (This explanation is unlikely to play an important role in the
current application, because most installations appear to be in relatively large stores.)
The LBD has information on establishment payroll and the number of paid employees,
but does not include revenue or other output measures, so studying the productivity effects

8

of scanners requires matching to a third data source: the Census of Retail Trade (CRT).
The CRT is part of the Economic Census, which takes place quinquennially in years ending
in “2” and “7.” The CRT provides employment as of the week of March 12, annual payroll,
and annual revenue for each retail establishment. The micro files for the CRT are available
electronically starting in 1977, so I am able to match the 1977 and 1982 CRT with the
LBD/FMI data. Although the full 1972 CRT is not available electronically, the 1977 CRT
provides 1972 employment, revenue, and payroll for continuing establishments.
The CRT also asked stores to report the share of their revenue attributed to each of
several grocery categories (meat, fish, and poultry; fresh produce; packaged frozen foods;
dairy products; bakery items; and all other grocery products), as well as alcohol, tobacco
products, health and beauty aids (including prescription and non-prescription drugs), and
other, less common, categories. I have these data only for 1977 and 1982, and from this I
calculate the variable packaged, the share of store i’s 1977 revenue obtained from packaged grocery products, which I define as excluding fresh produce and meats. The variable
packaged is missing if a store did not break down its revenue by category in 1977, if its
1977 reported revenues in the various grocery subcategories sum to within more than 1% of
its total grocery revenue, or if its reported combined revenues from food and all non-food
product lines sum to within more than 1% of its total revenue.
I calculate labor productivity as the ratio of revenue to payroll from CRT data. To reduce
the impact of outliers on coefficient estimates, I drop the top and bottom 1% of productivity
values for each year. I focus on labor productivity because the stated goal of most store
managers installing scanners was to reduce labor costs. Labor productivity is preferable to
raw labor costs, however, because raw costs could have increased if sales increased. I prefer
measuring productivity as the ratio of revenue to payroll over the alternative of revenue per
worker for several reasons. First, both revenue and payroll are annual measures, whereas
employment is given at a point in time. Second, revenue and payroll are measured in the
same units, so payroll provides a natural deflator for revenue. Third, the employment figures

9

do not distinguish between full-time and part-time workers, which introduces noise into this
measure and may bias coefficient estimates. If stores respond to scanner installations by,
for example, increasing the number of full-time workers relative to part-time workers, we
may see an effect on revenue per worker while revenue per hour is unaffected; using revenue
per payroll dollar should eliminate problems of this sort. This is a particular concern since
cashiers tend to work fewer hours than other grocery-store workers, so a reallocation of tasks
across the store is likely to affect the distribution of hours. Finally, employment figures do
not distinguish between high-skilled and low-skilled workers or managers and cashiers, and
stores may change the mix of these as they install scanners, as well. I explore these issues
in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
Even the ratio of revenue to payroll is not an ideal measure of productivity. An obvious
problem is that wholesale costs are not netted out of revenue because the Census does not
collect input costs from retailers at the store level.4 Another problem is that revenue is
sensitive to prices. The productivity gains I measure are therefore biased downward if stores
lowered prices, or alternatively if wages increased, in response to scanner-induced increased
worker productivity. In the absence of store-level price deflators there is no perfect way to
solve this problem, but I am able to get at the magnitude of this problem in a specification
check in which I test for a relationship between scanner installations at other stores in the
city and a store’s own productivity.5
A final problem is that much of the wage variation across establishments is known to
reflect relative bargaining positions and other factors that do not reflect either hours of
work or worker skill. For example, Abowd, Kramarz, Margolis, and Troske (2001) find
substantial variation in wages among full-time workers even after controlling for skill. Using
4

These data are collected in an annual survey at the firm level, but only published sector-level averages
are available for this time period.
5
All these problems are shared by the employment- (rather than payroll-) based productivity measure used
by Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2002) and Doms, Jarmin, and Klimek (2004). See Foster, Haltiwanger,
and Krizan (2002), Haskel and Sadun (2009), and Betancourt (2005) for further discussion.

10

data from the Current Population Survey’s Outgoing Rotation Groups for 1979–1982, I find
that hours worked and highest grade attained explain 70–75% of usual weekly earnings by
grocery-store employees, depending on the year. Adding occupation (e.g., cashier, manager,
meat cutter, etc.), state, and central-city controls increases the regression R2 to 78–83%.
Standard explanations for differential returns to skill focus on firm-level variables (typically
unobservable). Since all my regression equations include store fixed effects, unobserved storeor firm-level variables should not bias the results in this paper as long as they do not change
over the time period studied.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for my matched sample. For each year, the table
separates the observations into three adoption cohorts: 1974-1977 (cohort 1a), 1978-1982
(cohort 1b), and 1983-1984 (cohort 2). Since there are only 70 cohort-1a adopters in my
data set, most of the identification comes from cohort-1b adopters. The key identification
assumption in my regressions, therefore, is that the second cohort serves as a valid control
group for the first cohort. The table compares stores in the first and second cohorts on five
dimensions: annual revenue and payroll (deflated to 1982 real dollars using the all-items
CPI); productivity, which is measured as the ratio of the two; chain size, measured as the
number of stores in the chain; and the fraction of revenue the store obtains from packaged
groceries.
Stores installing scanners got monotonically smaller between cohort 1a and cohort 1b,
and smaller again in cohort 2, in terms of both revenue and payroll. In most years, t-tests
reject the hypothesis that store sizes were the same, on average, for the earliest, middle,
and later adopters. Despite this statistical difference, the pre-installation distributions are
largely overlapping and similar. Figure 4 compares the distribution of 1972 log revenue for
the three cohorts, and 1977 log revenue for cohorts 1b and 2.
In contrast, chain size, measured as the number of stores operated by the store’s owning
firm, grew larger over the adoption cohorts. Chain size is defined to be 1 for the approximately 13% of observations in the sample that were owned by single-establishment firms.

11

The share of store revenue coming from packaged goods in 1977 also changed from one cohort
to the next, but not monotonically: it decreased between cohort 1a and cohort 1b adopters
and increased again in cohort 2.
Table 2 reports several city-level variables, also by year and adoption cohort. The
variable CityScanner equals 1 if at least one other grocery store in the city had a scanner
(new or pre-existing) in year t:


 0
CityScannerit ≡

 1

if maxj∈c(i)/i Scannerjt = 0
if maxj∈c(i)/i Scannerjt > 0

where the set c(i)/i denotes stores in store i’s city, c(i), excluding store i. To determine
whether any grocery store in city c had a scanner in year t, I first remove a small number
of stores from the FMI dataset which are clearly not grocery stores (mainly drugstores and
general-merchandise stores). I include all other stores in the city, whether or not I can
identify them in the LBD.
The table also includes summary statistics on the 1970 population and the number of
food-selling establishments (SIC 541) in 1972 for each city listed in the 1977 County and
City Data Book (CCDB), obtained electronically as ICSPR study 7735, as well as the city’s
population growth from 1970 to 1980. After adjusting for spelling variations and typos,
approximately 90% of the establishments in the combined FMI/LBD file merged with the
CCDB data; population figures are available for all matching cities, but only a subset have
establishment counts. City size is not monotonic across cohorts: the very earliest (cohort
1a) installing stores were in larger cities; cohort 1b stores were in slightly smaller cities, and
cohort 2 stores were in larger cities again. Earlier installations also occurred in cities that
grew faster from 1970 to 1980.

12

4
4.1

Scanners and Productivity
Difference-in-Difference Estimates

I estimate productivity regressions using a difference-in-difference specification:

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + βScannerit + εit

(1)

where productivityit is revenue per payroll dollar in store i in year t, αi is a store fixed
effect, δt is a time fixed effect, and Scannerit is an indicator for the store having had a
scanner for the full calendar year, or, if the scanner was installed partway through year t,
the fraction of year t during which the store had a scanner. (I assume that a store that
installed a scanner in January had the scanner for
were active for

10.5
12

11.5
12

of the year, February installations

of the year, and so on.) Standard errors εit are clustered at the store

level to allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the error term.
I limit the analysis to the matched sample to address both measurement error and
omitted-variable bias. Measurement error in the full sample of stores results from the fact
that more than 6,000 stores listed in the FMI data as having installed scanners over the
period of study cannot be matched to stores in the LBD and CRT. Excluding stores in the
Census that did not match with installations in the FMI data ensures that stores coded
as not having scanners as of year t really do not have scanners. Otherwise, measurement
error in the scanner variable would cause attenuation bias of the coefficient β. Discarding
all unmatched stores eliminates the measurement-error concerns.
Omitted-variable bias is present if the selection into scanning is not random, specifically,
if it is either caused directly by store productivity or correlated with other factors that affect
productivity. Because stores that adopted scanners in the early years were on average larger,
more productive, and had higher productivity growth than non-adopting stores, including
non-adopters in the regression would bias the estimate of β upwards. In Appendix A, I

13

provide estimates using the full data set and show that the endogeneity bias dominates the
measurement-error bias in the full sample.
Restricting my sample to matched stores imposes only weak conditions for interpreting
the estimates causally. The estimates require only that, conditional on installing a scanner
by December 1984, the exact timing of a store’s installation is uncorrelated with the error
term, so that stores that installed in 1983 and 1984 are valid controls for stores that installed
scanners earlier. This is the standard difference-in-difference assumption. Endogeneity bias
could still be present if stores that installed scanners in the late 1970s and early 1980s
are systematically different from stores that installed scanners in 1983 and 1984, but these
differences are likely to be much smaller than the differences between the “treatment” stores
and stores that lacked scanners at the end of 1984. In the next section, I perform two
specification tests to determine the extent to which these problems are in fact addressed
with the limited sample.
My estimate of β is shown in the first column of Table 3. It shows a 4.5% increase in the
productivity of stores that installed scanners by the end of 1982. Estimates are robust to
several specification tests (not shown), including controlling for state-by-year fixed effects,
to allow different trends across states, as well as to interacting year fixed effects with chain
size, city size (whether measured using the 1970 population of the city or the 1972 number
of food-selling establishments), and city growth rate (measured as the log increase in city
population between 1970 and 1980). The result is also robust to adding firm fixed effects
in addition to store fixed effects, to account for the small number of stores that change
ownership over the sample period. The estimate continues to be statistically significant at
the 1% level when clustered at the firm, rather than store, level. Estimates using different
samples, e.g., only supermarkets (the primary installers of scanners over this time period),
are also very similar.
In Appendix B, I present alternative estimates using a spline method that exploits
the non-linearities in expected productivity gains between 1977 and 1982 from installing a

14

scanner in 1981, 1982, and 1983. This method, which uses significantly fewer observations
(1,580 in total), generates an estimate of 4.6% productivity gain.

4.2

Specification Tests

In this section, I look for evidence of omitted-variable bias related to other productivity
shocks. For example, productivity-enhancing management or ownership changes, or changes
in store organization, could be concurrent with, or followed closely by, the adoption of
scanning technology. One symptom of this sort of omitted-variable bias could be a positive
“preemptive” estimate of scanner adoption on productivity. Specifically, stores that do not
yet have scanners in year t but that install them shortly thereafter (in year t+1) may exhibit
high productivity already in year t. To investigate the extent of this problem, I estimate

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + βt Scannerit + βt+1 ∆Scanneri,t+1 + εit ,

(2)

where ∆Scanneri,t+1 is equal to one if store i installed scanners between January and December of year (t+1), and the other variables are as defined earlier. Column (2) of Table 3 shows
estimates of βt and βt+1 . The estimate of βt is very similar to the one from Equation (1). The
estimate of βt+1 is small and not statistically significant, consistent with random timing of
installations, or at least with the timing of installations being uncorrelated with other factors
affecting store productivity. In contrast, Appendix Table A-1 shows that if I do not restrict
the sample to stores that installed scanners by 1984, βt+1 is estimated to be both large and
statistically significant. Using the restricted sample appears to solve this omitted-variable
bias.
A second specification test concerns local market conditions. If scanners installations
coincided with, or caused, falling wages or increasing grocery prices, then estimates of the
effect of scanners on productivity would be biased upward. (Conversely, estimates would
be attenuated if installations coincided with increasing wages or decreasing prices.) This

15

is a particular concern if faster-rising prices in some cities induced supermarkets in those
cities to install scanners sooner than supermarkets and grocery stores in cities with lower
food-at-home inflation rates. To test whether this effect is biasing my results, I estimate

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + βScannerit + γCityScannerit + εit .

(3)

where CityScannerit equals one if there is at least one other grocery store, besides store i, in
the city with a scanner. Results are shown in the last column of Table 3. Again, the estimate
of β is virtually unchanged, while the estimate of γ is very small and not statistically different
from zero, consistent with an installation process that is neither driven by, nor correlated
with, city-level changes in prices or wages. Restricting the sample to stores without current
scanners to avoid confounding the effects of store- and city-installed scanners, not shown,
produces even smaller estimates of γ. In robustness checks, not shown, I also verify that this
result is not sensitive to city size; in particular, it survives if I restrict the sample to cities
with 1970 population below 100,000 and even below 10,000.
A causal interpretation of the results in Section 4.1 and in the following sections requires
assuming that my sample is free of endogeniety bias, that other drivers of productivity are
uncorrelated with scanner adoption, and that the timing of adoption is independent of their
effect on productivity. While the specification tests in this section are not definitive, their
results are consistent with these assumptions. Of course, it is still possible that stores that
adopt scanners experience a concurrent increase in productivity for any of a host of reasons.

5
5.1

Understanding the Productivity Effect
Decomposition

In this section I separate the impact on store productivity, measured as the revenue-to-payroll
ratio, into its components, estimating separately the effect of scanners on store revenue and

16

payroll. I re-estimate Equation (1), replacing the left-hand side variable by ln(revenue)it and
ln(payroll)it , respectively. These results are reported in the first two columns of Table 4.6
Selmeier (2008, p. 238) reports that a month after installing scanners stores often
experienced a 10-12% increase in revenue, but I find no evidence of such an effect. The
point estimate of the effect of scanners on revenue is small (and negative), and although the
confidence interval is large, a 10% increase in sales can be rejected at the 1% level. The
effect on payroll, however, is negative, statistically significant, and, at −5.3%, large enough
to fully account for the productivity increase estimated in the previous section.
Since the average annual payroll of stores in the sample is approximately $816,000 (in
1982 dollars), these results imply that, on average, barcode scanners increased productivity
by reducing payroll by about $36,500 per year, and holding revenue unchanged.
For completeness, the rest of the table reports, respectively, the effect on March 12
employment, revenue per March-12 employee, and payroll dollar per March-12 employee.
For these three variables, I also estimate an alternative specification in which I replace the
scanner variable with an indicator which equals 1 if the store installed a scanner no later
than March of year t; results (not shown) are unchanged. The results show that stores
did not adjust their employment in response to the scanner installations. Since revenue was
unchanged, too, productivity figures based on revenue per March-12 employee show no effect.

5.2

Scanners’ Skill Bias

The finding that the productivity gain accompanying scanner adoption comes from payroll
reduction begs the question of how this payroll reduction is achieved. The two most obvious
channels, a reduction in worker hours and a reduction of the average hourly pay per worker,
have different economic interpretations. In the first case, the machines are labor-substituting;
in the second, they may increase the relative demand for lower-skilled labor, acting as an
6

The number of observations in this table varies with the left-hand side variable because I remove the
top and bottom 1% of each variable separately before estimating the regressions.

17

unskilled-biased technology à la Acemoglu (2002). Supporting the first alternative, Walsh
(1993) argues that scanners “drastically reduced” the demand for cashiers (p. 106). Supporting the second, Bloom (1972, p. 223) notes that one advantage of the new technology
was that “the automatic feature of the operation would make it possible for stores to hire
less competent applicants.”
Since the CRT does not contain information on worker hours, worker wages, or worker
skills, I turn to auxiliary data sources to investigate this issue. The findings, although
tentative by necessity, suggest a mix of these two channels.
As a first pass, I use the Current Population Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Groups
(ORG) from 1979 to 1989. The CPS ORG includes both an industry code, equivalent to
a 3-digit SIC code, and a detailed occupation code. Over this decade, approximately 6,000
respondents annually reported working at a food store (1970 industry code 628 or 1980
industry code 601, equivalent to SIC 541). Another 2,500 or so per year reported working
for an apparel or shoe store (1970 industry code 657 or 658 or 1980 industry code 630 or
631, equivalent to SIC 56), and 5,000 or so reported working for a general-merchandise store
(1970 industry code 609 or 1980 industry code 591, equivalent to SIC 531 or 532).
I compare the change in compensation for food-store workers with workers in the generalmerchandise and apparel sectors, which were much slower to adopt scanners. From January
1979 to December 1982, the average food-store worker’s real hourly wage fell by about 9.3%,
compared with a 7.3% decline in real hourly wages in the apparel and general-merchandise
sectors, consistent with a “de-skilling” effect of scanners. Undermining this explanation, the
percentage of high-school-educated workers increased in all three sectors over this period,
and increased the most among food-store workers.
I repeat these comparisons for the 1983 to 1989 period, during which some generalmerchandise retailers started adopting scanning technology, albeit slowly. In this later period
the real average hourly wage fell most sharply in food stores — by 16%, compared with 4–
6% in the apparel and general-merchandise sectors. The percentage of high-school-educated

18

workers also fell in all three sectors, with the largest decline in the food sector. Given the
relatively small sample sizes for these industries in the CPS and the fact that fewer than half
of all food stores — a classification that includes not only supermarkets and specialty food
stores but also convenience stores — and very few general merchandise stores had adopted
scanning by this period, the finding is inconclusive, but is consistent with a de-skilling effect.7
There is also some anecdotal evidence to support this hypothesis. In interviews from the
early adoption period, several store managers and chain executives remarked on the reduction
in on-the-job training costs for new cashiers. A store manager remarked to Progressive Grocer
magazine in 1976 that “today the turnover on the front end is so fierce that training the
girls [sic] to tell a Rome from a Delicious apple, or a Texas from a Florida grapefruit, is
time consuming. Worse, it’s pretty ineffective. On the other hand, they quickly memorize
most of the codes” (Progressive Grocer, March 1976, pp. 40-42). Scanners also reduced
cashiers’ need to keep track of which items were eligible for food stamps (Progressive Grocer,
December 1976, p. 70) and which items were to be taxed: “the law [in Pennsylvania]
states that entertainment magazines, like True Confessions, are taxable. But informative
magazines, like Time, are not taxable. So [the cashier does not know] where does People
fall?” (Progressive Grocer, December 1978, p. 56). Consistent with these anecdotes, a
training manual for aspiring cashiers first published in 1975 and revised for a second edition
in 1984 notes that while cashiers need to know math, this is less true if they work in stores
using “sophisticated register equipment” that can calculate “prices for multiple items and
customer or employee discounts, refunds or returns, taxable merchandise, credit for food
stamps, and so on” (Hephner, 1984, p. 7).
Other evidence on the skill component of the job, however, is more nuanced. The
Department of Labor’s Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) provides some information,
including a complexity rating, on thousands of job titles, including several entries for cashiers
7

The opposite conclusion is reached by Budd and McCall (2001), who study the 1984–86 and 1992–94
periods and find that scanners may have reined in wage decreases among grocery workers.

19

in different industries (e.g., banks, retail, hotels, restaurants).8 The occupational description
for retail cashiers changed little between the third edition of the DOT, published in 1965,
and the revised fourth (and last) edition, published in 1991. Each DOT edition rates the
complexity of every job on three dimensions: data, people, and things. Between 1965 and
1977, the rating of cashiers’ complexity of working with data and people remained unchanged;
the complexity rating with respect to “things” changed from an “8”, denoting “no particular
relationship,” to a “2”, denoting “operating or controlling a machine.” There were no further
changes in the complexity ratings between 1977 and 1991.
The main alternative to savings through lower wages is reduced demand for labor, both
skilled and unskilled. Some functions of low-skilled workers, such as checking, were performed
faster once the store was reconfigured to make optimal use of the new equipment and the
cashiers were properly trained. This reduced the number of cashiers needed in the store at
any point in time. U.S. Department of Agriculture predictions, reported by Bloom (1972, pp.
218-220), indicated that if 100% of items were to be barcoded, checker speed could increase
by as much as 18–19%; the productivity gain would have been lower in the early years,
but could still have been substantial. Newspaper reports, as well as informal interviews
I conducted with store managers about their personal experiences with scanner adoption,
confirm that staffing levels were reduced in scanning stores (see, e.g., Williams, 1984).
An additional benefit was achieved in some stores by eliminating item pricing, the process of putting individual price stickers on products, replacing it with shelf-pricing. This
practice was not widespread during the period of this study due to both consumer and
union resistance, and in some states due to legal restrictions. Unions and labor groups were
also very much opposed to item-pricing removal, fearing loss of jobs. Dunlop and Rivkin
(1997) report that by March of 1976, three months before scanners were installed, “an understanding was reached between the labor and management of the [Joint Labor Management]
8

More information on the DOT is available in Lin (2011) and Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003).

20

Committee [of the Retail Food Industry]: Labor would not block the introduction of scanning systems and would not pursue item pricing legislation, and management would agree to
leave prices on most retail products” (p. 26).9 By 1989, only half of all stores had removed
item prices (Walsh, 1993, p. 102). Stores that did remove item prices were able to reap
significant labor-cost reductions. In Michigan, which to this day requires prices be noted on
individual packages, the president of one supermarket chain estimated in 1986 that removing
item pricing could have saved him 40–80 worker hours per store per week, or an average of
about $25,000 per store annually (McGrayne, 1986).10
The evidence here, then, suggests that scanners may have contributed to the de-skilling
of the cashier’s job, although the full extent of this effect may have been delayed beyond the
initial window on which the current paper focuses. A decrease in demand for workers of all
skill levels, from cashier to meat-cutter to bookkeeper, suggest scanners initially may have
functioned as a form of “undirected” technical change.

5.3

The Value of a Barcode

The benefits from scanning depends critically on the number of products labeled with UPCs.
The more manufacturers adopted the UPC, the more retailers benefited from scanners. As
Bloom (1972) notes, “If the operator at the checkout must stop and manually enter the code
for items which are not marked, the benefits described could be substantially reduced” (p.
220).
Ideally, I would have liked to directly estimate the increase in productivity from having
one more product bearing a UPC symbol. In the absence of supplier-level information on
UPC adoption I cannot hope to estimate this effect at the store level. Instead, in this
9
Walsh (1993) explains this agreement as a strategic decision on the part of organized labor, which did
not want to be seen as anti-innovation and therefore opted to form a coalition with consumers.
10
In a previous version of this paper, I attempted to use variation in states’ legal environment to estimate
the impact of item-pricing regulation on the magnitude of the productivity effect. The fact that item pricing
remained the rule even when the law allowed stores to remove these prices, however, limited the power of
this exercise.

21

section I estimate the effect of carrying more packaged (e.g., boxed, canned, jarred) goods,
since these products generally got UPC codes sooner than frozen and fresh products. I then
use these estimates to back out the impact of one additional barcoded product on a store’s
productivity.
To test whether supermarkets whose revenue depended more heavily on products likely
to be barcoded early saw bigger productivity gains from the introduction of scanners, I use
a subset of food stores that provided an accounting of their revenue sources on their 1977
Census form.11 While the sample is relatively small, it allows me to estimate the extent to
which differences in product emphasis affected stores’ ability to exploit the new technology.
I estimate

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + γt × packagedi
+ βScannerit + βl Scannerit × packagedi + εit (4)

where packaged is the share of store i’s 1977 revenue obtained from packaged grocery
products, which I define as excluding fresh produce and meats.

The interaction term

γt × packagedi captures the possibly different time trends of productivity for stores that
specialize in packaged goods and stores that specialize in other food products, such as fresh
produce.
Results are presented in the first column of Table 5. While the main effect β is negative,
the coefficient βl , which captures the additional productivity gain from scanning due to
a higher share of packaged goods, is large, above 0.21, and significant at the 1% level. To
interpret the results, note that across stores in the sample, the 25th percentile of packaged is
approximately 0.5, and the 75th percentile is 0.7; the mean is 0.6. The point estimates imply
that a store that received half of its revenue from packaged groceries in 1977 experienced a
11

I do not have 1972 records on product line sales, so I omit 1972 data from these regressions.

22

productivity increase, on average, of only 1.4% when it installed a scanner, compared with a
5.7% productivity increase for a store that got 70% of its revenue from packaged groceries.
When I estimate Equation (4) using revenue and payroll as dependent variables, the
interaction terms are estimated very imprecisely. This is particularly true in the case of
payroll, where the standard error on the interaction coefficient is eight times the size of the
coefficient.
Making inferences from these estimates to the productivity gain from each additional
UPC requires some additional assumptions. First, I assume for this discussion that packaged
goods are synonymous with barcoded products. In practice, the diffusion of UPCs took time,
and not all packaged goods were barcoded during this period. Conversely, some non-packaged
products may have been early adopters of UPC symbols. Second, I use a store’s share of
revenue obtained from packaged goods as a proxy for the store’s share of items with barcodes
(effectively assuming that the average quantity-weighted price of packaged and non-packaged
goods is the same). Food Marketing Institute reports cited by Messinger and Narasimhan
(1995, Table 6, p. 200) gives the average number of stock-keeping units, or products, in
a supermarket in 1975 as 9,000, a number that increases to 14,000 by 1980. I assume the
average store in my sample had 10,000 products when it introduced a barcode scanner.
With these assumptions, the estimates above can now be translated into the impact of
a single barcode. Adding one barcoded product to a store with 6,000 barcoded products, in
1977, would have increased a store’s productivity gain from installing a scanner by 0.0035%.
Given the estimate in Section 5.1 that a 4.5% productivity gain saves the average store
$36,500 in payroll annually, a single additional barcoded product increases the savings due
to a scanner by approximately $28 per year per store.
Since the gain from barcoded products accrued to the retailer, not the manufacturer,
this ballpark figure puts some bounds on the magnitude of network externalities that were
central in the implementation of scanning technology. This figure should be interpreted with
some care, however, since, at best, it represents an average, per product, per store. Both

23

the frequency of purchase and the number of scanning stores carrying each product directly
affect the value of an individual barcode.
The second side of this two-side network externality is that the more stores adopt scanners, the greater the demand for UPC-marked products. In principle, this demand shift
could increase the market share of manufacturers that adopted UPCs early at the expense
of later adopters. To the extent that early adopters were likely to larger firms such as the
ones represented on the Ad Hoc Committee — Interstate Brands Corp. (today, Hostess
Brands), H. J. Heinz Company, General Foods Corp. (now Kraft Foods), Bristol-Myers (today, Bristol-Myers Squibb), and General Mills, Inc. — early adoption may have contributed
to increased concentration in the food-manufacturing sector. Anecdotally, figures from the
Census of Manufacturers show that the share of the top four firms in the canned-and-cured
seafood manufacturing industry (SIC 2035), for example, increased from 50% in 1972 to 55%
in 1977 to 62% by 1982; and in the bread, cake, and related products industry (SIC 2051)
it increased from 29% to 33% to 34%. A complete treatment of this topic requires detailed
information on manufacturers’ UPC registrations, and is outside the scope of this paper.

6

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The cost of scanners varied over time and by manufacturer. Brown (1997, pp. 80-81) gives
a cost of “between $50,000 and $250,000 for a supermarket with $60,000 a week in sales” in
1973. In 1978, a Time magazine article estimated “the purchase price [of] a sophisticated
eight-lane check-out system” at “more than $110,000” (Time Magazine, 1978). Consistent
with this estimate, Shaw (1977, pp. 58-60) quotes prices from IBM for a 10-lane scanning
system at $133,100 in 1976, not including maintenance fees which averaged $7,000/year.
Shaw (1977) also provides other vendors’ prices, which were roughly similar. Finally, Bloom
(1972, p. 224), citing an early McKinsey & Co. estimate, predicts that the equipment would
cost “in excess of $150,000” for a store with $4 million in annual revenue, and approximately

24

$100,000 for a store with half that revenue. These numbers provide a benchmark against
which to check the credibility of the empirical estimates of scanners’ productivity benefits.12
Extrapolating to the larger stores that actually installed the early scanners, the cost is likely
to have exceeded $200,000 in 1977 dollars, or about $300,000 in constant 1982 dollars, even
accounting for a 10% decrease in the real price over this time period.
Like other major innovations with network externalities and social returns to scale,
the scanner platform required players in the market to overcome two important barriers:
coordination and short-term costs. (For background, see Bresnahan and Greenstein, 1999.)
If the primary barrier were one of coordination costs, we might expect profits to rise quickly
once the platform is adopted. Instead, the above calculation suggests that costs were high
relative to benefits in the short run, suggesting that profitability constrained the rate of
diffusion, with a more limited role for coordination costs, at least once the key design choices
were made.
The opportunity cost of setting up a scanner included more than the cost of hardware and
software. If the installation required the attention of managers be diverted from other tasks,
as implied by many of the early accounts of scanner adoption, the short-term productivity
gains could have been significantly lower than the above estimates. To quantify this effect I
separately estimate the short-term (current-year) and medium-term productivity impact of
having a scanner installed:

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + βt Scannerit + βs 1 (∆Scannerit > 0) + εit ,
12

(5)

Very different numbers are provided by Zimmerman (1999, p. 39), who quotes a former NCR employee
saying scanners listed for “$4,200 in 1974 and decreased to about $3,800 by 1980.” These numbers are
roughly consistent with an early, but undated, document published by scanner system manufacturer National
Semiconductor claiming the cost differential between a mechanical register and an optical scanner in the
$7,000-$11,000 range (National Semiconductor Corporation Systems Division, undated). I was unable to
determine the source of this discrepancy.

25

where 1(·) is the indicator function. The coefficient βs represents the non-pecuniary “setup
cost”: the one-time contemporaneous effect of a scanner installation on productivity.
Estimates are shown in the second column of Table 5. The productivity gain a store
experiences in the year of scanner adoption is significantly smaller, both statistically and
economically, than its gain in subsequent years. A scanner installed in January would have
increased the variable Scannerit by

11.5
12

and increased the variable 1 (∆Scannerit > 0) by

one, leading to a net productivity gain of 2.2%. Each year thereafter, the store’s productivity
relative to the rest of the industry is 4.6% higher than its baseline.
There are several possible reasons for non-pecuniary setup costs that may be reflected in
productivity figures. Early accounts of scanner installations, for example by the former IBM
employee Bill Selmeier, are full of details of meetings with store managers. These meetings
could have taken the managers’ attention off other issues, such as pricing and scheduling,
reducing observed productivity. Other types of investments, such as reorganization, may have
also interfered with early returns (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003). In addition, scanners’ early
productivity gains may have been tempered by additional training and a learning-by-doing
phase. Because relatively few stores installed scanners during a Census year, I was unable to
separately estimate possible “learning-by-doing” effects and the one-time productivity loss
due to installation.
The productivity gains due to scanners probably increased over time for at least three
reasons. First, as discussed earlier, later vintages of scanners, released starting in 1979,
were able to read smaller barcodes and had fewer reading errors. Second, the number
of firms registered with the Uniform Code Council increased monthly, and the number of
manufacturers with UPC registrations more than doubled between 1977 and 1982 (Dunlop
and Rivkin, 1997, Figure 1, p. 4). Finally, manufacturers improved their training of store
managers and cashiers over time. Bill Selmeier recalls the feeling in 1974: “As much as
everyone expected the systems to be productive, somehow they weren’t” (Selmeier, 2008, p.
159). IBM was able to provide better training to stores implementing its technology after a

26

sending team to investigate the source of the problems.
Since my estimates provide the marginal effect of the average scanner installed over the
period 1974–1982, and installations are heavily weighted towards the later part of this period,
these estimates most likely do not apply to the earliest scanners. To test for a differential
effect of later scanners, I estimate

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + βScannerit + β82 Scanneri,82 + εit ,

(6)

Estimates are shown in the third column of Table 5. The estimate of β, which captures the
productivity effect of a scanner installed by December 1977, is negative, but because it is
imprecisely measured, the 1977 effect of a scanner is hard to determine from this regression.
The differential effect of a scanner installed between 1977 and 1982, β82 , is also imprecisely
estimated, but the point estimate is large (5.65%) and different from zero at the 5% level.
As already noted, for a store with $816,000 in annual payroll, an average productivity
gain of 4.5% is the equivalent of $36,500 per year in saved payroll. (Figures are all in
1982 dollars.) The shelf-life of a scanner is somewhat hard to gauge from the available data
because upgrades are not always properly classified, but at least 10% of the scanners installed
by the end of 1983 were upgraded by the end of 1984, with the first upgrades listed as early
as 1978. Given the high cost of scanners and their relatively short life, it seems doubtful
that the early scanners were cost effective despite their large productivity impact (and in
contrast to McKinsey & Co.’s forecasts).
This is not to say that scanners’ long-run benefits did not outweigh their costs. Circumstantial evidence links scanners to the explosion in the number of products carried by
supermarkets (Ellickson, 2007, reports that the number of distinct products per supermarket more than doubled between 1980 and 2004). Unfortunately, the data I use in this paper
cannot be used to test this hypothesis, since Census product codes are extremely broad and
only packaged goods were reliably barcoded in the early years of the technology. If scanners

27

did lead to increased store size, they may also have contributed to chains’ increased market
power in the supermarket industry. Basker, Klimek, and Van (forthcoming) provide evidence that over this period, chains with the biggest increase in the number of products they
carried also opened more stores, suggesting a complementarity between product breadth and
chain size. Larger chains have been able to exploit other sources of competitive advantage,
including economies of scale.
The biggest barrier preventing immediate realization of scanners’ benefits was the relatively small number of manufacturers printing UPC symbols on their products. This number
increased from about 2,000 at the time of the first scanner’s installation in 1974 to over 8,700
by the 1982 Census and nearly 13,000 by the end of 1984 (Dunlop and Rivkin, 1997). Although no data exists on the number of products bearing UPC symbols, this number probably
increased at a slower rate, since early adopters probably had more distinct products than late
adopters. A second, closely related, barrier was the inability of scanners to “read” barcodes
that were small, wet, wrinkled, or damaged; as noted earlier, these technical barriers were
overcome in stages, in 1979 and 1980. Later still was the problem of coding random-weight
products, such as fresh produce, solved.
A second barrier was popular opposition among consumer and union groups to the
removal of item-level prices, the individual stickers retailers placed on each package with the
item’s current price. Although retailers expected to realize significant saving by replacing
so-called “item pricing” with a single label on the shelf (“shelf pricing”), this potential for
saving was constrained in some states by law and in many others by popular sentiment.13
In addition to the potential for significant reductions in labor costs, Nakamura (1999) and
others also note that the eventual elimination of item prices increased the ease of price
changes, allowing retailers to experiment and learn about price elasticities.14 Consumer
13

Levy, Bergen, Dutta, and Venable (1997) and Bergen, Levy, Ray, Rubin, and Zeliger (2008) make a
compelling case that item pricing was costly to stores and, indirectly, to consumers.
14
More generally, the cost of price changes could affect retailers’ choice of pricing strategy, e.g., “every-day

28

arguments against removing the prices centered on the difficulty of checking one’s receipt
for errors, the difficulty of comparison-shopping, and the belief that supermarkets without
item prices would raise prices more often.15 Unions and labor groups were also very much
opposed to item-pricing removal, fearing loss of jobs. Dunlop and Rivkin (1997) report
that by March of 1976, three months before scanners were installed, “an understanding was
reached between the labor and management of the [Joint Labor Management] Committee
[of the Retail Food Industry]: Labor would not block the introduction of scanning systems
and would not pursue item pricing legislation, and management would agree to leave prices
on most retail products” (p. 26). This barrier eroded over time, but only very slowly. By
1989, only half of all stores had removed item prices (Walsh, 1993, p. 102).
A final and important barrier to full utilization of the new technology was removed with
the development and adoption of complementary technologies. The use of scanner-collected
information on sales for inventory-management purposes, which provided a major benefit
to both retailers and manufacturers, was neither immediate nor obvious to early adopters.
According to Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil (1999), for example, inventory control was not among the initial benefits anticipated by scanner adopters. Scanner-enabled
inventory keeping, in turn, allowed the development of electronic data interchange (EDI),
including automated purchasing and payments, which helped retailers realize large cost savings (Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil, 1999). Only once retailers fully integrated
these technologies into their operations could they realize the full productivity benefits of
scanners.
low pricing” (ELDP) vs. “promotional” (“Hi-Lo”) pricing. See Ellickson and Misra (2008) for a discussion
of pricing strategies.
15
This concern may not have been unrealistic considering the high inflation rate during scanning’s first
years.

29

7

Concluding Remarks

Much of the conversation about the so-called “ICT revolution” has focused on the 1990s and
2000s, often with only murky measures of “technology.” This paper goes back in time to
trace the effect of an early innovation — the introduction of barcode scanners by grocery
stores in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Using a specific well-defined measure of technological
innovation, and detailed store-level data on productivity, I find evidence of a direct causal
relationship between technology adoption and productivity. To my knowledge, this is the
first systematic evidence on the impact of any specific innovation on worker productivity in
the retail industry.
I find that the early scanners increased store-level productivity by 4.5% on average,
though the very earliest scanners probably had a much smaller impact, and setup costs
substantially reduced first-year returns. The returns were higher at larger chains, which
had been represented in the standard-setting initiative from the beginning and had been the
strongest advocates of scanning. Each additional barcoded product contributed, on average,
$28 to the cost saving. Despite these impressive productivity gains, scanners were probably
not a cost-effective investment in the early years.
The new platform required distributed investment, unequal economic burden, and uncertain profitability. It is a remarkable feat that chain retailers, stand-alone stores, wholesalers,
food manufacturers, and scanner manufacturers were able to accomplish this transformation
absent any government intervention and without massive transfers or cross-subsidies across
players. Nevertheless, my calculations suggest that limited short-run profitability, more than
the heterogeneity of costs and benefits and associated coordination costs, played a key role
in limiting the adoption of this technology. Part of the explanation for the relative ease of
coordination may be the relative ethnic and cultural homogeneity of the original Ad Hoc
Committee. Another was, perhaps, a sense of urgency. If the industry failed to adopt a
uniform code, individual supermarket chains were said to be likely to adopt different codes,
the cost of which was likely to have been far higher. These higher costs would have been
30

incurred not only by supermarkets, in terms of higher production costs of scanners and duplication of research and development, but also by manufacturers, which would have had to
contend with placing many competing symbols on their packages.
Were scanners an example of capital deepening, or did they represent a profound shift in
the way capital and labor are used — in other words, a change in total-factor productivity?
Census data on the retail sector are too coarse to answer this question directly, but the
path of progress after scanners’ initial deployment suggests they represented more than
capital deepening. Most store-level technological innovations since the 1970s have built
upon the early scanners. Software and hardware upgrades now enable retailers to keep track
of inventories and engage in electronic procurement and payments, reducing back-office labor
costs. Inventory management may be further enhanced by the widespread implementation
of radio-frequency identification (RFID), which will enable employees to “scan” items not
in their direct line of vision. At the front end, the recent introduction of self-checkout
— impossible before scanning — also appears to be reducing labor costs with hardly any
additional capital investment.

31

A

Measurement Error and Selection Bias

I restrict the sample used in this paper to stores that installed scanners by the end of
1984, and which I was able to match with observations in the LBD, in order to address
both omitted-variable and measurement-error biases. In this Appendix, I re-estimate Equations (1)-(3) using the full set of stores classified in SIC 541 to investigate the extent of
selection bias and measurement error in the full sample of stores. The results are shown in
Table A-1.
The omitted-variable concern is that stores adopted barcodes because of some unobserved factor, which either has itself a direct effect on store productivity, or is correlated
with other unobserved factors affecting store productivity. Including store fixed effects in
the regression controls for any time-invariant store-level differences in both observed and
unobserved factors, but cannot account for time-varying effects. For example, stores that
implement scanning may have grown, on average, relative to other grocery stores in this
time period, or may have been located in neighborhoods that become relatively more prosperous. If these unobserved characteristics create differential productivity trends in stores
that ultimately adopt scanners and stores that do not, a naı̈ve regression would attribute
the differential trend to the impact of scanners. In the main text, I argue that this problem
is eliminated when I restrict the sample to stores that adopted scanners by December 1984.
The specification tests support this argument. While omitted-variable bias could be either
positive or negative, in this case it is almost certain to overstate the effect of a scanner.
The measurement-error concern is not present in the restricted sample by construction,
since every store included in the sample is known to have installed a scanner. But because
I am unable to match more than 6,000 stores listed in the FMI publication to stores in the
Census, it is very likely that the full sample of stores includes some for which my scanner
variable is set to zero actually had scanners for part of the sample period. This measurement
error creates attenuation bias in the estimated coefficients.
In the full sample, the estimate of β from Equation (1), shown in the first column,
32

is nearly 0.15, or three times the magnitude of the estimate in the restricted sample, indicating large omitted-variable bias. Consistent with this conclusion, the estimate of βt+1
from Equation (2) is also positive, large, and significant. The statistical significance is not
merely an artifact of the large sample. Scanner installation in year t + 1 is associated with
a 10% increase in store productivity in year t, an increase that amounts to two thirds of the
estimated post-installation productivity increase. The positive and statistically significant
estimate of γ from Equation (3) in the full sample, shown in column (3), most likely reflects
measurement error.

B

Spline Estimation

As a complement to the difference-in-difference estimates presented in the main part this
paper, I also present a piecewise linear regression that exploits the timing of installations.
Since most scanners were installed in the second part of my sample, I focus for this section
on the years 1981–1983.
This analysis exploits the nonlinearity in the relationship between the timing of installation and the estimated impact on the store’s measured productivity in 1982. Specifically,
while the impact of scanners installed in 1981 should be fully captured in 1982 productivity,
the impact of scanners installed in 1982 should be partially captured in 1982 productivity
— more so, the earlier in the year the installation occurred — and the impact of scanners
installed in 1983 should have had no effect on 1982 productivity. To test this hypothesis I
estimate a spline regression. The left-hand side variable is a store’s productivity growth from
1977 to 1982. I limit the sample to the 1,580 stores that installed scanners from January 1981
to December 1983 and for which I have both 1977 and 1982 productivity measures. This
limited sample imposes even weaker identifying assumptions than the “installer” scanner
used in the main part of the paper, namely that, conditional on a store installing a scanner
over this 3-year period, the timing of installation is uncorrelated with other factors related

33

to the store’s productivity growth from 1977 to 1982.
For each store, I define ScanTime to be the time elapsed, in months, between January
1, 1982 and the store’s installation date. For example, if a store installed a scanner in March
1982, this variable equals 2.5; if the store installed a scanner in November 1981, this variable
equals −1.5. Since my sample is limited to stores that installed scanners from January
1981 to December 1983, ScanTime takes on values from −11.5 to 23.5. To accommodate
the nonlinearity discussed above, I create two knots in ScanTime, allowing changes in the
constant term starting at ScanTime = 0, separating stores that installed in 1981 from stores
that installed in 1982, and at ScanTime = 12, separating stores that installed in 1982 from
stores that installed in 1983. I then estimate the piecewise linear relationship between the
timing of scanner installation and productivity growth using a spline regression:

∆ ln(productivity)i,1982 = α0 + β0 ScanTimei · 1(ScanTimei < 0)
+ α1 1(ScanTimei ∈ [0, 12)) + β1 ScanTimei · 1(ScanTimei ∈ [0, 12))
+ α2 1(ScanTimei ≥ 12) + β2 ScanTimei · 1(ScanTimei ≥ 12) + εi , (B-1)

where, as before,1(·) is the indicator function, and ∆ ln(productivity)i,1982 is the difference
between establishment i’s 1982 productivity and its 1977 productivity.
The results are shown graphically as the dashed (green) line in Figure B-1. I have
normalized the coefficients so that the point estimate for the effect of a scanner installed
at ScanTime = 12 (January 1, 1983) is zero. Dashed vertical lines indicate the knots.
The results show a downward-sloping relationship between 1982 productivity gains and the
time of installation for the full period from January 1981 to December 1982, followed by
a slight upward-sloping relationship. Only the coefficient on the middle segment of the
spline, however, statistically significant at the 10% level. That coefficient indicates that each
additional month without a scanner reduces a store’s productivity in 1982, relative to its

34

1977 level, by 0.29%, or 3.5% annualized.16
To increase the power and precision of these estimates, I also estimate an alternative
specification in which I force the slopes of the first and last segments to be zero, and omit
the level shifters between segments. The estimated coefficients from this regression are
shown as the solid (orange) line in Figure B-1. Each month without a scanner reduces the
store’s 1982 productivity by 0.38%. Put differently, scanning for the full year increases the
store’s productivity growth by 4.6%, a figure remarkably close to the difference-in-difference
estimate presented in Table 3.

C

Heterogeneous Effects of Scanners

I extend the basic analysis of Section 4.1 by allowing the effect of a barcode scanner on a
store’s productivity to vary with the characteristics of the firm to which the store belongs
or the city in which it is located. There are many dimensions on which scanner adoption
could have differential effects, and a complete catalog of these is beyond the scope of this
paper. I focus on one firm-level covariate, the size of the chain, and three city-level covariates:
population in 1970, number of food-selling establishments in 1972, and the population growth
rate between 1970 and 1980. Summary statistics for these variables are provided in Tables 1
and 2 in the paper.
I estimate

ln(productivity)it = αi + δt + γt × ln(Xi )
+ βScannerit + βx Scannerit × ln(Xi ) + εit (C-1)

16

In unreported regressions, I also estimate variants of this regression in which I replace the left-hand side
variable with the store’s 1982 productivity (instead of productivity growth), both with or without controlling
for 1977 productivity. Those results show larger effects, annualized to productivity gains of 7.6% and 5.2%,
respectively. In model variants that allow discontinuities at the knots, the discontinuities are never jointly
significant.

35

where X is, respectively, the firm’s size (measured as the number of stores it operates), the
city’s population in 1970, the number of food-selling establishments (SIC 541) in 1972 in the
city, or the city’s population growth. Not all cities in the LBD/FMI dataset have city-level
variables, so these regressions are estimated with the subset of observations for which I have
city-level data.
The results are shown in Table C-1. None of the interaction effects are statistically significant at the 5 percent level; the population interaction is significant at the 10 percent level.
The interaction terms are also not statistically significant when I estimate heterogeneous
effects on stores’ payroll or revenue.

36

References
Abernathy, F. H., J. T. Dunlop, J. H. Hammond, and D. Weil (1999) A Stitch in Time:
Lean Retailing and the Transformation of Manufacturing — Lessons from the Apparel
and Textile Industries. Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford.
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, D. N. Margolis, and K. R. Troske (2001) “The Relative Importance of Employer and Employee Effects on Compensation: A Comparison of France and
the United States,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 15(4), Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies.
Acemoglu, D. (2002) “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(4), 781–
809.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279–1333.
Basker, E., S. Klimek, and P. H. Van (forthcoming) “Supersize It: The Growth of Retail
Chains and the Rise of the “Big Box” Retail Format,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.
Beck, J., M. Grajek, and C. Wey (2011) “Estimating Level Effects in Diffusion of a New
Technology: Barcode Scanning at the Checkout Counter,” Applied Economics, 43(14),
1737–1748.
Bergen, M., D. Levy, S. Ray, P. H. Rubin, and B. Zeliger (2008) “When Little Things Mean
a Lot: On the Inefficiency of Item-Pricing Laws,” Journal of Law and Economics, 51(2),
209–250.
Betancourt, R. R. (2005) The Economics of Retailing and Distribution. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK, and Northampton, MA.
Bloom, G. F. (1972) Productivity in the Food Industry. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bresnahan, T. F., and S. Greenstein (1999) “Technological Competition and the Structure
of the Computer Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 47(1), 1–40.
Brown, S. A. (1997) Revolution at the Checkout Counter: The Explosion of the Bar Code.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Brynjolfsson, E., and L. M. Hitt (2003) “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 793–808.
Bucklin, R. E., and S. Gupta (1999) “Commercial Use of UPC Scanner Data: Industry and
Academic Perspectives,” Marketing Science, 18(3), 247–273.
Budd, J. W., and B. P. McCall (2001) “The Grocery Store Wage Distribution: A Semiparameteric Analysis of the Role of Retailing and Labor Market Institutions,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 54(2A), 484–501.
37

Das, N., E. M. Falaris, and J. G. Mulligan (2009) “Vintage Effects and the Diffusion of
Time-Saving Technological Innovations: The Adoption of Optical Scanners by U.S. Supermarkets,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Advances), 9(1), article 23.
Doms, M. E., R. S. Jarmin, and S. D. Klimek (2004) “Information Technology Investment and
Firm Performance in U.S. Retail Trade,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
13(7), 595–613.
Dunlop, J. T., and J. W. Rivkin (1997) “Introduction,” in Stephen A. Brown, Revolution at
the Checkout Counter: The Explosion of the Bar Code. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ellickson, P. B. (2007) “Does Sutton Apply to Supermarkets?,” RAND Journal of Economics, 38(1), 43–59.
Ellickson, P. B., and S. Misra (2008) “Supermarket Pricing Strategies,” Marketing Science,
27(5), 811–828.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2002) “The Link between Aggregate and Micro Productivity Growth: Evidence from Retail Trade,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 9120.
(2006) “Market Selection, Reallocation and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade
Sector in the 1990s,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4), 748–758.
Greenwood, J., and M. Yorukoglu (1997) “1974,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 46, 49–95.
Haberman, A. L. (2001) Twenty-Five Years behind Bars: The Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Anniversary of the U.P.C. at the Smithsonian Institution, September 30, 1999. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Harmon, C. K., and R. Adams (1984) Reading between the Lines: An Introduction to Bar
Code Technology. North American Technology, Inc., Peterborough, NH.
Haskel, J., and R. Sadun (2009) “Entry, Exit and Labour Productivity in UK Retailing:
Evidence from Micro Data,” in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, ed.
by J. B. Jensen, T. Dunne, and M. J. Roberts. University of Chicago Press.
Hephner, T. A. (1984) The Cashier. Gregg Division/McGraw-Hill Book Company, second
edn.
Holmes, T. (2001) “Bar Codes Lead to Frequent Deliveries and Superstores,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 32(4), 708–725.
Jarmin, R. S., and J. Miranda (2002) “The Longitudinal Business Database,” unpublished
paper, U.S. Census Bureau.
Jorgenson, D. W., M. S. Ho, and K. J. Stiroh (2008) “A Retrospective Look at the U.S.
Productivity Growth Resurgence,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1), 3–24.
38

Levin, S. G., S. L. Levin, and J. B. Meisel (1985) “Intermarket Differences in the Early
Diffusion of an Innovation,” Southern Economic Journal, 51(3), 672–80.
(1987) “A Dynamic Analysis of the Adoption of a New Technology: The Case of
Optical Scanners,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(1), 12–17.
(1992) “Market Structure, Uncertainty, and Intrafirm Diffusion: The case of Optical
Scanners in Grocery Stores,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(2), 345–350.
Levy, D., M. Bergen, S. Dutta, and R. Venable (1997) “The Magnitude of Menu Costs:
Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
12(3), 791–825.
Lin, J. (2011) “Technological Adaptation, Cities, and New Work,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 93(2), 554–574.
Marrano, M. G., J. Haskel, and G. Wallis (2009) “What Happened to the Knowledge Economy? ICT, Intangible Investment, and Britain’s Productivity Record Revisited,” Review
of Income and Wealth, 55(3), 686–716.
Mas, A., and E. Moretti (2009) “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review, 99(1), 112–
145.
Matsa, D. A. (2011) “Competition and Product Quality in the Supermarket Industry,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3), 1539–1591.
McGrayne, S. (1986) “Supermarkets Eye Price-Code Scanners,” Crains Detroit Business,
February 3, 1986, 3.
Messinger, P. R., and C. Narasimhan (1995) “Has Power Shifted in the Grocery Channel?,”
Marketing Science, 14(2), 189–223.
Nakamura, L. I. (1999) “The Measurement of Retail Output and the Retail Revolution,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, 32(2), 408–425.
National Semiconductor Corporation Systems Division (undated) How to Buy a Supermarket Checkout System: The National Semiconductor Datachecker. National Semiconductor
Corporation.
Progressive Grocer (December 1976) “Electronic Front Ends: Three Solutions to the Same
Problem,” Progressive Grocer, 55(12), 65–73.
(December 1978) “For a Five-Store Operator ‘Efficiencies Sprout Everywhere’ with
Scanners at Work,” Progressive Grocer, 57(12), 49–55.
(March 1976) “‘Electronic’ Produce Pays Off Big for Family Super,” Progressive
Grocer, 55(3), 40–43.
Selmeier, B. (2008) Spreading the Barcode: Personal Memories of Bill Selmeier. Lulu.

39

Shaw, R. N. (1977) “Universal Product Code Scanning Systems: The Retail Experience
1974–1976,” Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, Department of Agricultural Economics.
Time Magazine (1978) “The Computer Society: Checking Out Tomorrow,” Time Magazine,
February 20.
Walsh, J. P. (1993) Supermarkets Transformed: Understanding Organizational and Technological Innovations. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
Williams, W. (1984) “The New Supermarket Takes Shape,” New York Times, September 2,
1984.
Zimmerman, G. E. (1999) “The Effects of Network Externalities on the Adoption of the Universal Product Code: An Empirical Investigation of Grocery Retailers and Manufacturers,
1970–1980,” Harvard University undergraduate honors thesis.

40

Figure 1. U.S. Scanning Stores, 1974–1984
Shaded periods represent Census years
Source: Author’s calculations from Food Marketing Institute data

41

(a) 1977

(b) 1982

Figure 2. Scanner Locations, Year End 1977 and 1982
Alaska and Hawaii installations not shown
Source: Author’s calculations from Food Marketing Institute data

42

Figure 3. Number of Scanner Installations Matched to Business Register, by Year

Figure 4. Log Annual Revenue by Cohort, 1972 and 1977

43

Figure B-1. Spline Estimates of Scanners’ Effect on Labor Productivity

44

45

Stores
41
902

Revenue
Payroll
Productivitya
Chain Size
Packagedb
1972: Cohort 1a
9,217
873
10.5
148
0.631
Cohort 1b
8,207
721
12.1
245
0.589
c
t-test
0.206
0.043
0.005
0.127
0.049
Cohort 1
943
8,250
727
12.0
240
0.591
Cohort 2
755
7,696
690
12.0
545
0.605
t-testd
0.029
0.108
0.982
0.000
0.019
70
11,526
1,121
11.3
142
0.632
1977: Cohort 1a
Cohort 1b 1,469
9,423
874
11.4
282
0.585
t-testc
0.001
0.000
0.805
0.009
0.002
Cohort 1
1,539
9,519
886
11.4
275
0.587
Cohort 2
1,156
8,373
779
11.5
557
0.604
t-testd
0.000
0.000
0.610
0.000
0.000
1982: Cohort 1a
63
11,676
1,109
11.3
121
0.632
Cohort 1b 2,053
8,917
867
11.1
303
0.585
t-testc
0.000
0.001
0.640
0.002
0.003
Cohort 1
2,116
8,999
874
11.1
298
0.587
Cohort 2
1,356
8,205
810
10.7
581
0.606
d
t-test
0.000
0.000
0.007
0.000
0.000
Note: Cohort 1a stores installed scanners by December 1977; cohort 1b installed January 1978 to
December 1982; cohort 1 combines 1a and 1b; cohort 2 installed scanners in 1983 and 1984.
Revenue and payroll are in thousands of 1982 dollars; chain size number of stores
a
Ratio of revenue to payroll; see text for details
b
Fraction of 1977 store revenue attributed to packaged groceries
c
p-value from t-test for equality of means for cohorts 1a and 1b
d
p-value from t-test for equality of means for cohorts 1 and 2

Table 1. Establishment Summary Statistics

Table 2. City-Level Summary Statistics
1970
1972 Food
1970–1980
b
b
CityScanner
Population
Estabs
Pop Growth
1972: Cohort 1a
0.000
153,321
151
0.241
Cohort 1b
0.000
114,155
120
0.124
t-teste
0.497
0.608
0.027
Cohort 1
0.000
115,807
122
0.129
Cohort 2
0.000
207,279
217
0.118
f
t-test
0.000
0.000
0.471
1977: Cohort 1a
0.157
225,319
241
0.188
Cohort 1b
0.100
111,574
118
0.173
e
t-test
0.124
0.010
0.010
0.761
Cohort 1
0.103
116,617
123
0.174
Cohort 2
0.164
175,425
187
0.140
f
t-test
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1982: Cohort 1a
0.698
234,441
252
0.195
Cohort 1b
0.652
113,037
123
0.200
e
t-test
0.443
0.006
0.008
0.929
Cohort 1
0.653
116,581
126
0.200
Cohort 2
0.633
184,209
199
0.151
f
t-test
0.221
0.000
0.000
0.001
See notes to Table 1. Observation counts for CityScanner are as in Table 1.
Observation counts for other variables are lower due to incomplete city-level data.
a
Indicator for city having at least one (other) scanning store, calculated by author
b
Source: City and County Data Book (CCDB) from ICSPR study 7735
a

Table 3. Scanners’ Effect on Labor Productivity: Difference-in-Difference Estimates

Scanner

(1)
0.0451***
(0.0084)

(2)
0.0495***
(0.0105)
0.0076
(0.0099)

∆Scannert+1

(3)
0.0454***
(0.0084)

−0.0068
(0.0073)
Year FE
X
X
X
Store FE
X
X
X
Observations
7,865
7,865
7,865
LHS variable is log productivity. Unbalanced panels, 1972–1982.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by store)
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10%
CityScanner

46

Table 4. Scanners’ Effect on Alternative Outcomes: Difference-in-Difference Estimates
Revenue
Annual
Annual
March 12
per March
Revenue
Payroll
Employment
Employee
Scanner
−0.0097
−0.0535**
0.0299
0.0022
(0.0253)
(0.0259)
(0.0256)
(0.0173)
Year FE
X
X
X
X
Store FE
X
X
X
X
Observations
7,050
7,050
6,960
7,552
LHS variables in column headers (in logs). Unbalanced panels, 1972–1982.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by store)
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10%

Payroll
per March
Employee
−0.0546***
(0.0210)
X
X
6,556

Table 5. Scanners’ Effect on Labor Productivity: Interactions

Scanner
Scanner×
packageda
1 (∆Scannert > 0)

(1)
−0.0914**
(0.0436)
0.2115***
(0.0718)

(2)
0.0460***
(0.0085)

(3)
−0.0072
(0.0241)

−0.0234***
(0.0091)

Scanner1982

0.0546**
(0.0242)
X

Year FE
X
X
Year FE × packaged
X
Store FE
X
X
X
Years
1977–1982
1972–1982
1972–1982
Observations
4,913
7,863
7,863
LHS variable is log productivity. Unbalanced panels.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by store)
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10%
a
1977 revenue share from packaged goods

47

Table A-1. Scanners’ Effect on Labor Productivity: All Grocery Stores

Scanner

(1)
0.1484***
(0.0068)

(2)
0.1540***
(0.0069)
0.1000***
(0.0074)

∆Scannert+1

(3)
0.1428***
(0.0068)

CityScanner

0.0330***
(0.0038)
Year FE
X
X
X
Store FE
X
X
X
Observations
247,242
247,242
247,242
LHS variable is log productivity. Unbalanced panels, 1972–1982.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by store)
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10%
Table C-1. Heterogeneous Effects of Scanners on Labor Productivity

Scanner

(1)
0.0511***
(0.0184)
−0.0032
(0.0037)

(2)
0.1443**
(0.0563)

(3)
0.0773*
(0.0441)

(4)
0.0434***
(0.0099)

Scanner
× ln(ChainSize)a
Scanner
−0.0096*
b
× ln(Pop1970)
(0.0054)
Scanner
−0.0085
× ln(Estab1972)c
(0.0092)
Scanner
0.0125
d
× ln(Growth)
(0.0310)
Year FE
X
X
X
X
Year FE × ln(ChainSize)
X
Year FE × ln(Pop1970)
X
Year FE × ln(Estab1972)
X
Year FE × ln(Growth)
X
Store FE
X
X
X
X
Observations
7,865
7,057
3,546
7,057
LHS variable is log productivity. Unbalanced panels, 1972–1982.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by store)
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10%
a
Number of stores in the chain in 1977
b
1970 city population from City and County Data Book
c
1972 number of food-selling establishments from City and County Data Book
d
Log 1970 to 1980 population growth

48

