                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRACTICAL MONETARY POLICY:
                  EXAMPLES FROM SWEDEN AND THE UNITED STATES

                                         Lars E.O. Svensson

                                        Working Paper 17823
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17823


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




A previous version of this paper was prepared for the Fall 2011 issue of Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members
of the Riksbank’s Executive Board or the Riksbank’s staff. I am grateful for helpful comments from
and discussions with Hanna Armelius, Claes Berg, Alan Blinder, Bernard Dumas, Karolina Ekholm,
Jon Faust, Martin Flodén, Gabriela Guibourg, Jesper Hansson, Donald Kohn, Stefan Laséen, Andrew
Levin, Jesper Lindé, Edward Nelson, Bengt Pettersson, Raghuram Rajan, Ulf Söderström, Ingvar Strid,
Staffan Viotti, Karl Walentin, Jonathan Wright, Janet Yellen, my discussants Randall Kroszner and
David Wessel and other participants in the Brookings Papers conference, and the editors. I thank, without
implication, Riksbank staff members Magnus Åhl, Björn Andersson, and Mikael Apel for contributions
to the paper. From May 2007, I serve a 6-year term as deputy governor of the Riksbank and one of
the six members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Lars E.O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Practical Monetary Policy: Examples from Sweden and the United States
Lars E.O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 17823
February 2012
JEL No. E42,E43,E47,E52,E58

                                              ABSTRACT

In the summer of 2010, the Federal Reserve’s and the Swedish Riksbank’s inflation forecasts were
below the former’s mandate-consistent rate and the latter’s target, respectively, and their unemployment
forecasts were above sustainable rates. Given the mandates of the Federal Reserve and the Riksbank,
conditions in both countries clearly called for policy easing. The Federal Reserve maintained a minimum
policy rate, soon started to communicate possible future easing, and in the fall launched QE2. In contrast,
the Riksbank started a period of rapid tightening. I examine the arguments that were raised in opposition
to the Federal Reserve's easing, and those for the Riksbank's tightening. Although the Swedish economy
subsequently performed better than expected, probably an important reason was that the market implemented
much easier financial conditions than were consistent with the Riksbank’s policy rate path. Without
the policy tightening, performance would have been even better. The U.S. economy meanwhile performed
worse than expected because of factors other than monetary policy. Without the policy easing, performance
would have been even worse. Thus, the Federal Reserve appears to have followed its mandate in the
summer of 2010, and subsequent adverse economic shocks contributed to weak performance of the
U.S. economy. In contrast, the Riksbank appears to have deviated from its mandate, but favorable
circumstances contributed to an economic outcome with better performance than might have been
expected based on policy choices.


Lars E.O. Svensson
Sveriges Riksbank
SE-103 37 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and Stockholm University
and also NBER
lars.svensson@iies.su.se




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17823
In the spring of 2011, the Swedish economy was being called a “Pippi Longstocking economy” and a
“tiger economy,” reflecting high growth after a deep recession.1 Conditions in the U.S. economy seemed
more problematic. One might think that the disparate performances of the Swedish and U.S. economies
could be attributed to their respective monetary policies. I will argue that on the contrary, and perhaps
surprisingly, in the summer of 2010, when forecasts for inflation (too low) and unemployment (too high)
were similar in the two countries, the Riksbank’s monetary policy, by starting a period of rapid policy rate
increases, was not in line with its mandate. In contrast, the Federal Reserve kept the policy rate at its lower
bound, soon started to communicate possible policy easing, and later launched QE2, the second round of
quantitative easing. That the Swedish economy nevertheless grew faster than expected may largely be
explained by the market implementing an actual yield curve that was lower than implied by the policy rate
path, so that actual financial conditions were much more expansionary than the Riksbank intended. That
the U.S. economy performed worse than expected is due to factors other than monetary policy.

         This paper examines the actions of the Federal Reserve and the Riksbank in the summer of 2010
as examples of practical monetary policy. My starting point is that there is a substantial degree of
consensus among central bankers and academics that the objective of an appropriate monetary policy
framework is twofold: to stabilize inflation around a low level and to stabilize resource utilization around
the highest sustainable level (Bernanke 2011d). The dual mandate of maximum employment and stable
prices of the Federal Reserve, with its mandate-consistent inflation rate, and the flexible inflation targeting
of the Riksbank, are both fully consistent with such a framework. There is no fundamental difference
between the monetary policy frameworks of the two central banks, although their communications
strategies are somewhat different.2

         The Federal Reserve’s dual mandate and the Riksbank’s flexible inflation targeting both boil
down to “forecast targeting” (Woodford 2007, Svensson 2011c), that is, choosing a policy rate path such
that the corresponding forecasts for inflation and resource utilization “look good,” in the sense that they
best stabilize inflation around the inflation objective (the mandate-consistent rate or the target inflation
rate) and resource utilization around its highest sustainable level. Thus, “looking good” means achieving
an efficient trade-off between inflation stability and stable resource utilization.3

        The forecasts for inflation and unemployment published by the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) and the Riksbank make it possible to assess whether they “look good”—more precisely, whether
they look as good as possible, taking into account what policy actions are possible. What is possible in
turn depends on restrictions such as the zero lower bound (ZLB), the ability to manage expectations of
future policy rates and inflation, and the availability of unconventional policy tools such as the size and
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet.

         In the summer of 2010, forecast inflation in both countries was too low relative to the central
bank’s objective, and forecast unemployment was too high relative to a sustainable unemployment rate.
All else equal, such a configuration of forecasts calls for more expansionary policy, if that is possible. In
the event, however, as mentioned the FOMC and the Riksbank chose very different policies. The FOMC
maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to 25 basis points (bp) and effectively eased policy
further by communicating possible future policy easing and, in the fall, launching QE2. The Riksbank
instead embarked on a policy of rapid policy rate increases.



                                                      2
         Several arguments against the Federal Reserve’s policy easing have been presented. These relate
to concerns about higher inflation and the anchoring of inflation expectations, to uncertainty about the
effect of the unconventional policy measures, to possible negative consequences of low policy rates for
financial stability and investment allocation, to possible overestimation of the amount of slack in the
economy, and to concerns about increased exposure of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to possible
capital losses. Some emerging-market policymakers have also expressed concern that the policy would
result in increased capital inflows into their countries, generating bubbles and other negative impacts. I
will argue that none of these arguments are convincing, and thus that the Federal Reserve’s policy easing
was in line with its mandate.

        Several arguments for the Riksbank’s policy tightening have likewise been presented. One
argument focuses on the stabilization of economic growth rather than of resource utilization, another
seems to call for mechanical revision of the policy rate path as outcomes diverge from forecasts, a third
advocates using the policy rate to limit increases in household debt and housing prices, and a fourth calls
for normalizing the policy rate to prevent unspecified future financial imbalances. I will argue that these
arguments, too, are not convincing, and thus that the Riksbank’s policy tightening was not consistent with
its mandate.

         I will argue further that the Riksbank’s action deviated from its mandate not only ex ante, taking
into account only the information available at the time, but also ex post, taking into account information
that became available later. As I have argued elsewhere (Svensson 2011b), evaluation ex ante is more
relevant when assessing the quality of policy decisions, whereas evaluation ex post, although still
interesting, to a considerable extent means assessing whether the policymaker was lucky or unlucky. By
July 2011, a year after the tightening began, the Swedish economy had performed better than had been
anticipated. Growth had been higher and unemployment had fallen more than forecast in the summer of
2010. Does this better-than-expected performance mean that the policy tightening begun in the summer of
2010 was in line with the Riksbank’s mandate? Put differently, had the better future performance of the
Swedish economy been known at the time, would it have been in line with the mandate to initiate policy
tightening? My answer is no. The reason is that in July 2011, inflation and the inflation forecast, although
higher, were still too low, and unemployment and the unemployment forecast, although lower, were still
too high. A more expansionary policy in the summer of 2010 would have resulted in an even better
outcome, with inflation higher and unemployment lower.

        Why did the Swedish economy perform better than had been anticipated in the summer of 2010?
The Riksbank itself (Sveriges Riksbank 2011c) mentions higher-than-expected exports, domestic demand,
and productivity. But another possible explanation, not mentioned in that document, is that actual
financial conditions were substantially more expansionary than the intended financial conditions. That is,
the actual market term structure of interest rates was more expansionary than that which would have been
consistent with a credible policy rate path and normal term premiums. For instance, from the beginning of
2010 until July 2011, Swedish 5-year interest rates were on average about 85 bp lower than the average
consistent with a credible policy rate path and normal term premiums. Thus, the Swedish economy may
have benefited from the market effectively implementing a more expansionary policy than what the
Riksbank intended.

          Three circumstances may have contributed to the Riksbank’s choice of a high policy rate path.
First, its forecast for foreign policy rates has consistently been too high, much above levels consistent with

                                                      3
foreign yield curves and implied forward rates. All else equal, this implies an upward bias in the domestic
policy rate path. Second, the outlook for potential output and estimates of past potential output were seen
as having shifted downward considerably since the global financial crisis, even though the shock to the
economy was an aggregate demand shock, in the form of a collapse of world demand for Swedish exports,
and thus should have had little or no effect on future, let alone past, potential output. All else equal, this
downward shift of the potential output forecast implies an upward bias in the estimate of resource
utilization and thus in the policy rate path. Third, Sweden has undertaken substantial structural reforms
over the last few years, which, studies indicate, have significantly lowered the sustainable unemployment
rate. Yet the Riksbank in response has made only a small adjustment to its estimate of the sustainable rate,
thus imparting another upward bias to the policy rate path. A lower forecast for foreign policy rates in line
with market expectations, together with a higher estimated potential output and a lower estimated
sustainable unemployment rate, would strengthen the case for more expansionary policy in Sweden.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the monetary policy framework in the
United States and Sweden, section II shows how published FOMC and Riksbank forecasts can be used to
analyze policy, and section III discusses the situation and policy decisions at the FOMC’s and the
Riksbank’s meetings in the summer of 2010. Section IV scrutinizes arguments for the Riksbank’s policy
tightening, and section V scrutinizes arguments against the FOMC’s policy easing. Section VI discusses
the situation facing the Riksbank in July 2011, why the Riksbank’s policy rate path was so high, and why
the Swedish economy performed better than expected. 4 Section VII presents some broader conclusions.
Online appendixes contain further details.5

I. The Monetary Policy Framework
There is substantial consensus among central bankers and academics that an appropriate monetary policy
framework has as its objective both price stability and real stability (Bernanke 2011d); more precisely, the
objective is to stabilize both inflation around a low rate and resource utilization around the highest
sustainable level. The mandates of the Federal Reserve and the Riksbank are both consistent with this. The
Federal Reserve’s dual objective of maximum employment and stable prices can be seen as stabilizing
inflation around a mandate-consistent inflation rate and stabilizing employment around the highest
sustainable employment rate. 6 “Maximum employment” is in practice the same as the highest sustainable
employment rate. The Riksbank’s objective is likewise twofold: to stabilize inflation around the inflation
target and resource utilization around the highest sustainable level.7

         In practice, the dual mandate and flexible inflation targeting both amount to “forecast targeting”
(Woodford 2007, Svensson 2011c): choosing a policy rate and a policy rate path (or, under special
circumstances, using unconventional policy instruments) that best stabilize both the resulting inflation
forecast around the objective and the resulting resource utilization forecast around a sustainable level. This
can be made more precise and operational by specifying a measure of inflation (PCE or core PCE inflation
in the U.S. case, CPIF inflation in Sweden; both are defined below) and a measure of resource utilization
(such as the gap between the unemployment rate and an estimate of the sustainable rate, the steady-state
equilibrium unemployment rate), and by specifying a quantitative measure of stability, that is, a measure
of to what extent a particular forecast of inflation or resource utilization stabilizes inflation or resource
utilization.




                                                      4
         A suitable measure of stability is the mean squared gap: the mean over the forecast period of the
squared deviation of the mean forecast from the target or sustainable level (the sum of squared deviations
can be used instead).8 Specifying weights on the stability of resource utilization and on the stability of
inflation then results in a standard quadratic loss function (with no discounting). One can go further and
discuss to what extent mean forecast targeting (relying on certainty equivalence and hence only on mean
forecasts) is still a good approximation when there is model uncertainty, multiplicative uncertainty, and so
on. In practice there is usually insufficient information to know whether a policy should be more or less
aggressive than the certainty-equivalent one, so the certainty-equivalent policy is still warranted (the main
exception is the nonlinearity caused by the lower bound on nominal interest rates).

         I have come to the conclusion that the gap between the unemployment rate and an estimate of the
sustainable rate is the best measure of resource utilization. The main reason is that the alternative of using
the output gap requires estimating potential output, and during my period at the Riksbank I have become
more skeptical about measures of potential output. Estimating the sustainable unemployment rate is less
difficult and carries less risk of big mistakes. One can thus have a more open and transparent discussion
about the sustainable unemployment rate than about potential output. I discuss some problems relating to
the Riksbank’s measures of potential output in section VI.9

         Also important is to distinguish between using measures of resource utilization as indicators of
inflationary pressures and using them as target variables. For the former, it is the gap between the
unemployment rate and any short-run NAIRU or equilibrium unemployment rate that is relevant. For use
as a target variable, however, I am convinced that the relevant measure is the gap between the actual
unemployment rate and the sustainable rate (Blanchard and Galí 2010).10 Using instead a short-run
NAIRU as a target and stabilizing unemployment around it effectively implies introducing inflation
smoothing as an objective, which makes little sense. (This is discussed further in online appendix A1.)
This is not to say that short-run slack in the economy should be disregarded. Short-run slack does have an
impact on inflation and the inflation forecast, but it is only for that analysis that it matters.

II. Using FOMC and Riksbank Forecasts to Analyze Policy
Published Riksbank forecasts for inflation, various resource utilization measures, and the policy rate make
it easy to describe the economic outlook in Sweden and to assess whether easier or tighter policy would
better stabilize inflation and resource utilization or make them worse. The published FOMC participants’
projections for inflation, GDP growth, and unemployment create considerable scope to do the same for the
United States. Indeed, at Chairman Ben Bernanke’s press conferences after the policy meetings, these
projections take center stage. As he noted in his opening remarks at the press conference on April 27,
2011:

        The Committee’s economic projections provide important context for understanding today’s
        policy action as well as the Committee’s general policy strategy. Monetary policy affects output
        and inflation with a lag, so current policy actions must be taken with an eye to the likely future
        course of the economy. Thus the Committee’s projections of the economy, not just current
        conditions alone, must guide its policy decisions. The lags with which monetary policy affects the
        economy also imply that the Committee must focus on meeting its mandated objectives over the
        medium term, which can be as short as a year or two but may be longer, depending on how far the



                                                      5
        economy is initially from conditions of maximum employment and price stability. (Bernanke
        2011b, pp. 4-5)

         The FOMC’s projections are usually presented in terms of an interval, called the central tendency,
where the three highest and the three lowest projections for each year have been excluded. However, the
individual participants’ projections are presented in sufficient detail that a smaller interval for the median
of the projections can be identified. The midpoint of that interval can then be used as a reasonable point
forecast of the FOMC. Further, the median of the different participants’ longer-run projections for
inflation can, by the median-voter theorem, be interpreted as the result of a hypothetical majority vote
among them about the FOMC’s mandate-consistent inflation rate, and the median of the longer-run
projections for unemployment as the result of such a vote about the FOMC’s estimate of the sustainable
unemployment rate.11

         As noted above, there are good reasons why the forecasts used to guide monetary policy should be
mean forecasts, not mode or median forecasts. Mean forecasts have the attractive property that they are
“risk adjusted,” in the sense of being the probability-weighted sum of upside and downside risks; that is,
the risks should already be incorporated into the mean forecast and need not be accounted for separately.
For instance, a higher probability of a low outcome will reduce the mean outcome. The Riksbank forecasts
are, since February 2007, intended to be mean forecasts, but the FOMC forecasts are mode forecasts.
However, I will assume that the probability distributions around FOMC forecasts are sufficiently close to
unimodal and symmetric that the difference between the mode and the mean does not matter. (Online
appendix A2 discusses mean, mode, and median forecasts in more detail.)

         Each FOMC participant’s projections of inflation, unemployment, and growth are based on that
participant’s assessment of “appropriate monetary policy,” defined as “the future path of policy that each
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives” (FOMC 2010b). Thus, behind each
participant’s projection is a policy rate projection. Those projections are not published, however. That is,
the intended monetary policy and financial conditions are not directly available. Instead, only the actual
financial conditions, in the form of the market term structure of interest rates, are available. In contrast, for
the Riksbank both intended and actual financial conditions are directly available.

        As examples of practical monetary policy, I will look at the policy decisions by the two central
banks in the summer of 2010: that of the FOMC at its June 22-23 meeting, announced on June 23, and that
of the Riksbank at its June 30 meeting, announced on July 1 (which I therefore call the June/July
meeting). For the Riksbank I will also look at the policy decision a year later, on July 4, 2011, announced
on July 5.



III. The Situation in June 2010
Figure 1 shows, for the United States, realized PCE inflation and realized core PCE inflation from 2000
through 2010Q1, the last full quarter for which data were available for the FOMC June 2010 policy
meeting. (PCE inflation is the annual rate of change in the price index for personal consumption
expenditures; core PCE inflation uses the PCE price index excluding food and energy.) The extensions of
those series beyond 2010Q1 represent the FOMC forecasts for the two measures at that meeting,

                                                       6
constructed as the median of the participants’ projections as reported in FOMC (2010b). For Sweden,
figure 1 shows realized and forecast CPIF inflation (the annual change in the consumer price index
excluding direct effects on the CPI of changes in mortgage rates) from the Riksbank’s June/July 2010
meeting.12

         The central tendency of the FOMC participants’ longer-run PCE projections is reported as 1.7 to
2.0 percent, but the median actually falls in the upper range of this interval, or more precisely, between
1.85 and 2.05 percent, with the midpoint at 1.95 percent (FOMC 2010b). I will assume here that this
number, rounded to 2 percent (using unbiased rounding), is the Federal Reserve’s mandate-consistent
inflation rate. The Riksbank’s inflation target is also 2 percent. As the figure shows, both central banks
were forecasting inflation below the objective, except at the end of the forecast period for the Riksbank.
These forecasts alone therefore indicate that more expansionary policy, if possible, was in line with their
mandates.13

Figure 1. Inflation, Realized and June/July 2010 Central Bank Forecasts, Sweden and United States
Percent per year

 5.0                                                                                      5.0
            Mandate-consistent inflation rate/Inflation target
            June 2010, FOMC (PCE)
 4.0        June 2010, FOMC (Core PCE)                                                    4.0
            June/July 2010, Riksbank (CPIF)

 3.0                                                                                      3.0


 2.0                                                                                      2.0


 1.0                                                                                      1.0


 0.0                                                                                      0.0


-1.0                                                                                      -1.0
       00   01    02    03     04    05     06    07     08      09   10   11   12   13
Sources: The Bureau of Economic Analysis, the FOMC, Sveriges Riksbank, and Statistics Sweden.
Note: The vertical line indicates 2010Q1, the last quarter for which inflation outcomes were available for
the FOMC’s and the Riksbank Executive Board’s June/July 2010 meetings. The extensions to the right of
the vertical line are the forecasts announced after those meetings. The horizontal line shows the median of
FOMC participants’ longer-run projections of PCE inflation as of the June 2010 meeting, rounded from
1.95 percent. The Riksbank’s inflation target is also 2 percent.

         Figure 2 shows the two countries’ realized and forecast unemployment rates at the same policy
meetings. Also shown is the median of the FOMC participants’ projections of the longer-run
unemployment rate, which I take as the FOMC’s estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate. The
median falls in the interval from 4.95 to 5.15 percent, with the midpoint at 5.05 percent, which I round to
5.1 percent.14 For Sweden, a graph in the Riksbank’s October 2010 Monetary Policy Report (figure B23,
p. 61) shows an estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate of 6.5 percent from 2010 onward. I

                                                                      7
therefore use that as the sustainable unemployment rate as of the June/July meeting. Both the U.S. and the
Swedish forecasts are above the sustainable rate, meaning that forecast resource utilization was too low,
thus also indicating that more expansionary policy, if possible, was in line with their mandates.

         In such a situation, the simple criterion suggested by Deputy Governor of the Norges Bank Jan
Qvigstad (2005) applies: the forecasts for inflation and resource utilization should not both be too low, nor
should both be too high. If both are too low, as in this case, easier policy would better stabilize both
inflation and resource utilization.

Figure 2. Unemployment Rate, Realized and June/July 2010 Central Bank Forecasts, Sweden and United
States
Percent

10                                                                                     10



 8                                                                                     8



 6                                                                                     6



 4                                                                                     4



               June 2010, FOMC
 2                                                                                     2
               June/July 2010, Riksbank
               Sustainable unemployment rate, FOMC
               Sustainable unemployment rate, Riksbank
 0                                                                                     0
     00   01      02    03    04    05    06    07       08   09   10   11   12   13
Sources: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, the FOMC, Sveriges Riksbank, and Statistics Sweden.
Note: The vertical line indicates 2010Q1, the last quarter for which unemployment rate outcomes were
available for the FOMC’s and the Riksbank Executive Board’s June/July 2010 meetings. The extensions
to the right of the vertical line are the forecasts announced after those meetings. The horizontal red solid
line is the median of FOMC participants’ projections of the longer-run unemployment rate, as of the June
2010 meeting, rounded from 5.05 percent. The horizontal blue dotted line is the Riksbank’s estimated
sustainable unemployment rate.

         The FOMC (2010a) announced after its June meeting that it “will maintain the target range for the
federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low
rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.” In August it announced
that it would keep the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities constant at their current level by reinvesting
principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury
securities. After speeches by Chairman Bernanke (2010a, 2010b) in August and September in which he
discussed additional policy measures, in November the FOMC launched QE2, announcing that it intended
to purchase a further $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of 2011Q2.


                                                                    8
        The Riksbank, in contrast, raised its policy rate, the repo rate, from 25 bp to 50 bp after its
June/July meeting, launching a period of rapidly rising policy rates. In doing so it announced that “the
Swedish economy is developing strongly following the severe downturn. The repo rate now needs to be
raised gradually towards more normal levels to attain the inflation target of 2 per cent and to ensure stable
growth in the real economy.” Two members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board, Deputy Governor
Karolina Ekholm and I, dissented.15

         Figure 3 shows the federal funds rate before and the term structure of U.S. interest rates after the
FOMC’s June 23 announcement; the term structure here is measured by market forward rates adjusted for
normal forward term premiums (assumed to be 1 bp per month). The forward rate curve indicates that the
market expected the federal funds rate to remain at its very low level at least for another year. For Sweden
the figure shows the repo rate before and the term structure of interest rates (likewise measured by
adjusted forward rates) after the Riksbank’s July 1 announcement. The figure also shows the announced
policy rate path. Note that the forward rate curve is much lower than the policy rate path, indicating that
the market expected the Riksbank to raise the policy rate at a much slower pace.

Figure 3. Policy Rates, Policy Rate Expectations, and Riksbank Policy Rate Path, June/July 2010, Sweden
and United States
Percent
 5                                                                             5
                    Repo rate/forward rate 1 July 2010
                    Repo-rate path
                    Fed funds/forward rate 23 June 2010
 4                                                                             4



 3                                                                             3



 2                                                                             2



 1                                                                             1



 0                                                                             0
     08        09           10             11             12    13
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and Sveriges Riksbank.
Note. Forward rates are adjusted for normal forward term premiums (assumed to be 1 bp per month).

          Thus, for Sweden, figure 3 shows both the actual financial conditions (market expectations of the
future repo rate) and the Riksbank’s intended financial conditions (the published repo rate path). For the
FOMC, the figure shows only the actual financial conditions (market expectations of the future federal
funds rate). We do not know what policy rate path corresponds to the median of the FOMC participants’
views of “appropriate policy.” Nor do we know whether appropriate policy for some participants included
at least some of the QE that the Federal Reserve implemented in the fall.16




                                                           9
         Figure 3 highlights that, for the Riksbank, more expansionary policy was clearly possible.
Obviously, the published policy rate path could have been shifted down. This should have had an impact
on market expectations and shifted down the term structure of interest rates, in particular if the policy rate
path were shifted down to or below the forward rate curve. The FOMC, however, was clearly more
constrained. The target range for the federal funds rate was 0 to 25 bp, and the zero lower bound (ZLB)
was effectively binding. Arguably, the funds rate could have been lowered to zero, and a zero interest rate
could have been paid on reserves (Bernanke 2010a, 2011a). The FOMC could also have announced that it
might keep the federal funds rate low for longer than the market was expecting, and possibly shifted the
term structure of interest rates down further (Bernanke 2010a, 2010b, Yellen 2011c). Indeed, just over a
year later, in its August 9, 2011, statement, the FOMC extended the period of low federal funds rates,
announcing that it anticipated that economic conditions were likely to warrant “exceptionally low levels
for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.” However, we do not know how successful such a
move would have been in June 2010. Finally, the FOMC could have managed its balance sheet so as to
reduce longer-term interest rates, by reducing term premiums. Some simulations published later (Chung
and others 2011, Cúrdia and Ferrero 2011, Fuhrer and Olivei 2011) indicate that such action would have
had a significant effect, and in the end, this is what the FOMC opted for in the fall. As was apparent from
the reaction of some politicians and the media, the FOMC then faced substantial political resistance to
more expansionary policy. I find it difficult to judge the overall extent of economic and political
constraints on the FOMC.17

IV. Arguments for the Riksbank’s Policy Tightening
The argument against the Riksbank’s policy tightening in June/July 2010 is straightforward. Given the
Riksbank’s objectives, forecast inflation was too low, and forecast unemployment was too high. Easier
policy would have led to better attainment of both inflation and resource utilization objectives. Several
arguments for the Riksbank’s policy tightening are presented in the minutes of that meeting (Sveriges
Riksbank 2010b) and were presented at other policy meetings. I group them here into four main
arguments:18

    —the growth stabilization argument
    —the revision argument
    —the household debt and housing prices argument
    —the normalization argument.

Except for the second, all four are essentially arguments for why policy should, at least on this occasion,
be based on something other than the forecasts of inflation and resource utilization.

IV.A. The Growth Stabilization Argument
        Some arguments for tightening seem to concern the stabilization of economic growth rather than
of resource utilization. Recall that the Riksbank’s July 2010 announcement stated that “[t]he Swedish
economy is developing strongly following the severe downturn. The repo rate now needs to be raised
gradually towards more normal levels to attain the inflation target of 2 per cent and to ensure stable
growth in the real economy” (emphasis added). This gives the impression that monetary policy was
directed toward stabilizing growth rather than the level of resource utilization. However, the Swedish
word translated here as “growth” is utveckling, which is often translated as “development” or, in this
context, as “performance.” Therefore, the sentence above should arguably have ended “to ensure the


                                                      10
stable performance of the real economy.” Still, it is clear that the announcement emphasizes the change in
the real economy rather than the level of resource utilization. And, as far as I know, no objections were
raised to translating utveckling as “growth.”

         Furthermore, the headings in the slide presentation at the press conference on July 1, 2010, read as
follows: “Swedish economy developing strongly,” “…despite fiscal problems in Europe,” “Limited
impact on the financial markets,” “The global recovery is continuing,” “Broad upturn in Swedish
economy,” “The upturn is continuing,” “Employment is increasing,” “Lower unemployment ahead,”
“Inflation in line with target,” “Interest rate increased from low level,” “A forecast, not a promise,” and
again, as clearly the main message, “Swedish economy developing strongly.” It seems fair to say that
these headings reinforce the impression that the Riksbank was emphasizing the growth in the economy
and the change in resource utilization rather than the level of resource utilization.

        Figure 4, which shows the level of Swedish GDP over the recent period, and figure 5, which
shows the GDP growth rate, give rather different impressions. In the summer of 2010, both realized and
forecast output was quite low. Realized growth in 2010Q1 was high, 6 percent at an annual rate, but the
forecast was not much above normal. Stabilizing growth at that low level of output would seem to amount
to prolonging the recession. Stabilizing resource utilization would imply a very different policy.

Figure 4. GDP, Realized and Forecast, and Potential GDP, Sweden
Index, 2007Q4 realized GDP = 100

115                                                                                                   115
                     GDP September 2008/June/July 2010/July 2011
                     Potential GDP September 2008/June/July 2010/July 2011
110                                                                                                   110


105                                                                                                   105


100                                                                                                   100


 95                                                                                                   95


 90                                                                                                   90


 85                                                                                                   85


 80                                                                                                   80


 75                                                                                                   75
      00   01   02      03     04      05     06     07     08     09        10   11   12   13   14

Sources: Sveriges Riksbank and Statistics Sweden.
Note: For each date, the thick solid line represents the most recently available estimates of realized GDP,
the dashed line the Riksbank’s GDP forecast, and the thin solid line the Riksbank’s then-current estimate
and forecast of potential GDP (as of September 2008, June/July 2010, and July 2011).

         The Riksbank’s thrice-yearly Monetary Policy Report has also traditionally emphasized growth
rather than the level of resource utilization, at least when it comes to the figures. The first four main
graphs in each report show the repo rate path and the forecasts of GDP growth, CPI inflation, and CPIF


                                                                             11
inflation. In the July 2010 report, forecasts of employment, unemployment, and resource utilization do not
appear until figure 18, on page 15, and later. It is less than obvious from that report that inflation and
resource utilization are supposed to be the two target variables of the Riksbank.

         My experience from practical monetary policy is that there is often considerable ambiguity and
confusion between growth and levels of the real economy. I maintain that the level of resource utilization,
not the growth rate, should be the relevant target variable for monetary policy, in order to best full the
mandate. In particular, stabilizing growth after a big fall in output and a rise in unemployment will
prolong the period of low resource utilization. Higher than normal growth is then warranted to return to
the sustainable level of resource utilization.

Figure 5. GDP Growth, Realized and Forecast, Sweden
Annualized quarterly growth, percent

 10                                                                                  10


  5                                                                                  5


  0                                                                                  0


 -5                                                                                  -5


-10                                                                                  -10


-15                                                                                  -15
            June/July 2010/2011, Riksbank

-20                                                                                  -20
      00   01   02   03    04   05    06    07   08   09   10    11   12   13   14
Sources: Sveriges Riksbank and Statistics Sweden
Note: For each date, the solid line represents the most recent available estimates of realized GDP growth
(annualized), and the dashed line the Riksbank’s GDP growth forecast.

IV.B. The Revision Argument
         The outlook for the real economy at the June/July 2010 meeting was a bit better than had been
projected at the previous meeting, in April 2010. Realized GDP growth was a bit higher, and realized
unemployment a bit lower, than had been anticipated. This was mentioned as a reason for tightening
policy. The argument seems to be that if the outcome for the real economy or inflation, or both, is higher
(or lower) than anticipated, policy should be tightened (or eased) a bit. Of course, this assumes that
previous policy was optimal. If previously the policy was at a corner solution—for instance, with a
binding ZLB—this conclusion does not follow. Unfortunately, the Riksbank’s communication was not
clear about whether the period from April 2009 through April 2010, when the policy rate was 25 bp, was
one of a binding effective lower bound or not (Svensson 2010a). Furthermore, since policy is never
perfect, mechanically applying the above argument can mean that error is added to error, and policy could



                                                                12
drift away from its optimum like a random walk. This can be avoided if policy instead is checked against
and is mainly based on forecasts of levels of inflation and resource utilization.19

IV.C. The Household Debt and Housing Prices Argument
        Several Riksbank board members at several policy meetings have expressed worries about an
increasing ratio of household debt to disposable income—in June/July 2010 it was about 170 percent—
and about rising housing prices. The suggestion is that a policy rate increase would beneficially dampen
the growth of household indebtedness and of housing prices. This raises two questions: first, whether
household debt and housing prices present a problem for the macroeconomy or financial stability, and
second, if they do, whether the policy rate is a suitable instrument to address the problem or whether there
are other, better instruments.

         On the first question, household debt is not considered to be a problem for financial stability in
Sweden. The likelihood that Swedish banks would suffer any losses from mortgages is very small. The
reason is that mortgages are full recourse, credit reviews are thorough (in part because mortgages are not
securitized but stay with the initiating mortgage institution), and households’ capacity to repay debt is
good. Not even during the severe crisis in the early 1990s did mortgage issuers incur any substantial losses
from mortgage defaults. Sweden is indeed very different from the United States in these respects.20

         Could household debt and housing prices cause problems for the macroeconomy? Several
considerations suggest that the danger is small. First, model simulations of a housing price fall show that
expansionary monetary policy can neutralize the negative effects on aggregate demand and inflation from
a housing price fall, even taking into account the ZLB. Second, the assets of Swedish households
(excluding pension claims) are, in the aggregate, three times their debt, so that household equity is two-
thirds of household assets, resulting in a quite low leverage. Nor is there any trend toward higher leverage.
Third, the household saving ratio is high, so there is no evidence of aggregate consumption being financed
by withdrawal of housing equity.21 Fourth, an ambitious Riksbank research project on the housing market
(Sveriges Riksbank 2011d) has confirmed that housing prices are consistent with fundamentals and that
there is no evidence of a bubble or overvaluation. If housing prices are consistent with fundamentals, then
the fundamentals themselves would have to fall for housing prices to decline. This is a much more benign
situation than a bubble that might burst.

          Finally, a debt-to-disposable income ratio as high as 170 percent is fully sustainable, and a
constant ratio at this level requires only a very small “primary surplus” as a share of disposable income,
when not only nominal interest payments but the households’ complete net cash flow, that is, net debt
service considering after-tax interest payments and net amortization, is taken into account. (With a high 7
percent nominal mortgage rate, a 30 percent deductible capital income tax, and 4 percent nominal
disposable income growth only a steady-state after-tax primary surplus of about 1 percent [= 7(1-0.3) – 4
percent] of the debt-to-disposable income ratio is required; see appendix A3 in the online appendix for
details.)

        On the second question, even if household debt and housing prices were considered a problem,
considerable research indicates that the policy rate has a limited impact on either (the two are highly
correlated, since most household debt is in the form of mortgages), but that a rise in the policy rate can
cause sizable collateral damage in the form of negative effects on inflation and real activity.22 A number of


                                                     13
more efficient instruments are available to influence household debt and housing prices, such as loan-to-
value ceilings, amortization floors, property taxes, and limitations on tax deductions.

         In general, if there is some probability of a future housing price fall, and such a fall is expected to
have an impact on future aggregate demand, resource utilization, and inflation, then that impact should be
taken into account in constructing the mean forecasts of inflation and resource utilization. Then one could
derive the correct implications for the policy rate and best stabilize inflation and resource utilization. The
impact could imply a downward shift of future resource utilization and inflation, which in itself would
seem to imply more expansionary rather than contractionary policy. Furthermore, if the policy rate is
deemed to have some effect on the probability or the magnitude, or both, of a housing price fall, this
should also be taken into account. It could imply more contractionary policy, if a higher policy rate was
deemed to reduce the probability or the magnitude of such a fall. But in the absence of such an analysis it
is not clear what the policy implications are.

        Donald Kohn (2006, 2008) mentions three conditions that should be fulfilled before central banks
implement “extraordinary actions” to handle possible asset price bubbles, such as an unsustainable
increase in housing prices: “First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with
reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability that it
will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future
economic performance that would result from the curtailment of the bubble must be sufficiently great.”
These conditions will rarely be fulfilled in practice.

         Occasionally, the minutes of the Riksbank meetings refer to the impact of the policy rate through
household debt and housing prices on outcomes well beyond the forecast horizon of 3 years. However, the
connection between these outcomes and the current policy rate is often difficult to articulate. Normally
there is little or no information about the impact of the policy rate on the outcome beyond the forecast
horizon. Responding to information that we do not really have only introduces random errors in policy. 23

IV.D. The Normalization Argument
        Another argument is that, all else equal, low interest rates will lead to unspecified financial
imbalances and unspecified threats to financial stability. This argument seems related to worries about
increased leverage and increased risk taking – consistent with the so-called risk taking channel – and the
misallocation of investment. Such arguments imply that, for given forecasts of inflation and resource
                                                                                                   2
utilization, more normal interest rate levels are preferred. It is similar to adding a term (it  i ) to the
loss function, where it denotes the policy rate in period t and i  denotes the normal policy rate. This term
would represent undesirable impacts of lower than normal policy rates that are not included in the
forecasts of inflation and resource utilization. There are several references to “normalization” in Riksbank
press releases, Monetary Policy Reports and Updates, minutes, and speeches.

         However, there is no evidence that low interest rates lead to more leverage or more risk taking in
Sweden. The Swedish financial sector is dominated by an oligopoly of four large commercial banks, and
there is no shadow banking sector to speak of. There is no evidence that these commercial banks tend to
increase their leverage when the policy rate is low.24 Furthermore, even if lower policy rates did lead to
more risk taking, it does not follow that the resulting amount of risk taking would be too much. That
depends on what the optimal level of risk taking is. In the wake of the financial crisis, it might be that risk

                                                       14
aversion and the perception of uncertainty are exceptionally high and that there is overall too little risk
taking. Without further analysis, this cannot be known.25

         The argument that low interest rates would lead to misallocation of investment is much weakened
by the fact that the level of investment in Sweden has been very low and is still lower today than before
the crisis. There has been little construction—certainly no construction boom—and no overinvestment in
housing. The argument would further require a downward bias in the estimate of capital costs during the
lifetime of the investments that are undertaken. I am not aware of any evidence of such bias.

         Furthermore, the general discussion about policy rates, the risk taking channel, and so on, and the
existing models, consistently seem to suffer from confusion between nominal policy rates and the general
level of real interest rates. Models such as those of Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2011) and
Douglas Diamond and Raghuram Rajan (2011) include a short real rate but no nominal policy rate and no
explicit monetary policy.26 Nor do they distinguish between the short real rate and the neutral real rate
(also called the natural real rate). All that monetary policy can do by setting a short nominal policy rate is
to temporarily make the short real rate deviate from the neutral real rate, which itself is beyond the control
of monetary policy. The effects attributed to monetary policy should be the effects of that difference, not
the level of the neutral rate or the overall level of the real rate. The neutral real rate is affected by many
things and can remain low for many years for several reasons, including global imbalances, fiscal policy,
and shocks to aggregate demand and supply. (Online appendix A5 provides an illustration with the
simplest New Keynesian model.)

V. Arguments against the FOMC’s Policy Easing
The argument for more expansionary U.S. monetary policy, if possible, in June 2010 is also
straightforward: the FOMC’s projections for underlying inflation were below the mandate-consistent
level, and its projections for unemployment were above the estimate of the sustainable rate. Indeed, noting
these facts, Chairman Bernanke (2010b) concluded at the time, “Given the Committee’s objectives, there
would appear – all else equal – to be a case for further action.” However, some arguments against more
expansionary policy have been put forward. From my reading of the FOMC minutes and the broader
debate about U.S. monetary policy, I find that the various arguments can be organized as follows:27

    —concerns about increased inflation and the anchoring of inflation expectations
    —uncertainty about the effects of unconventional policy measures on the economy
    —concerns about the possible negative effects of low policy rates for an extended period on financial
    stability and the allocation of investment
    —concerns about estimates of the amount of slack in the economy
    —concerns on the part of emerging-market policymakers that the policy would result in increased
    capital inflows into those countries, possibly generating bubbles and other negative impacts there
    —concerns that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would be more exposed to possible capital losses.

V.A. Concerns about Increased Inflation and the Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
        One argument is that an expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet risks reducing public
confidence in the Federal Reserve’s commitment to price stability. Some observers might erroneously
think that a large increase in the balance sheet, since it implies a larger monetary base, will automatically
bring higher inflation, especially since future circumstances may make it difficult to scale back the


                                                      15
balance sheet quickly. This may increase longer-run inflation expectations, possibly with a ratchet effect,
and ultimately require a recession to reduce them.

         Why do inflation expectations matter for monetary policy? First, because all else equal, higher
inflation expectations raise actual inflation and the inflation forecast. If expectations instead are anchored
on the central bank’s inflation objective, it is easier for the central bank to stabilize both inflation and
resource utilization. Second, they matter because the proximity of long-run inflation expectations to the
inflation objective provides a good indicator of the central bank’s credibility or, more precisely, of belief
in its ability to attain the objective. This indicator is of some independent interest, for instance for policy
evaluation. But, importantly, the mandate of the Federal Reserve (and of the Riksbank) includes price
stability, not stability of inflation expectations. Inflation expectations should therefore not be taken as an
independent target variable. At most, they are an intermediate target variable, whose stability simplifies
the stabilization of the actual target variables.

           As an illustration, consider the standard New Keynesian Phillips curve,
       t   *   ( t 1|t   *)   xt   t ,
(1)
where      t denotes inflation in period t,  * is the inflation objective,  is the private sector discount
factor,  t 1|t denotes private sector expectations in period t of inflation in period t + 1, xt denotes the
output gap,        t denotes a possibly serially correlated cost-push shock, and  is a positive constant.28
Shocks to private sector inflation expectations will, all else equal, imply shocks to inflation. Stable
inflation expectations make it easier to stabilize inflation around π* and the output gap around zero.
Higher inflation expectations will, all else equal, imply higher actual inflation. Inflation expectations
above π* will, all else equal (zero cost-push shocks), require a negative output gap to keep inflation at π*.

         A good inflation forecast implicitly incorporates a forecast for inflation expectations. Note,
however, that there is a risk of double counting: If inflation expectations are forecast to increase, and
inflation forecast takes this into account, the increase in inflation expectations contains no additional
information that is not already contained in the inflation forecast. Responding to inflation expectations
beyond the response to the inflation forecast could then be excessive.

           Let  t  ,t denote the central bank’s mean forecast in period t of inflation in period t + τ. It is, by
equation 1, given by
              *  (                *)   x    
(2) t  ,t         t  1|t  ,t     t  ,t t  ,t

and hence depends on the central bank’s forecast in period t of private sector inflation expectations in
period t + τ,  t  1|t  ,t , and on forecasts in period t of the output gap and the cost-push shock in period t +

τ, xt  ,t and   t ,t . The effect of private sector inflation expectations is fully incorporated in the inflation
forecast.29

        Arguably, an increase in shorter-run inflation expectations above the inflation objective would not
actually be a problem in the current situation of a binding ZLB. On the contrary, a temporary increase
would reduce the real interest rate and stimulate the economy and would therefore be desirable.


                                                            16
Furthermore, according to Qvigstad’s (2005) criterion, if the unemployment forecast is above the
sustainable unemployment rate, optimality requires that the inflation forecast be above the inflation
objective.

        What would be a problem is if longer-run inflation expectations were to increase and require tight
policy for a significant period to be brought down. Clear communication about the purpose of the
expansion should mitigate the risk of a reduction in public confidence in the central bank’s long-run
commitment to price stability.

        Regarding the increase in the monetary base that follows from the Federal Reserve’s asset
purchases, the fact that the Federal Reserve can pay interest on reserves means that a large monetary base
no longer by itself leads to inflation. In the standard textbook treatment, a large monetary base implies a
zero policy rate. But the Federal Reserve’s ability to pay interest on reserves implies that a large monetary
base does not prevent it from setting the policy rate at any level required to restrict aggregate demand and
thereby limit inflation. Clear communication of this fact should reduce naïve beliefs of the opposite. Yet
these beliefs seem quite stubborn, in spite of rather clear communication by the Federal Reserve. In any
case, short- and long-run inflation expectations are monitored very closely in real time, and the Federal
Reserve has the option of modifying its policy if inflation expectations start to move in undesirable
directions.

         Moreover, there seems little danger in the United States today of a ratchet effect in inflation
expectations. The Federal Reserve’s mandate of price stability is well established. Long-run inflation
expectations are well anchored in the United States, as in the euro area and in other advanced countries
with inflation targeting. As argued by Adam Posen (2011), nervousness about inflation expectations being
sticky downward may stem from the stagflation experience in the 1970s. The struggle of some countries
with bad inflation histories to achieve credibility for newly established targets in the early 1990s may also
be a factor. But the success of inflation targeting in an increasing number of advanced and emerging-
market countries in bringing low and stable inflation should dampen this nervousness.

        Finally, as discussed by Evans (2011), the Federal Reserve’s objective to stabilize inflation around
the mandate-consistent rate should be interpreted as a symmetric objective, and the mandate-consistent
rate should not be interpreted as a cap on inflation. Therefore, when unemployment is too high, inflation
above the mandate-consistent rate is not in itself a problem. According to the Qvigstad criterion, it is
instead a condition for optimal policy.

V.B. Uncertainty about the Effects of Unconventional Policy Measures
         It has been argued that additional expansionary policy measures when the ZLB is binding may
have limited effects on the economy, and because of this, that attempts by the Federal Reserve to use such
measures might reduce its credibility and perceived competence, making it less effective at stabilizing
inflation and resource utilization in the future.

         There is a lively debate and now a considerable body of research on the effects of large-scale asset
purchase programs (LSAPs).30 Estimates based on a number of recent studies, as well as the Federal
Reserve’s own estimates, suggest that, all else equal, QE2 lowered longer-term interest rates by 10 to 30
bp. Federal Reserve analysis further indicates that such a reduction is roughly equivalent in its economic
effect to reducing the federal funds rate by 40 to 120 bp (Bernanke 2011a)—a large reduction. In


                                                     17
simulations using the FRB/US macroeconomic model, discussed by Janet Yellen (2011b) and reported by
Hess Chung and others (2011), QE2 is assumed to lower 10-year yields by about 15 bp, which would
reduce the unemployment rate by about 0.3 percentage point and increase core PCE inflation by about 0.2
percentage point.31 This is to my mind a substantial effect.

         According to the so-called portfolio balance channel, LSAPs affect long-term interest rates by
changing the quantity and mix of financial assets held by the public. This assumes that different financial
assets are not perfect substitutes in investors’ portfolios, so that changes in the net supply of an asset affect
its yield and those of broadly similar assets.

        LSAPs can be seen as a shortening of the duration of the public debt; they result in privately held
public debt consisting of relatively fewer long-term Treasury bonds and relatively more deposits in the
Federal Reserve. They also simply reduce the amount of Treasury securities available to the public,
replacing them with deposits at the Federal Reserve. However, a change in the balance of new Treasury
issues of short- and long-term debt can to some extent undo this shortening of duration (Hamilton and Wu
2011). Thus, cooperation by the Treasury, including a commitment not to undo the LSAPs, may be
desirable and may increase their effect.

         The Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury securities, by removing substantial quantities of
these securities from the market, should induce private investors to buy other assets that serve as
substitutes for Treasuries, such as corporate bonds and mortgage-backed securities. The result is to reduce
the yields and increase the prices of those other assets as well, lowering borrowing costs and easing
financial conditions throughout the economy (Bernanke 2011a).

        As discussed in section I, an increase in uncertainty that does not change the means (a mean-
preserving spread) should normally not change the optimal policy. The direction of the optimal policy
adjustment in response to increased and more complex uncertainty, such as model and multiplicative
uncertainty, is usually not clear from the available information. Hence an increase in uncertainty by itself
provides no reason to deviate from the normal response to the mean forecasts, that is, from the certainty-
equivalent policy.

        About a decade ago, many academics, including myself, criticized the Bank of Japan for not doing
more when it faced the ZLB. The reason for its inaction seemed to be that the effectiveness of further
policy measures was uncertain, and it was therefore safer not to try. As I wrote at the time (Svensson
2001), “The logic of this argument escapes me. Instead…it seems that, if a monetary expansion is deemed
desirable, prudent policy calls for trying a number of the suggested remedies (as long as they are not
inconsistent), in the hope that some may work.” I remain convinced that uncertainty about the effects of
unconventional policy is not a valid reason to do nothing. The Federal Reserve has indeed acted very
forcefully in undertaking LSAPs, even though the magnitude of the effect on the economy was very
uncertain ex ante.

V.C. Concerns about the Effects of Low Policy Rates on Financial Stability and Investment Allocation
        Although I feel confident in rejecting this argument for Sweden (see section IV.D), I am less
informed about the U.S. situation, with its substantial shadow banking sector and complicated supervisory
and regulatory framework, with responsibilities divided among several authorities. Yellen (2011a)
describes how the Federal Reserve is engaged in monitoring a number of indicators of potential financial


                                                       18
market imbalances. These include indicators of asset valuations relative to historical norms such as
forward price-to-earnings ratios in the stock market and price-to-rent ratios in the real estate market, as
well as various measures of risk premiums and debt growth. The Federal Reserve has also intensified its
monitoring of leverage, particularly outside the traditional banking system. This includes gathering both
supervisory and market surveillance data and initiating an ongoing dialogue with a range of market
participants to obtain more detail on the complex use of leverage in the shadow banking sector. At present,
the Federal Reserve sees few indications of significant imbalances, and the use of leverage seems well
below precrisis levels.

        As noted in section IV.D, much theoretical and empirical work on the possible consequences of
low interest rates on leverage and risk taking confuses the policy rate, the real rate, and the natural real
rate and does not appreciate that the relevant impact of monetary policy is the impact of temporary
deviations of the short real rate from the natural real rate. This means that the conclusions of this work for
monetary policy are not clear.

         The situation in the United States regarding the housing market and housing construction is hardly
an argument against more expansionary policy. Continued housing price declines and a construction
slump are rather arguments for more expansionary policy. As for any misallocation of investment, again,
this requires a systematic bias in the estimates of capital costs during the lifetime of the investment.

         In a second-best situation, without appropriate supervision and regulation, if the policy rate is the
only available tool and there is a trade-off between its effect on the monetary policy objectives and
financial stability, that trade-off should be taken into account. Normally, however, the policy rate is not
the only available tool, and much better instruments are available for affecting financial stability. Given
this, one can aruge that monetary policy and the policy rate should be the last line of defense, when other
policy measures have been exhausted. Kohn’s three conditions, discussed above, also apply here.

V.D. Concerns about Estimates of Economic Slack
         It has been argued that there may be less slack in the U.S. economy than commonly appreciated,
because the structural unemployment rate, the NAIRU, and the short-term equilibrium unemployment rate
may have increased. For instance, the observed increase in longer-term unemployment may lead to an
erosion of skills and the need to reallocate labor across sectors that require new skills, and may make the
matching of the unemployed to vacant jobs more difficult. However, even if an increase in short-term
equilibrium unemployment rates has occurred, it seems obvious that it is dwarfed by the large rise in
unemployment during the crisis.

         Furthermore, as discussed in section I and in Bernanke (2010b), there are good reasons why the
mandate-consistent unemployment rate should be interpreted the sustainable unemployment rate, that is,
the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate. Then, the relevant target variable, besides inflation, is the
gap between unemployment and the sustainable rate, not that between unemployment and any short-run
equilibrium unemployment concept. The latter is relevant for the impact on inflation and the inflation
forecast, but not as a target variable. Using it as the target variable in effect introduces a preference for
constant inflation, which I find difficult to motivate. (See online appendix A1 for more details.)

        In particular, in a situation with high unemployment, increased longer-term unemployment, skills
erosion, increased needs to reallocate labor, less effective matching, and thereby a higher short-run


                                                      19
equilibrium rate (if this can be defined), expansionary policy may quickly drive unemployment down
toward the sustainable unemployment rate, speed up the reallocation, limit the erosion of skills or speed
the acquisition of new ones, and bring down not only actual unemployment but also the short-run
equilibrium unemployment rate. The cost of this may be higher inflation, but this cost is appropriately
taken into account by the squared gap between actual inflation and the mandate-consistent rate. The
benefit is measured by the reduction in the squared gap between unemployment and the sustainable
unemployment rate times the weight on that term.

V.E. Concerns about Increased Capital Inflows into Emerging Markets
         Some policymakers in emerging-market economies have expressed concerns about increased
capital flows into their countries and the related risks of bubbles and other negative effects there.
However, the Federal Reserve’s mandate concerns only U.S. inflation and employment; it is not
responsible for inflation, real developments, or monetary policy in other countries except as they feed
back into the United States. That responsibility should rest with the policy authorities in those countries.
Countries with a peg to the dollar will tend to import expansionary U.S. monetary policy, possibly causing
the economy to overheat. A flexible exchange rate gives countries the option to run an independent
monetary policy appropriate for the country. If countries nevertheless choose a dollar peg, and this results
in capital inflows, bubbles, and other negative effects, they are themselves responsible for those effects.

         In principle, more expansionary U.S. monetary policy, for instance in the form of lower long-term
interest rates, tends to depreciate the dollar, all else equal. Does this mean that the United States is
conducting a beggar-thy-neighbor policy? I do not see it that way. A weaker currency is a normal
consequence of more expansionary policy in an open economy. Each of the countries affected has the
option of adjusting its own monetary policy in response. All countries cannot depreciate their currency
against each other, but all countries can conduct more expansionary policy if they prefer, whether through
conventional or unconventional methods. Such a policy will increase real activity, world trade, and
imports, which in a situation of underutilized resources is to the benefit of all. Monetary policy is not a
zero-sum game.

V.F. Concerns about Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Losses
         The Federal Reserve could indeed realize a loss when it sells its holdings of long-term Treasury
bonds. However, any such capital loss for the Federal Reserve would be a (possibly unrealized) capital
gain for the Treasury, so the consolidated government sector would not be affected. If capital losses by the
Federal Reserve are considered a problem, a possible solution is for it to be compensated by the Treasury.
Also, since the Federal Reserve can raise the interest rate on reserves, it need not sell assets to tighten
policy but can keep them to maturity. Furthermore, central banks are different from commercial banks in
that they can operate with negative capital, as long as the income from their assets exceeds operating costs
(including interest on reserves) by a sufficient margin, so that cash flow is positive. For the Federal
Reserve to have a negative cash flow would require very high interest rates on reserves. Even then, the
Federal Reserve could actually sell assets to finance the negative cash flow for a long time (see Reis 2009
and Rudebusch 2011 for details). Nevertheless, these facts do not preclude that capital losses for the
Federal Reserve might cause political or communication problems.



VI. The Situation One Year Later
                                                    20
Figure 6 shows realized PCE and core PCE inflation and the FOMC’s forecast, and realized CPIF inflation
and the Riksbank’s forecast, in the summer of 2011. The forecast for PCE inflation was by then above the
mandate-consistent rate for 2011 and early 2012 but below that rate for the rest of 2012 and 2013. The
forecast for core PCE inflation was below the mandate-consistent rate throughout the forecast period but
consistent with the higher PCE inflation rate for 2011 because of temporary factors.32 The Riksbank’s
CPIF forecast was above the target for 2013 but below the target on average over the forecast period.

        Figure 7 shows the corresponding unemployment forecasts. The FOMC’s estimated sustainable
unemployment rate was by then 5.4 percent,33 higher than the June 2010 estimate of 5.1 percent. The
Riksbank was still using 6.5 percent as the sustainable unemployment rate. Sweden’s National Institute for
Economic Research (2010) published an estimate of about 6.5 percent in June 2010, but in March 2011 it
revised this down to just above 6 percent (NIER 2011a).34 In May it published a report estimating the
sustainable unemployment rate at either 5 or 6 percent, depending on assumptions about the wage
formation process (NIER 2011b). In April 2011 the Ministry of Finance (2011) published an extensive
analysis of the effects of Sweden’s substantial structural reforms, tax changes, and other factors, including
demography and labor force composition, that have an impact on the sustainable unemployment rate. It
arrived at an estimate of 5 percent. I consider this study the best analysis so far. My own preliminary
estimate of 5.5 percent (Sveriges Riksbank 2010c) is approximately the midpoint between that of the
Ministry of Finance and that of the National Institute of Economic Research and is marked in figure 7.
The full range of estimates above is also indicated in the figure.

Figure 6. Inflation, Realized and June/July 2011 Central Bank Forecasts, Sweden and United States
Percent per year

 5                                                                                        5
           Mandate-consistent inflation rate/Inflation target
           June 2011, FOMC (PCE)
           June 2011, FOMC (Core PCE)
 4         June/July 2011, Riksbank (CPIF)                                                4


 3                                                                                        3


 2                                                                                        2


 1                                                                                        1


 0                                                                                        0


-1                                                                                        -1
     00   01   02    03     04    05    06     07    08    09   10    11   12   13   14
Sources: The Bureau of Economic Analysis, the FOMC, Sveriges Riksbank, and Statistics Sweden.
Note: The vertical line indicates 2011Q1, the last quarter for which inflation outcomes were available for
the FOMC’s and the Riksbank Executive Board’s June/July 2011 meetings. The extensions to the right of
the vertical line are the forecasts announced after those meetings. The horizontal line indicates the median
of FOMC participants’ longer-run projections of PCE inflation as of the June 2011 meeting, rounded from
1.95 percent. The Riksbank’s inflation target is also 2 percent.

                                                                 21
        The FOMC’s June 2011 unemployment forecast was above the sustainable rate. The Riksbank’s
forecast was on average above the range of estimates of the sustainable rate, and clearly above the
estimates of the NIER and the Ministry of Finance and my own estimate.

          In this situation the FOMC (2011b) kept its policy rate unchanged, announcing that

          The Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions – including low rates of resource
          utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run – are likely to warrant
          exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will
          complete its purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of this month
          and will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities
          holdings.35

For its part, the Riksbank continued to raise the policy rate, this time from 1.75 percent to 2.0 percent, and
announced (Sveriges Riksbank 2011b) that its forecast for the repo rate was unchanged. Deputy Governor
Ekholm and I again dissented.36

Figure 7. Unemployment Rate, Realized and June/July 2011 Central Bank Forecasts, Sweden and United
States
Percent
10                                                                                     10



 8                                                                                     8



 6                                                                                     6



 4                                                                                     4



               June 2011, FOMC
 2                                                                                     2
               July 2011, Riksbank
               Sustainable unemployment rate, FOMC
               Sustainable unemployment rate, Svensson
 0                                                                                     0
     00   01    02   03    04    05   06    07   08      09   10   11   12   13   14
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, FOMC, Sveriges Riksbank, and Statistics Sweden.
Note: The vertical line indicates 2011Q1, the last quarter for which unemployment rate outcomes were
available for the FOMC’s and the Riksbank Executive Board’s June/July 2011 meetings. Forecasts are
those of the respective central banks announced after those meetings. The extensions to the right of the
vertical line are the forecasts announced after those meetings. The series of Swedish realized
unemployment rates differ from the one in figure 2 because of some data revisions, mainly before mid-
2005. The horizontal red solid line shows the median of FOMC participants’ projections of the longer-run
unemployment rate, as of the June 2011 meeting. The horizontal blue dotted line shows my estimate of the
sustainable unemployment rate for Sweden. The blue shaded area shows the range of sustainable rate
estimates for Sweden.



                                                                   22
        Figure 8 shows the federal funds rate and market expectations of future federal funds rates after
the Federal Reserve’s announcement. The market expected the federal funds rate to be exceptionally low
for more than another year. The figure also shows the Riksbank’s repo rate, the forward rate curve, and the
announced policy rate path. The market still expected a noticeably lower path, more than 100 bp lower at
the end of the forecasting period.

VI.A. Why Was the Riksbank Policy Rate So High?
         The upward-sloping policy rate path in figure 8 reflects the Riksbank’s intended policy in
June/July 2011. The policy rate path is indeed very high compared with market implied forward rates and
even higher compared with foreign implied forward rates, shown in the top panel of figure 9 (these rates
are calculated using Total Competitiveness Weights, which are essentially Swedish trading-partner
weights).37 One reason for the high Riksbank policy rate is that the Riksbank’s forecast of foreign policy
rates, also shown, was much higher than the foreign implied forward rates. The bottom panel of figure 9
shows that this divergence persisted in July 2011.

Figure 8. Policy Rates, Policy Rate Expectations, and Riksbank Policy Rate Path, June/July 2011, Sweden
and United States
Percent per year

5                                                                               5
                  Repo rate/forward rate 5 July 2011
                  Repo-rate path July 2011
                  Fed funds/forward rate 22 June 2011
4                                                                               4



3                                                                               3



2                                                                               2



1                                                                               1



0                                                                               0
    08       09         10           11          12      13       14


Sources: Reuters EcoWin and Sveriges Riksbank.
Note: Forward rates are adjusted for normal forward term premiums (assumed to be 1 bp per month).

         Indeed, Riksbank forecasts of foreign policy rates have been much above the implied forward
rates since 2009. The forward rates have not been very good forecasts, but they have been much better
than the Riksbank’s (see figure A2 in the online appendix). The Riksbank’s forecast for foreign policy
rates has arguably been systematically too high for several years. A too-high forecast for foreign policy
rates biases the repo rate path upward, all else equal. A higher policy rate path for foreign rates, all else
equal, leads to a weaker forecast for the Swedish krona, and the Swedish repo rate path must then be
higher to counteract this. Deputy Governor Ekholm and I consider it more appropriate to adopt a forecast


                                                        23
for foreign policy rates that starts from implied forward rates and is then adjusted for any further
information about foreign monetary policy intentions.

        A second source of upward bias in the policy rate path is a possible overestimation of the
sustainable unemployment rate (see above) and underestimation of potential output. The Riksbank’s
measures of potential output have shifted down substantially relative to precrisis levels (figure 4),
implying a less negative output gap and a bias toward higher resource utilization. Potential outputs for
September 2008 and June/July 2010 were constructed with a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, which has a
well-known endpoint problem, which implies that the output gap always tends to be closed at the end of
the forecast horizon (see, for instance, Apel, Hansen, and Lindberg 1996). Potential output for July 2011 is
constructed using a new production function approach, but it retains the properties of an HP filter, and
potential productivity is still estimated with an HP filter.

Figure 9. Riksbank Policy Rate Path and Foreign Policy Rate Forecast, and Market Forward Rates, 2010
and 2011

June/July 2010
Percent

5                                                                                     5
            Repo-rate path
            Market forward rates
            Riksbank TCW policy rate
4           TCW market forward rate                                                   4



3                                                                                     3



2                                                                                     2



1                                                                                     1



0                                                                                     0
    10         11              12         13            14           15
July 2011
Percent




                                                      24
5                                                                                  5
            Repo-rate path
            Market forward rates
            Riksbank TCW policy rate
4           TCW market forward rate                                                4



3                                                                                  3



2                                                                                  2



1                                                                                  1



0                                                                                  0
    10       11           12           13     14          15         16
Sources: Reuters EcoWin, Sveriges Riksbank, and author’s calculations.
Note: Calculated using Total Competitiveness Weights.

         As discussed previously, if the shock to the Swedish economy was mainly a shock to aggregate
demand through a fall in exports, it is not clear why potential output would be much affected. Nor is it
clear why past potential output would have to be adjusted so much that 2007Q4 comes to be considered a
boom as high as the recession in 2009Q9 was deep, particularly given that in September 2008, the boom
in the previous year was considered quite moderate.38

        Figure 10 shows estimates and forecasts of U.S. potential output by the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) in September 2008, August 2010, and August 2011, together with FOMC forecasts of GDP
in June 2008, 2010, and 2011. The figure shows that the CBO does not adjust past estimates of potential
output as much as the Riksbank, nor do its estimates and forecasts look like HP-filtered series. For these
reasons, as discussed in Svensson (2011a), I have become skeptical about Riksbank estimates of potential
output and regard the gap between unemployment and the sustainable unemployment rate as a more
relevant, reliable, and transparent indicator of resource utilization as a target variable.

Figure 10. GDP, Realized and Forecast, and Potential GDP, United States
Index, 2007Q4 realized GDP = 100




                                                    25
115                                                                               115
            GDP June 2008/2010/2011, FOMC
            Potential GDP September/August 2008/2010/2011, CBO
110                                                                               110

105                                                                               105

100                                                                               100

 95                                                                               95

 90                                                                               90

 85                                                                               85

 80                                                                               80

 75                                                                               75
      00   01   02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09   10    11   12   13   14


Sources: Congressional Budget Office and FOMC.
Notes: For each date, the thick solid line represents the most recently available estimates of realized GDP,
the dashed line the FOMC’s GDP forecast (as of June 2008, June 2010, and June 2011), and the thin solid
line the CBO’s then-current estimate and forecast of potential GDP (as of September 2008, August 2010,
and August 2011).

        Online appendix A6 shows Riksbank policy alternatives in July 2011 under the assumption of
forecasts of foreign policy rates in line with market forward rates and a sustainable unemployment rate of
5.5 percent. These alternatives are also discussed in the minutes of the July 2011 meeting (Sveriges
Riksbank 2011a).

VI.B. Why Did the Swedish Economy Perform Better in 2010 than Forecast?
        As reported above, at its June/July 2010 meeting the Riksbank began to raise the repo rate, even
though inflation by the CPIF forecast was undershooting the target and the forecasts for all measures of
resource utilization were below sustainable levels. The Riksbank thus was tightening despite monetary
policy not being well balanced to begin with, and despite Qvigstad’s (2005) criterion for a well-balanced
monetary policy not being met. Under these conditions one might have expected that the real economy
would perform rather poorly. Instead, GDP growth in 2010 was more rapid than expected (figures 4 and
5). Although GDP in July 2011 was just above the precrisis level, it had increased much more than was
forecast in June/July 2010. Unemployment, although still high, had also come down more than forecast
(compare figures 2 and 7).

        Does this better-than-expected performance mean that the policy tightening that began in
June/July 2010 was appropriate ex post? Recall that when evaluating past policy, one must distinguish
between evaluation ex ante and ex post, and that evaluation ex post to a considerable extent means
assessing whether policymakers were lucky or unlucky.

        Had the Riksbank known in June/July 2010 that the Swedish economy would perform as well as it
did, would it have been consistent with its mandate to start tightening? My answer is no. A year later,


                                                             26
inflation and the inflation forecast, although higher, were still too low, and unemployment and the
unemployment forecast, although lower, were still too high. More expansionary policy in June/July 2010
would have had better results, with inflation higher and unemployment lower.

        But why did the Swedish economy perform better than anticipated in the summer of 2010?
Sveriges Riksbank (2011c) mentions higher-than-expected exports, domestic demand, and productivity. A
possible explanation, not mentioned in that report, is that actual financial conditions (that is, the actual
market term structure of interest rates) were substantially more expansionary than the intended financial
conditions (the market term structure consistent with a credible policy rate path and normal forward term
premiums). From the beginning of 2010 until July 2011, Swedish 5-year interest rates were on average
about 85 bp lower than the average consistent with a credible policy rate path and normal forward term
premiums. Thus, the Swedish economy may have benefited from the market effectively implementing a
more expansionary policy than that intended by the Riksbank. But since forecast inflation was still too low
and forecast unemployment too high, even more expansionary policy would have been better.

         This can be seen from the top panel of figure 11, which shows the actual yield curve and the yield
curve compatible with the repo rate path, both as of June/July 2010; the former represents actual financial
conditions, and the latter represents intended financial conditions; it is the yield curve that would arise if
the repo rate path was fully credible and credit and forward term premiums were normal.39 When the two
curves differ, it is the former that affects the Swedish economy, not the latter. And according to the figure,
they differed substantially: the actual 5-year interest rate at that time was slightly more than 100 bp lower
than the 5-year rate compatible with the repo rate path. A regression of the 5-year rate on a 3-month rate
indicates that a 100-bp increase in the former is equivalent to an increase in the policy rate of between 200
and 300 bp. Such an increase would have been very bad for the economy and would have negatively
affected the recovery. The krona would have appreciated substantially, reducing exports. Actual financial
conditions were thus much more expansionary than those consistent with the policy rate path.




                                                     27
Figure 11. Yield Curves, Sweden, 2010 and 2011

June/July 2010
Percent

5                                                                                    5
             Yield curve based on repo-rate path
             Yield curve based on market rates
             Yield curve based on Riksbank TCW forecast
4            Yield curve based on TCW market rates                                   4



3                                                                                    3



2                                                                                    2



1                                                                                    1



0                                                                                    0
    10         11               12              13              14        15
July 2011
Percent

5                                                                                    5
             Yield curve based on repo-rate path
             Yield curve based on market rates
             Yield curve based on Riksbank TCW forecast
4            Yield curve based on TCW market rates                                   4



3                                                                                    3



2                                                                                    2



1                                                                                    1



0                                                                                    0
    10       11            12            13               14         15    16
Sources: Reuters Ecowin, Sveriges Riksbank, and own calculations.


        In fact, the 5-year rate has been substantially below the level consistent with the policy rate path
since February 2010, and the bottom panel of figure 11 shows that in July 2011 the difference between
them was still about 100 bp. As noted above, since the beginning of 2010, the difference has been on
average almost 85 bp, equivalent to a reduction in the policy rate path of about 175 to 250 bp. Had the 5-

                                                               28
year rate been on average 85 points higher, the krona would, all else equal, have appreciated substantially,
and the recovery would probably have come to a halt.

         As mentioned, the effect of lower long-term rates has been discussed at length in the United
States, in connection with the discussion of the effects of QE. A common view is that QE in total may
have reduced 10-year rates by around 50 bp or more, primarily by lowering term premiums. According to
several analyses (Chung and others 2011, Cúrdia and Ferraro 2011, Fuhrer and Olivei 2011, Yellen
2011b), this may have had significantly positive effects on the U.S. economy and prevented
unemployment from being even higher and inflation from being even lower. Using a factor of 4 (as in
Bernanke 2011a), a 50-bp-lower 10-year rate is equivalent to a federal funds rate reduction of about 200
bp, comparable to the range of 175 to 250 bp cited above for the repo rate.

VII. Conclusions
I have started from the observation that in the summer of 2010 the Federal Reserve and Riksbank forecasts
for inflation and unemployment were quite similar. The forecasts for inflation were below the Federal
Reserve’s mandate-consistent rate and the Riksbank’s inflation target, and the forecasts for unemployment
were above the countries’ sustainable rates. Given the mandates of the Federal Reserve and the Riksbank,
such a situation would seem to call for more expansionary policy, if possible. But the Federal Reserve and
the Riksbank chose dramatically different policies. The Federal Reserve maintained a minimum policy
rate, started to communicate possible future easing, and in the fall launched QE2, while the Riksbank
started a period of rapid policy tightening. I have examined the arguments against policy easing by the
Federal Reserve and the arguments for policy tightening by the Riksbank and have found them
unconvincing. Thus, the Federal Reserve appears to have followed its mandate in the summer of 2010, and
subsequent adverse economic shocks contributed to weak performance of the U.S. economy. In contrast,
the Riksbank appears to have deviated from its mandate, but favorable circumstances contributed to an
economic outcome with better performance than might have been expected based on policy choices.

         The Riksbank’s policy rate path has been very high compared with Swedish market interest rates
and foreign market interest rates. As a contributing explanation of the Riksbank’s decision, I have pointed
to a possible bias in the Riksbank’s forecast of foreign policy rates, which is much higher than foreign
implied forward rates. This effectively implies an assumption and a forecast of the foreign term structure
of interest rates much above the actual one. I have also argued that the Riksbank’s estimates and forecasts
of potential output in recent years imply a bias toward estimates and forecasts of resource utilization that
are too high. The gap between actual unemployment and an estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate
is a more reliable and transparent indicator of resource utilization. Ambiguity regarding whether to target
stable GDP growth or a stable level of resource utilization may also help explain the choice of a high
policy rate path.

        A year later, in July 2011, the Swedish economy had performed better than expected, whereas the
U.S. economy had performed worse than expected. Sweden’s good performance may largely be explained
by the market implementing much easier financial conditions than what was consistent with the
Riksbank’s policy rate path. There were also upward revisions of GDP data. This better-than-expected
performance does not mean that the Riksbank’s tightening was in line with its mandate ex post;
performance would have been better with easier policy and financial conditions. The poorer U.S.
performance depends on factors other than monetary policy, including fiscal policy problems (too large a


                                                     29
subject to address here), a slow recovery of the housing market, and substantial downward revisions of
GDP data. Performance would have been even worse without the Federal Reserve’s policy easing. Thus,
the Federal Reserve appears to have followed its mandate in the summer of 2010, and subsequent adverse
economic shocks contributed to weak performance of the U.S. economy. In contrast, the Riksbank
appears to have deviated from its mandate, but favorable circumstances contributed to an economic
outcome with better performance than might have been expected based on policy choices.

         What broader conclusions can be drawn from these examples of practical monetary policy? One is
that a simple and transparent monetary policy framework has great benefits. The dual mandate of the
Federal Reserve and the flexible inflation targeting of the Riksbank provide such frameworks. Both boil
down to “forecast targeting,” that is, setting the policy rate and choosing a policy rate path (and managing
the central bank’s balance sheet) so as to best stabilize the forecast of inflation around the inflation
objective and the forecast of resource utilization around a sustainable level. For the framework to be more
precise and operational, an inflation index, a measure of resource utilization, and a measure of stability
need to be specified. It is important not to confuse measures of resource utilization that are to be used as
indicators of inflationary pressures with those that are to be used as target variables. For the latter purpose,
the gap between the actual and the sustainable unemployment rate seems more relevant, reliable, and
transparent than the alternatives. I am convinced that the framework is more effective if only one inflation
index and only one measure of resource utilization are chosen. When multiple measures are used, the
framework becomes more opaque and accountability becomes difficult to enforce: policymakers can often
find at least one or two that are close to the desired level and thus can motivate quite different policies.

         Such a simple and transparent framework is a great help to policymakers in making the right
decision and motivating this decision. Publishing the central bank’s forecasts of inflation and resource
utilization also makes external evaluation easier and more effective and makes it possible to hold powerful
and independent policymakers accountable for their decisions. The present assessment of Federal Reserve
and Riksbank monetary policy could not have been written without the public availability of their
forecasts.

         Finally, I remain quite suspicious of arguments that a lack of instruments, doubts about policy
ineffectiveness, or other concerns are reasons why one should not try to best stabilize the forecasts of
inflation and resource utilization around their desired levels. Such arguments often seem too vague and
lacking in substance to be convincing.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by the
other members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board or the Riksbank’s staff. I am grateful for helpful
comments from and discussions with Hanna Armelius, Claes Berg, Alan Blinder, Bernard Dumas,
Karolina Ekholm, Jon Faust, Martin Flodén, Gabriela Guibourg, Jesper Hansson, Donald Kohn, Stefan
Laséen, Andrew Levin, Jesper Lindé, Edward Nelson, Bengt Pettersson, Raghuram Rajan, Ulf
Söderström, Ingvar Strid, Staffan Viotti, Karl Walentin, Jonathan Wright, Janet Yellen, my discussants
Randall Kroszner and David Wessel and other participants in the Brookings Papers conference, and the
editors. I thank, without implication, Riksbank staff members Magnus Åhl, Björn Andersson, and Mikael
Apel for contributions to the paper. From May 2007, I serve a 6-year term as deputy governor of the
Riksbank and one of the six members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board.



                                                      30
References
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2011. “Financial Intermediation and Monetary Economics.” In
       Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3A, edited by Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael
       Woodford, chapter 12. Amsterdam.
Apel, Mikael., Jan Hansen, and Hans Lindberg. 1996. “Potential Output and Output Gap.” Sveriges
       Riksbank Quarterly Review 1996:3: 24-35.
Assenmacher-Wesche, Katrin, and Stefan Gerlach. 2010. “Monetary Policy and Financial Imbalances:
       Facts and Fiction.” Economic Policy (July): 437-82.
Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati. 2010. “Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great
       Recession—Estimating the Impact of a Compression in the Yield Spread at The Zero Lower
       Bound.” European Central Bank Working Paper no. 1258. Frankfurt: European Central Bank.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2010a. “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy.” Speech at the Federal Reserve
       Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
_________. 2010b. “Monetary Policy Objectives and Tools in a Low-Inflation Environment.” Speech at
       the Revisiting Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment Conference, Federal Reserve
       Bank of Boston, October 15.
_________. 2011a. “Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” testimony before the
       Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 13.
_________. 2011b. “Transcript of Chairman Bernanke’s Press Conference, April 27, 2011.” Washington:
       Federal Reserve Board.
_________. 2011c. “Transcript of Chairman Bernanke’s Press Conference, June 22, 2011.” Washington:
       Federal Reserve Board.
_________. 2011c. “The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and Practice.” Speech
at the 56th Economic Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 18.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Galí. 2010. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Model
       with Unemployment.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (April 2010): 1-30.
Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2011. “Have We
       Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Working Paper no.
       2011-01. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (January).
Claussen, Carl Andreas, and Øistein Røisland. 2010. “The Discursive Dilemma in Monetary Policy.”
       Working Paper no. 240. Stockholm: Sveriges Riksbank.
Cúrdia, Vasco, and Andrea Ferrero. 2011. “How Much Will the Second Round of Large-Scale Asset
       Purchases Affect Inflation and Unemployment?” Liberty Street Economics (blog), Federal
       Reserve Bank of New York (May). http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2011/05/how-


                                                  31
       much-will-the-second-round-of-large-scale-asset-purchases-affect-inflation-and-
       unemployment.html.
D’Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson. 2011. “The Federal
       Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effects.” Working paper.
       Washington: Federal Reserve Board.
D’Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King. 2011. “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury
       Purchases.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series no. 2010-52, revised. Washington: Federal
       Reserve Board (April).
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2011. “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest
       Rate Policy.” Working paper. University of Chicago.
Evans, Charles L. 2011. “The Fed’s Dual Mandate Responsibilities and Challenges Facing U.S. Monetary
       Policy.” Speech at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, September 7.
Federal Open Market Committee. 2010a. “Press Release.” Washington: Federal Reserve Board (June 23).
_________. 2010b. “Summary of Economic Projections.” Washington: Federal Reserve Board (June).
_________. 2011a. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22, 2011.” Washington:
       Federal Reserve Board.
_________. 2011b. “Statement.” (June 22). Washington: Federal Reserve Board.
_________. 2011c. “Summary of Economic Projections.” Washington: Federal Reserve Board (June).
Finansinspektionen. 2010. “Den svenska bolånemarknaden och bankernas kreditgivning” [The Swedish
       mortgage market and the banks’ granting of credit]. Stockholm (February).
Forslund, Anders. 2008. “Den svenska jämviktsarbetslösheten—en översikt” [The Swedish equilibrium
       unemployment rate—an overview]. Report to the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council. Stockholm:
       Finanspolitiska Rådet.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and Giovanni P. Olivei. 2011. “The Estimated Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal
       Reserve’s Large-Scale Treasury Purchase Program.” Public Policy Briefs no. 11-2. Federal
       Reserve Bank of Boston.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack. 2011. “Large-Scale Asset Purchases
       by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy
       Review 17 (May): 41-59.
Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu. 2011. “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy
       Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment.” Working Paper no. 16956. Cambridge, Mass.:
       National Bureau of Economic Research (April; also forthcoming in Journal of Money, Credit and
       Banking).



                                                  32
Kohn, Donald L. 2006. “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices.” Speech at "Monetary Policy: A Journey from
        Theory to Practice," a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing,
        Frankfurt, March 16.
_________. 2008. “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited.” Speech at the Cato Institute's 26th
       Annual Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, November 19.
_________. 2011. “Oral Evidence.” Presented to the Treasury Committee, U.K. House of Commons, May
       17.
_________. Forthcoming. “John Taylor Rules.” From the Great Moderation to the Great Deviation: A
       Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, edited by Evan Koenig and Robert
       Leeson. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
       Interest Rates.” Working paper. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University (June).
Ministry of Finance. 2011. “Hur ska utvecklingen av arbetsmarknadens funktionssätt bedömas?” [How to
       assess the development of the labor market’s way of functioning?] Report from the Economic
       Department. Stockholm. www.sweden.gov.se/sb/d/2062.
National Institute of Economic Research. 2010. The Swedish Economy June 2010. Stockholm.
_________. 2011a. The Swedish Economy March 2011. Stockholm.
_________. 2011b. Wage Formation in Sweden 2011. Stockholm.
Posen, Adam S. 2011. “Not that ‘70’s Show: Why Stagflation is Unlikely.” Speech at the University of
       Aberdeen Business School, June 27.
Qvigstad, Jan F. 2005. “When Does an Interest Rate Path ‘Look Good’? Criteria for an Appropriate Future
       Interest Rate Path—A Practician’s Approach.” Norges Bank Staff Memo no. 5/06. Oslo.
Reis, Ricardo. 2009. “Interpreting the Unconventional U.S. Monetary Policy of 2007-09.” BPEA (Fall):
       119-65.
Rudebusch, Glenn. 2011. “The Fed’s Interest Rate Risk.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
       Economic Letter 2011-11, www.frbsf.org.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 2001. “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a
       Liquidity Trap.” Monetary and Economic Studies 19, no. S-1: (February): 277-312.
_________. 2004. “Commentary” (on Laurence H. Meyer, “Practical Problems and Obstacles to Inflation
       Targeting”), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 84(4) (July/August): 161-164.
_________. 2010a. “Policy Expectations and Policy Evaluations: The Role of Transparency and
       Communication.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review no. 1: 43-78.
_________. 2010b. “Some Problems with Swedish Monetary Policy and Possible Solutions.” Speech at
       the Fastighetsvärlden conference, Stockholm, November 24.


                                                   33
_________. 2011a. “For a Better Monetary Policy: Focus on Inflation and Unemployment.” Speech at
           Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, March 8.
_________. 2011b. “Inflation Targeting.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B, edited by
           Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, chapter 22. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
_________. Forthcoming. “Evaluating Monetary Policy.” In From the Great Moderation to the Great
           Deviation: A Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, edited by Evan Koenig
           and Robert Leeson. Hoover Institution Press.
Sveriges Riksbank. 2010a. Financial Stability Report 2010:2. Stockholm.
_________. 2010b. “Minutes of the Executive Board’s Policy Meeting,” no. 3. Stockholm (June 30).
_________. 2010c. “Minutes of the Executive Board’s Policy Meeting,” no. 5. Stockholm (October 25).
_________. 2010d. Monetary Policy in Sweden. Stockholm (June).
_________. 2011a. “Minutes of the Executive Board’s Policy Meeting,” no. 3. Stockholm (July 4).
_________. 2011b. “Repo Rate Raised by 0.25 Percentage Points to 2.0 Per Cent.” Stockholm (July 5).
_________. 2011c. Material for Assessing Monetary Policy 2010. Stockholm .
_________. 2011d. The Riksbank’s Inquiry into the Risks in the Swedish Housing Market. Stockholm.
Swanson, Eric T. 2011. “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist
           and Its Implications for QE2.” BPEA (Spring): 151-88.
Woodford, Michael. 2007. “The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy.” Journal of
           Economic Perspectives 21, no. 4: 3-24.
Wright, Jonathan H. 2011. “What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero
           Lower Bound?” Working Paper no. 17154. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
           Research.
Yellen, Janet L. 2011a. “Assessing Potential Financial Imbalances in an Era of Accommodative Monetary
           Policy.” Speech at the 2011 International Conference: Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary
           Policy, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, June 1.
_________. 2011b. “The Federal Reserve's Asset Purchase Program.” Speech at the Allied Social Science
           Associations Annual Meeting, Denver, January 8.
_________. 2011c. “Unconventional Monetary Policy and Central Bank Communications.” Speech at the
           University of Chicago Booth School of Business U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York,
           February 25.



*
    A previous version of this paper was prepared for the Fall 2011 issue of Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.




                                                           34
1
  The reference to Pippi Longstocking (a fictional character, known for her unusual strength, in children’s books by
the Swedish author Astrid Lindgren) was made by OECD Secretary-General Angel Gurría in a speech on January 20,
2011. References to a tiger economy were, according to media reports, made by the British Chancellor of the
Exchequer George Osborne and Swedish Minister of Finance Anders Borg.
2
  For instance, until January 2012 the Federal Reserve’s mandate-consistent inflation rate had to be inferred from the
Federal Open Market Committee participants’ longer-term inflation forecasts, whereas the Riksbank has an explicit
inflation target; the Federal Reserve’s Greenbook and Bluebook (now replaced by the Tealbook) are published with a
5-year lag, whereas the Riksbank publishes an extensive Monetary Policy Report or a shorter Monetary Policy
Update (both of which also include a policy rate path) after each policy meeting; and the Federal Reserve’s minutes
are nonattributed but attributed transcripts are published with a 5-year lag, whereas the Riksbank’s minutes are
attributed. In January 2012, the Federal Reserve announced an inflation objective of 2 percent and published policy
path charts.
3
  Kohn (2007), Svensson (2011c), and Woodford (2007) explain why forecast targeting is both a better way of
conducting policy and a better description of actual policy than following an instrument rule such as the Taylor rule.
4
  Being a central banker, in line with central bank custom I will refrain from commenting on the current and
prospective policies of other central banks and therefore refrain from commenting on Federal Reserve policy in the
summer of 2011 and later.
5
  Online appendixes for papers in this volume may be found on the Brookings Papers webpage at
http://www.brookings.edu/economics/bpea.aspx. Those for this paper may also be found at the author’s website,
www.larseosvensson.net.
6
  In response to a question about an explicit inflation target for the Federal Reserve at the press conference on June
22, 2011, Chairman Bernanke explained why an inflation target is consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate
(Bernanke 2011c, pp. 9-10).
7
  As expressed in Sveriges Riksbank (2010d, p. 5), “the Riksbank, in addition to stabilising inflation around the
inflation target, [is] also striving to stabilise production and employment around long-term sustainable paths.” This
sentence is followed by the sentence “This does not mean that the Riksbank neglects the fact that the inflation target
is the overriding objective,” in line with the Riksbank’s “hierarchical” mandate (consistent with the statutes of the
European System of Central Banks) that makes price stability the primary objective of monetary policy. As discussed
in Svensson (2004), there is no fundamental difference between the Riksbank’s hierarchical and the Federal
Reserve’s dual mandate, once we distinguish first and second moments, that is, means and variances. The
hierarchical mandate applies to the first moment, the unconditional mean. When it comes to the first moment, there is
an explicit inflation target (an inflation rate of 2 percent per year) that is chosen and enforced by the Riksbank. There
is no explicit target that is chosen for resource utilization. Instead, what is the highest sustainable resource utilization
is determined by the properties of the economy and structural policies and is estimated by the Riksbank. Thus, the
Riksbank has an independently chosen target for inflation but no independently chosen target for resource utilization.
For the second moments, the variability of inflation and resource utilization, the Riksbank has a dual mandate in that
it aims to stabilize both inflation around the chosen target and resource utilization around the estimated highest
sustainable level.
8
   If the forecast is not close to its target or sustainable level at the end of the forecast period, the horizon of the mean
squared gap can be extended, using any information about the forecast beyond the forecast horizon or by assuming a
gradual return to the target or sustainable level. For details on mean squared gaps, see Svensson (2011c).
9
   Several years ago, when I was still a big fan of the output gap, I had a discussion with Alan Blinder about which of
the many concepts of potential output was most suitable. He strongly recommended the unemployment gap instead,
on the grounds of simplicity and smaller measurement errors. I have obviously come around to his view.
10
   Blanchard and Galí (2010) examine a New Keynesian model with labor-market frictions, unemployment, and real-
wage rigidity. They derive a quadratic approximation to the welfare of a representative household and show that the
relevant unemployment gap is the gap between the unemployment rate and the sustainable unemployment rate (the
steady-state unemployment rate). They also derive a Phillips curve where the short-run NAIRU (the unemployment
rate that implies constant inflation) differs from the sustainable unemployment rate.
11
   The “participants” at FOMC meetings are all the members of the Board of Governors and all the Federal Reserve
Bank presidents. The “members” are the voting participants only. One might argue that the relevant forecasts are
those of the voters only, but their separate forecasts are not available. The majority projections for growth, inflation,
and unemployment need not always be consistent with the majority projection for monetary policy; see Claussen and
Røisland (2010). Here I abstract from such “discursive dilemmas.”


                                                             35
12
   In recent years, large changes in the Riksbank’s policy rates have led to large differences between the CPI, which
includes the effect of varying mortgage rates on housing costs, and the CPIF, which does not. Most Executive Board
members therefore consider stabilizing CPIF inflation to be more relevant under current circumstances, and the
Riksbank has communicated this.
13
   Appropriately calibrated, more expansionary policy could have shifted the early part of the Riksbank forecast up
toward the target without overshooting at the end of the forecast period. Even if there were some overshooting at the
end of the forecast period and beyond, this would affect the mean squared gap very little, since the forecast would
still be close to the target.
14
   This could be rounded to 5, using unbiased rounding, but all projections outside this interval are above the interval.
Therefore, I here depart from unbiased rounding and round the median and the sustainable unemployment rate up to
5.1 percent.
15
   Ekholm’s dissent cited “the increased uncertainty prevailing as regards the sovereign debt problems in the euro
area… [and] the relatively low inflationary pressure.”
In my dissent I “advocated a repo-rate path with a repo rate of 0.25 per cent through the fourth quarter of 2010, and
thereafter a gradual return to the repo-rate path of the main scenario” on the grounds that “such a repo-rate path
results in a better outcome for both resource utilisation and inflation, with both lower unemployment and CPIF
inflation closer to the target.”
16
   According to the minutes of the December 2011 meeting, the FOMC will at the January 2012 meeting start
publishing information about participants’ projections of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate and as
well as qualitative information regarding participants’ expectations for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
17
   In September 2011 the FOMC introduced a new Operation Twist, in which purchases of longer-maturity bonds are
financed not by increased reserves but by sales of shorter-maturity Treasury bills and bonds, keeping the overall
balance sheet constant. See Swanson (2011) on the original Operation Twist.
18
   The Riksbank is unique, as far as I know, in having detailed attributed minutes (since the June 2007 meeting, my
first policy meeting), so it is possible to identify board members with the different arguments. This is not done here.
19
   The revision argument is further discussed in Svensson (2010b).
20
   See Sveriges Riksbank (2010a, 2011d) and Finansinspektionen (2010).
21
   See Svensson (2010b) and Sveriges Riksbank (2010a, 2011d) and more recent Financial Stability Reports for
further details.
22
   See Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010), Sveriges Riksbank (2011d), and references cited in Svensson
(2010b).
23
   There is a general point about conditional forecasts that some think is trivial while others think it is not (see online
appendix A4 for a detailed example). With a longer horizon, the conditional forecast approaches the unconditional
mean. This means that the unconditional variance of the conditional forecast falls towards zero as the horizon
increases. In contrast, the conditional variance of the outcome (which is the same as the conditional variance of the
forecast error) rises toward the unconditional variance as the horizon increases. Thus, a lack of information beyond a
certain horizon just shows up in the conditional forecast being closer to the unconditional mean. I find that this
insight helps a lot. Much of the debate about the forecast is about how much relevant information we have. In
practice, policymakers normally have very little information beyond the forecast horizon, in particular about the
impact of the policy rate on the outcome. This means that we should be wary of acting on information that we do not
have (about tail risk that is unrelated – or loosely related – to the policy rate, say). But we should still do the best we
can with the information we have (and try to get more useful information if possible).
24
   Plots of commercial banks’ leverage against the policy rate show no systematic relation between leverage and the
policy rate.
25
   Furthermore, the optimal adjustment of risk when real rates of return fall depends on the precise preferences for
expected real rates of return and risk, as is revealed by the simplest mean-variance analysis when the investment line
is shifted down. “Search for yield” regardless of the risk is difficult to understand in such mean-variance analysis,
other than as the result of an unfortunate and ill-conceived unconditional promise of a particular rate of return, which
regulators should prohibit.
26
   Adrian and Shin (2011) and Diamond and Rajan (2011) also do not contain the frictions, such as sticky prices, that
allow meaningful modeling of the effects of monetary policy.
27
   Yet another argument, which I do not discuss below, is that tight money is not the problem for the U.S. economy,
and therefore easier policy is not the solution. I fail to understand this argument. If the economy is affected by
negative shocks independent of monetary policy, it seems that easier monetary policy would remedy the situation, if


                                                            36
easier policy is possible. The best thing would be to directly undo the negative shocks, but if this is not possible,
easier monetary policy is an obvious second best.
28
   Calvo-style price-setting firms are assumed to index prices to π* when not setting the optimal price.
29
     Note that equation 2 incorporates the central bank’s forecast of private sector inflation expectations,    t  1|t  ,t , as
a separate variable. This means that private sector inflation expectations need not be assumed to be rational, and the
central bank’s forecast for private sector inflation expectations can differ from its forecast for inflation. In the special
case of rational expectations and symmetric information, the Phillips curve can be solved forward, private sector
inflation expectations are endogenous and equal to the central bank forecast, and the inflation forecast depends only
on the forecast or expectations of the output gap and the cost-push shock.
30
   See, for example, Baumeister and Benati (2010), Chung and others (2011), D’Amico and others (2011), D’Amico
and King (2011), Cúrdia and Ferrero (2011), Fuhrer and Olivei (2011), Gagnon, Raskin and Remache (2011),
Hamilton and Wu (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Swanson (2011), and Wright (2011).
31
   See Chung and others (2011, figure 10), for an estimate of the separate effect of QE2 (“phase 3”).
32
   In the June 2011 minutes (FOMC 2011a), the FOMC provided the following clarification: “In the discussion of
inflation in the statement, members decided to reference inflation – meaning overall inflation—rather than
underlying inflation or inflation trends, in order to be clear that the Committee's objective is the level of overall
inflation in the medium term.” This indicates that the FOMC puts little weight on developments of PCE inflation in
the short term.
33
   The median of the participants’ projection of the longer-run unemployment rate falls in the interval 5.35 to 5.55
percent, with a midpoint of 5.45 percent (FOMC 2011c). I round this to 5.4 percent. [Is there a reason you broke
from the standard here and didn’t round to 5.5? LS: Unless there is a special reason, I round to the nearest even
number. Always rounding up introduces a (small) bias.]
34
   Estimates of the sustainable unemployment rate are included in the longer Swedish versions of the publications.
35
   In August 2011, after the outlook had deteriorated significantly during the summer, the FOMC increased the
extended period and announced that it anticipated that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. In September 2011 it introduced a new Operation Twist.
36
   As stated in the press release (Sveriges Riksbank 2011b), we “preferred a repo rate equal to 1.75 per cent and a
repo rate path that first rises slowly to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2012 and then rises faster to about 3.8 per
cent by the end of the forecast period. This is motivated by [our] assessment that the Report’s forecasts for foreign
policy rates and Swedish resource utilization are both too high. [Our] repo rate path would imply CPIF inflation
closer to 2 per cent and a faster reduction of unemployment towards a longer-run sustainable rate.” Online appendix
A8 provides more details on why we preferred that path.
37
   The implied forward rates have been adjusted by a forward term premium of one basis point per month. The
curves have been extended beyond the standard three-year horizon by me.
38
   In figure 4, compare the large gap between 2007Q4 GDP and potential GPD as of June/July 2010 with the small
gap between the 2007Q4 GDP and potential GDP as of September 2008.
39
   Recall that expected future short rates equal the forward rate less the forward term premium. Thus, with normal
positive forward term premiums (such as the standard 1 bp per month), market expectations of future short rates are a
bit below the forward rate curve. When forward term premiums vary and are substantial, one needs to treat market
expectations of future short rates and the term structure of interest rates separately.




                                                             37
