NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESOLVING DEBT OVERHANG:
POLITICAL CONSTRAINTS IN THE AFTERMATH OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Atif R. Mian
Amir Sufi
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 17831
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17831

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We are grateful to Matilde Bombardini and Steve Davis for critical discussion and to participants to
the American Economic Association 2012 meetings presentation for their comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Atif R. Mian, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Resolving Debt Overhang: Political Constraints in the Aftermath of Financial Crises
Atif R. Mian, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 17831
February 2012
JEL No. G01,G33,G38,H1
ABSTRACT
Debtors bear the brunt of a decline in asset prices associated with financial crises and policies aimed
at partial debt relief may be warranted to boost growth in the midst of crises. Drawing on the US experience
during the Great Recession of 2008-09 and historical evidence in a large panel of countries, we explore
why the political system may fail to deliver such policies. We find that during the Great Recession
creditors were able to use the political system more effectively to protect their interests through bailouts.
More generally we show that politically countries become more polarized and fractionalized following
financial crises. This results in legislative stalemate, making it less likely that crises lead to meaningful
macroeconomic reforms.

Atif R. Mian
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
atif@haas.berkeley.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Canada
and NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca

I. Introduction
Financial crises lead to severe economic downturns because of their asymmetric impact
on debtors.1 The reason behind this empirical observation is that most external finance in the
world is raised through non-contingent debt. Hence the amount that debtors owe to creditors is
not made contingent on the aggregate state of the economy. Consequently, in the event of a
financial crisis such as an economy-wide decline in asset prices, the brunt of the losses are borne
by debtors. A reduction in the net worth of borrowers can lead to a reduction in real activity via
either the investment or consumption channel.2
There is substantial evidence that policies aimed at better ex-post risk sharing between
debtors and creditors after a financial crisis lead to superior economic outcomes. For example,
Kroszner (1998) shows that large-scale debt relief related to repudiation of gold-indexation in
debt contracts benefitted both equity and debt holders of firms. Countries that left the Gold
Standard earlier in the Great Depression--which resulted in inflation and reduced debt burdens
for nominal debt contracts--escaped the downturn more quickly (Eichengreen and Temin, 2000).
We begin with the observation that there are a number of scenarios in which an ex-post
transfer of resources--in the form of debt forgiveness, debt moratoria, or inflation-- from
creditors to debtors in response to a financial crisis is welfare improving.3 However, such

1

The evidence goes back to at least Fisher (1933), and supporting evidence has been found in Mishkin (1978), King
(1994), Olney (1999), Koo (2009), Mian and Sufi (2010, 2011a, 2011b), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), and Glick and
Lansing (2010). Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011) study 200 recessions in 14 advanced countries from 1870 to
2008 and show a very strong relation between the ex ante increase in private debt and the ex post severity of the
recession.
2
For example, Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) on investment and Eggertsson and
Krugman (2011) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) on consumption.
3
This of course is a strong assumption, but we feel it is justified given the substantial empirical and theoretical
evidence discussed above. A very large number of commentators have argued that debt forgiveness would give a
boost to growth. See: Kenneth Rogoff
(http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Understanding_the_Second_Great_Contraction_An_interview_with_Kenneth_
Rogoff_2871 ), the editorial board of Bloomberg (http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-09-06/for-the-u-seconomy-the-real-slam-dunk-answer-is-debt-forgiveness-view.html ), and Nouriel Roubini (http://www.projectsyndicate.org/commentary/roubini42/English )

1

transfers can only be approved and mediated by the political process. For example, Bolton and
Rosenthal (2002) build a model in which ex-post debt forgiveness is optimal and must be
approved via a voting mechanism. In this paper we investigate if such political mechanisms are
feasible.
Even if partial debt forgiveness is option in the aftermath of a financial crisis, creditors
are going to fight any such policy. There is thus a likely political tug-of-war between creditors
and debtors in the aftermath of a financial crisis.4 We investigate the political economy of the
creditor-debtor conflict using data from both the United States and other countries.
Relative to European countries, the US has more lenient bankruptcy regulations allowing
for a greater sharing of risk when a negative aggregate shock occurs. There is some evidence that
for a given decline in house prices and a given initial leverage ratio, indebted households in the
US are more likely to declare default and partially relieve their debt burdens compared to
households in Europe. Nonetheless, in all of these countries, debtors are much more severely
impacted than creditors in a financial crisis.
We investigate the political conflict between debtors and creditors using historical crosscountry data on financial crises, as well as data from the recent US financial crisis. Mian, Sufi
and Trebbi (2010a) show that both debtors (homeowners with mortgage debt outstanding) and
creditors (shareholders and creditors in US financial institutions) actively lobbied their respective
legislators to push for bailout legislation that would transfer resources from tax-payers to
themselves. While both debtors and creditors were successful in getting their respective
4

While the analysis of this paper mostly focuses on the clash between creditors and debtors in the aftermath of a
financial crisis, another interesting topic is the alignment of creditors, debtors, and political facilitators (e.g.
Congress) in the expansion of debt that leads to financial crises. These are recurring observations. Romer and
Weingast (1991) in their analysis of the buildup to the Savings and Loans crisis discuss the role of constituent
interests and Congress in facilitating S&L gambling for resurrection through sparse and ineffective legislative and
regulatory effort. Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2010b) present similar evidence for the 2000-2006 housing boom. Nunez
and Rosenthal (2004) discuss bankruptcy reform in the early 2000’s.

2

legislation passed in 2008, the mortgage relief legislation desired by debtors was smaller in
magnitude and was a failure in terms of implementation. In contrast, the bailout of US financial
institutions was implemented quickly with a massive injection of government funds into banks.
The success in implementation of the financial bailout contrasts sharply with the ultimate
impotence of the mortgage relief legislation. This is despite the fact that low net worth
homeowners with mortgages bore the brunt of the financial shock. Using data from the Federal
Reserve's Flow of Funds, we show that the collapse in house prices was much more dramatic
than the decline in financial wealth. Thus while there was an active political tug of war between
creditors and debtors, creditors were more effective in protecting their interests. A possible
politico-economic explanation comes from collective action theory (Olson, 1965). Collective
action is predicated on the fact that few, highly politically organized banks should be more
effective than millions of unorganized mortgage holders.
Looking at historical cross-country data on financial crises, there is some evidence that
reforms aimed at reducing creditor rights are more likely to take place in the aftermath of
banking and currency crises. In fact most of the changes in creditor rights, excluding ex-Soviet
bloc transition economies, in the last three decades have been in the direction of reducing
creditor rights. Yet such changes are not very common and mostly involve changes in the
bankruptcy code, which fail to significantly alter the debtor-creditor distribution of net wealth in
the event of a financial crisis.
Political polarization may help to explain why legislation addressing ex-post risk sharing
after a financial crisis is difficult to pass. We find robust evidence that politics after a crisis is
plagued by polarized interests. Using the Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, 2011) comprehensive data
set on financial crises, we show that banking, currency, inflation, or debt crises lead to greater

3

ideological polarization in society, greater fractionalization of the legislative body, and a
decrease in the size of the working majority of the ruling coalition. The size of the governing
coalition shrinks after almost any type of crisis (banking, currency, or inflation crises); at the
same time, political fragmentation increases. These novel stylized facts have crucial implications
for the study of macroeconomic response to crises.
Weaker governments mean political stalemate. Stronger opposition and more fragmented
legislatures constrain the implementation of reforms of any kind. This endogenous response of
political preferences and alliances in the face of financial crises may lead to political gridlock
and makes it harder to achieve compromise on macroeconomic intervention and bailouts. The
post-housing crisis US congressional gridlock of 2010-2011 appears the norm, not the exception.
In general, it is not theoretically obvious why individuals polarize systematically in the
aftermath of a financial crisis. Perhaps large negative shocks change radically voters’ beliefs
about what good policy is. However, even abstracting from policy uncertainty, one can
conjecture that creditors and debtors naturally polarize in the aftermath of a financial crisis.
Debtors become insolvent precisely at the time creditors are more in need of seeing their
outstanding credit is serviced. In fact, the same write-off that can be inconsequential to a creditor
during an expansion may prove lethal in bad times.
The increase in polarization and political gridlock in the aftermath of financial crises is
crucial in evaluating specific ‘mechanism design’ solutions after a financial crisis. For example,
Bolton and Rosenthal (2002) argue that in the event an economy suffers collectively from a debt
overhang problem, as was the case in the Great Depression and the Cotton Panic of 1819,
legislatures may be relied upon to intervene and pass legislation calling for collective debt relief.

4

Evidence of this type of response is available. Alston (1984) studies the case of the role of farm
foreclosure rates during the Depression and its importance as driver of state-wide debt moratoria.
However, our empirical findings suggest that relying on a voting mechanism to
renegotiate financial contracts at a national level may not be feasible. More generally, voting
outcomes are not necessarily driven by what is in the national economic interest. Instead, voting
and political debate are driven by a complex interaction of shifting voter preferences, strategic
lobbying, and special interest politics. For instance, the strategic delay of efficient reform with
the goal of shifting costs of implementation on political counterparties has been documented
both theoretically (Alesina and Drazen, 1991; Drazen and Grilli, 1993) and empirically (Alesina
et al., 2006). It may thus be better to think of alternative mechanism design arrangements to
resolve collective debt overhang problems. We discuss some of these possibilities in conclusion.
Secondly, higher political polarization means higher thresholds to achieve policy support. This
implies that of two different constituencies struggling for government support, possibly on equal
merits but with different degrees of political organization (e.g. organized big banks versus
diffused mortgage holders), only the politically organized group will get the bailout. From this
selective intervention, additional economic inequality and political polarization may ensue,
compounding and amplifying the initial political effects of the crisis.
This paper is related to recent political events in the aftermath of the global financial
crisis. Many observers have commented on the heightened gridlock in politics in both
Washington and Europe.5 Our results suggest that political gridlock and polarization is more

5

"[...] the 2012 election will be the most sharply ideological in at least a generation". Niall Stanage, 10/31/11 The
Hill, http://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/190621-one-nation-two-camps-the-most-ideological-election-in-ageneration ; "these growing socio-economic gaps are contributing to the rising polarization of our politics and
declining trust in government---developments that will make it even more difficult to forge agreements on the
policies we'll need to get out of this deep hole." William A. Galston, 07/27/11 Brookings,
http://www.brookings.edu/opinions/2011/0727_debt_debate_galston.aspx

5

common in the aftermath of financial crises. This is in contrast to research advocating crisis as
potential mechanism for unlocking efficient macroeconomic reform (Drazen and Grilli, 1993;
Drazen and Easterly, 2001). Indeed, our evidence on post-crisis political stalemate appears a
reasonable candidate in explaining the more protracted and deeper nature of downturns after
financial crises, an empirical regularity discussed in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Reinhart
and Reinhart (2010).
The large distributional shifts as a consequence of a debt-induced financial crisis raise the
stakes for everyone in the political process. We should not be surprised with increased
polarization and conflict between the “haves” and “have-nots”. Such polarization may manifest
itself within countries, e.g., the recent wave of Occupy Wall Street protests in the United States.
Polarization, and even conflict, can also manifest itself across countries, e.g., the polarization of
positions on fiscal stance between Germany and Southern Europe in the fall of 2011 or the
ideological polarization ensuing crises in 1920s’ Europe and the Great Depression that ultimately
led to World War II.
Finally, this is a consequential finding also in explaining persistent instability after
financial crises, for instance in terms of triggering sovereign debt ‘secondary’ crises.
International financial markets are often sensitive to the lack of sound ex-post political response
at the country level, which may factor into risk premia. This lack of response, however, follows
naturally from the political polarization we document.

II. Debtors and Creditors after a Financial Crisis
In this section, we explain why the conflict of interest between debtors and creditors is
central to our understanding of why financial crises lead to severe economic downturns. We

6

show how shocks to economic conditions and asset prices are amplified by debt, and we explore
the mechanisms in place meant to deal with the asymmetric losses imposed on debtors when
asset prices and economic conditions collapse. We argue that the existing mechanisms are often
ill-suited for resolving the financial crisis, and conclude that there is a meaningful role for
political intervention to impose a more even distribution of the losses among creditors and
debtors.
A. The Economic Cost of Financial Crises
There is a very large literature devoted to the question of how financial crises lead to
economic disruptions. The common theme in this literature is that the distribution of shocks
between debtors and creditors matters. Since a negative shock is primarily absorbed by debtors,
the net worth of debtors is most severely impacted in the face of a negative aggregate shock. As
a result, the distribution of net worth becomes more skewed against debtors. As we explain
below, such distributional shifts can lead to a negative impact on total output and employment by
disrupting investment or aggregate demand.
The Investment Channel of Financial Crises
The influential work of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) explains how a shock to the net
worth of borrowers reduces their ability to borrow. Agency problems such as the borrowers'
ability to renege on debt payments mean that lenders require borrowers to have equity in a
project. Given this equity requirement, a decline in the net worth of borrowers driven by a
decline in the value of assets they hold will reduce their overall capacity to borrow. This
borrowing constraint channel means that overall investment will fall even if there remain as
many positive NPV projects as before the shock (see also Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997).

7

A reduction in the borrowing capacity of the entrepreneurial class with access to
investment projects leads to a slowdown in investment when otherwise profitable investment
projects exist. There is a large literature that discusses such borrowing constraints in the context
of financial crises. A common prescription in such discussions is to transfer resources back to the
debtors to boost investment. We return to the political feasibility of implementing such reforms
in the next section.
The Consumption Channel of Financial Crises
A related transmission channel of financial crises is the effect of reduced net worth on the
consumption of debtors. The idea goes back to the debt-deflation hypothesis of Fisher (1933) and
was discussed by King (1994); this idea has gained traction in the context of the Great Recession
(e.g., Eggertsson and Krugman, 2011; Guerrieri and Lorenzoni, 2011).
The consumption channel focuses on the accumulation of debt by households followed
by an event that wipes out the net worth of debtors, leading to tightened borrowing constraints
and reduced liquidity. The severe shock forces debtors to cut back on consumption. Should one
worry about a sharp decline in debtors’ consumption from an aggregate perspective? The answer
to this question depends on general equilibrium feedbacks and whether the creditors are able or
willing to increase their consumption in the face of reduced consumption by debtors.
Recent theoretical work such as Eggertsson and Krugman (2011) points out scenarios
where nominal price rigidity and a zero lower bound constraint on nominal interest rates make it
difficult for aggregate demand to remain stable. Consider for example the recent episode in the
United States. A strong decline in the housing market forced indebted households to cut back on
consumption. The decline in debtors’ consumption means that savers or creditors must increase
their consumption in order to keep aggregate demand constant.

8

But why would creditors increase their consumption relative to earlier levels? Such an
increase is possible only if creditors can be enticed to consume more either through lower prices
or lower interest rates. However, both of these channels have limited success in practice.
Nominal prices may be rigid downwards. Moreover, even if significant deflation were possible,
it may exacerbate the problem by increasing the real burden of household debt, which will
further depress consumption by debtors. The alternative channel--lower nominal interest rates-may also have limitations. In particular, what if even at zero nominal interest rate creditors are
unwilling to increase consumption significantly?
Philippon and Midrigan (2011) focus on a specific case related to the liquidity role of
housing. In their framework, debtors are households that used their house as collateral in a cashin-advance constraint model. The sharp reduction in house prices leads to a sharp pull-back in
consumption for these households. With nominal rigidities and structural adjustment frictions in
labor markets, they also show that this pull-back in consumption can lead to a severe recession.
In both of these environments, there may be a need for collective action to increase
consumption. As in the case of investment channel, policy prescriptions in the consumption
channel require a net transfer in favor of debtors to resolve the debt overhang problem. This may
be done through explicit policies of debt relief or via taxation and spending on behalf of
creditors.
Two recent papers provide empirical evidence to show that the consumption channel is
indeed very powerful and responsible for a large fraction of the decline in US output and
unemployment. Mian, Rao and Sufi (2011) show that during the recent US recession
consumption decline was significantly stronger in counties with more indebted households.
Moreover, there was no equivalent increase in consumption by non-indebted households despite

9

interest rates reaching historical lows. As a result, aggregate demand fell sharply in 2009 and
2010.
Mian and Sufi (2011b) look at the employment consequences of the fall in aggregate
demand. They show that the larger decline in demand in counties hit hardest by the financial
crisis is also associated with a larger decline in non-tradable employment in these counties. Since
non-tradable employment has to depend on local demand for output, it suffers the consequences
of the local demand collapse. Employment in tradable sectors falls everywhere uniformly, since
it only depends on the country-wide fall in aggregate demand. Their empirical results show that
over 65% of the drop in employment during the Great Recession can be attributed to the fall in
aggregate demand driven by indebted households.
The discussion above has focused on private debt accumulated by firms or households.
However, the problem is similar if the debt instead belongs to a sovereign entity. The same
investment and consumption mechanisms highlighted earlier become operative at the public
sector level when the debt in question is sovereign. In particular, the debtor country (e.g.,
Greece) demand will fall as the country is forced to cut pensions and other public spending in the
face of a sovereign debt crisis. And in the absence of an equivalent positive change in demand
for debtor country goods from creditor nations, the debtor’s economy will plunge into a
recession.
B. Default Mechanisms for Dealing with Financial Crises
The preceding section argues that a sharp reduction in the net worth of debtors in
response to a financial crisis can lead to a sharp decline in investment and consumption. The
combination of high leverage and a negative asset price shock leads to a large imbalance in the
net worth positions of creditors and debtors, which we have argued is at the heart of the

10

economic malaise that follows. As a result, our argument is that there is a need for explicit policy
intervention to address the imbalance in net wealth created between debtors and creditors.
However, before going into the political process in more detail, it is important to
understand the legal and regulatory mechanisms put in place to deal with the potential imbalance
between debtors and creditors. Doing so is also important for understanding the default
bargaining position that debtors and creditors have in a post-financial crisis political process. For
example, if the legal system gives creditors complete recourse to go after debtors’ existing assets
and future cash flows, then creditors will have a stronger incentive to resist changes to the status
quo. On the other hand, debtors will also be more inclined to fight the political battle if they have
more to lose in the status quo. Overall, stronger creditor rights in the face of a financial crisis
might lead to more polarization between debtors and creditors.
The most common arrangement for dealing with the inability of debtors to pay creditors
is bankruptcy law. However, there are two main limitations of bankruptcy regimes in alleviating
the debt overhang problem. First, bankruptcy becomes operative only when the debtor declares
default and stops making payments on his debt. This is not necessarily the relevant margin. For
example, in the Eggertsen and Krugman (2011) model, there is no default on debt and yet
aggregate demand goes down as debtors desperately try to pay down their existing debts in the
face of a negative shock to collateral and debt capacity. This is especially relevant for the US,
where 25% of mortgages are underwater yet most homeowners do not default on their
mortgages.
The second reason bankruptcy regimes do not work very well is that in a financial crisis
the economy cannot absorb a large-scale fire sale of assets disposed of in bankruptcy. For
example, consider firm assets that can only be bought and run by other entrepreneurs that have

11

the know-how of the relevant industry. As discussed above, the core problem that the
entrepreneurial class does not have sufficient net worth and borrowing capacity. In such an
environment, a large scale attempt to sell firm assets will lead to a sharp decline in the value of
such assets, putting further pressure on entrepreneurs struggling to raise capital (e.g., Shleifer
and Vishny, 1992).
In the context of the housing collapse and US financial crisis, Mian, Sufi and Trebbi
(2011) study the impact of foreclosures on the real economy. Using exogenous variation in the
likelihood of foreclosures due to state laws, they show that forced sales of houses had a large
effect in terms of further reducing house prices, residential investment, and consumption. On
both theoretical and empirical grounds, bankruptcy regimes are unlikely to help in alleviating the
macroeconomic costs associated with financial crises.
C. The impact of bankruptcy regimes on debtor-creditor conflict
We have argued that the typical bankruptcy regime is not adequate in addressing the
gross imbalance between debtors and creditors created during a financial crisis. Nonetheless, on
the margin, bankruptcy design does influence the extent to which financial losses are shared
between debtors and creditors.
There are important differences in the design of bankruptcy regimes across countries. For
example, it is typically harder and more expensive to declare bankruptcy in Europe relative to the
United States. Moreover, in the event of a bankruptcy, most European countries allow full
recourse to an individual’s assets and future wages. European creditors can – and often do – go
after a borrower’s other assets and wages in case there is a deficiency in the value of collateral
and outstanding principal. Recourse is significantly more limited in the United States and
qualifying borrowers can discharge most debts by declaring bankruptcy.

12

A European Mortgage Federation study in 2007 found that recourse was allowed in
Belgium, Germany, Greece, the Netherlands, Spain, France, Ireland, Portugal, and the United
Kingdom. Borrowers in these countries cannot simply default on their mortgage and be cleared
of all their mortgage debts. The higher level of recourse and tougher rules for declaring
bankruptcy are likely to prevent borrowers from declaring default. As a result, debtors in
European countries are more likely to absorb financial shocks internally than declare default.
Does tougher bankruptcy regulation force borrowers to absorb more of the losses and
make them less likely to declare default? We investigate this question by comparing the change
in default rates across Europe and the United States during the 2007 to 2009 global housing
crisis. Since the bankruptcy regime is relatively more lax in the United States, one would expect
a larger increase in default rates. However, such a comparison can only be made if the macro
environment is otherwise similar between the United States and the European countries in
question.
There are two key variables that one needs to control for when comparing changes in
default rates on mortgages across countries. First, the comparison countries should experience a
similar decline in house prices. If the decline in house prices is smaller, then the change in
default rates is also likely to be smaller, even if the bankruptcy regime has no impact on default
rates. Second, for any given level of house price drops, the increase in the default rate depends
on the level of indebtedness of the borrowing households. For example, if a country has 60
percent loan to value ratio in general, then it is less likely to declare default relative to a country
that experiences the same decline in house prices but has 80 percent of loan to value ratio on
average.

13

For a meaningful comparison of default rates across countries, we need to combine data
on default rates with data on house price changes as well as data on the amount of leverage in a
country. We were able to collect all this information for five countries (US, U.K., Spain, France
and Ireland) from 2007 to 2009 using data from the European Mortgage Federation. Figure 1
shows the three main variables of interest for the five countries: the 2007 mortgage debt to GDP
ratio, the change in default rates from 2007 to 2009, and the change in log house prices from
2007 to 2009. In order to display the three variables together in a single graph we renormalize
change in default rate by multiplying it by ten.
The change in default rate (red bar) for USA between 2007 and 2009 is 5.9 percentage
points. While the default rate level in 2007 is not shown in Figure 1, it is quite low and similar
across the five countries (0.4%, 1.2%, 0.7%, 1.9%, and 2.1% for France, Ireland, Spain, the
United Kingdom and the United States, respectively). However, the change in default rate stands
out for the United States and is at least twice as large as the change in default rate for any of the
other four European countries.
All European countries in Figure 1 have high recourse and tough bankruptcy laws
relative to the United States. The very large increase in default rates for the US is consistent with
the notion that lower level of recourse and easier bankruptcy legislation helps indebted
borrowers declare default. As a related interpretation, it is also possible that differences in laws
reflect different cultural attitudes toward default in the United States and Europe.
While the United States has the highest increase in default rates along with having the
most debtor-friendly bankruptcy regime, we want to caution against a strong causal
interpretation. The data are limited and we do not control for other factors (such as underlying
quality of marginal borrowers in each country).

14

Nonetheless, Figure 1 shows two of the key variables that are relevant for understanding
the magnitude of the negative housing shock in each country. The green bar depicts the change
in house prices between 2007 and 2009. The stronger the decline in house prices, the higher the
likely increase in default rates. The change in house prices for the United States is 23.3 percent,
but it is not the strongest decline. House prices dropped even further in Ireland, with a 30.0
percent decline.
The blue bar depicts mortgage debt to GDP ratio for each country in 2007. The mortgage
to GDP ratio is highest for United Kingdom at 85.4% followed by United States and Ireland at
76.9% and 73.7% respectively. The mortgage to GDP ratio is a good indicator of the extent of
leverage in the housing sector. For the three countries for which we also have the average loan to
value ratio, this ratio lines up closely with the mortgage to GDP ratio.6 For a given change in
house prices, one would expect the change in default rates to be higher in countries with more
mortgage debt to GDP.
A collective look at the three housing market variables in Figure 1 shows that the United
States experienced the highest increase in default rates by far, despite some of the European
countries experiencing very similar (if not stronger) decline in house price (e.g. Ireland) and
having similar housing leverage (Ireland and the United Kingdom). Furthermore, the decline in
housing prices could very well have been stronger in countries such as the United Kingdom if
they also had more lax bankruptcy laws as more houses would have been put on the market as
foreclosure sales.7

III. The Political Response to Financial Crises and Debt Overhang
6

Mortgage to GDP ratio is 85.4%, 76.9% and 61.4% for the United Kingdom, the United States, and Spain,
respectively, while loan to value ratio for these countries is 80.0%, 77.1% and 62.8% respectively.
7
See Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2011) for evidence on the strong impact of foreclosure sales on house price decline.

15

A key problem in the aftermath of financial crises is debt overhang which
disproportionately affects debtor investment and consumption, necessitating debtor relief.
Existing regulations, such as bankruptcy laws, determine to some extent the ease with which
debtors can discharge their debt obligations in case of default. However, such mechanisms are
typically inadequate given the nature and magnitude of the aggregate debt overhang problem.
Given the inadequacy of mechanisms already in place, the extent to which policies are
implemented to address debt overhang after a financial crisis becomes a matter of political and
legislative debate. For example, Bolton and Rosenthal (2002) present a political economy model
where it is possible to “certify” debt overhang states of the world through the political voting
mechanism and renegotiate financial contracts. However, in practice, creditors are likely to push
back as it is not in their individual self-interest to provide debtor relief at their expense. As a
result, political battle lines are likely to be drawn between debtors and creditors. In this section,
we ask, how does the political process resolve this conflict between debtors and creditors?
A. The US Experience
The 2007-2009 US financial crisis provides an interesting case study to examine the
political tug of war between debtors and creditors. Table 1 provides information on the net worth
distribution for US homeowners at the beginning of the recession.8 As has been well
documented, column 1 shows a very striking increase in net wealth as one moves up the
distribution. The lowest quintile had a median net worth of $32 thousand whereas the highest
quintile had a median net worth of $1.2 million.

8

According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, homeowners in the United States made up 69% of the population.
We isolate the sample to homeowners because levered homeowners are the most relevant group of debtors in our
analysis. An analysis of renters during the Great Recession is also of interest but we exclude them from our analysis
here.

16

Columns 2 and 3 show another very important result: as a fraction of total assets, homes
represented the lion's share for low net worth homeowners, whereas high net worth owners had a
large amount of financial assets. The cell means in columns 2 and 3 are not adjusted for leverage.
Columns 4 and 5 show that low net worth households were much more levered, especially with
regard to their housing positions. We think of the lower net worth quintiles in Table 1 as debtors,
given their low net worth and levered position in housing. We think of the upper net worth
quintiles in Table 1 as creditors, given their high net worth and large holdings of financial assets.
The information in Table 1 allows us to clearly see how the sharp ex-post decline in
house prices from 2007 to 2009 affected the net wealth distribution. Housing assets were the
main asset for low net worth individuals, and their housing positions were quite levered. As a
result, the collapse in house prices disproportionately affected low net worth individuals. Mian,
Rao, and Sufi (2011) show that at the 10th percentile of the county-level house price distribution,
house prices dropped by 40 to 60% depending on the house price index used. This decline would
completely wipe out the entire net worth of the median household in lowest quintile of the net
worth distribution. CoreLogic reports that 25% of mortgages are underwater; for the low net
worth individuals in the US, this effectively means that their total net worth is negative.
It is in this context that Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2010a), henceforth MST, document the
political economy of two major bailout bills that were passed in the US Congress in 2008. The
first of these bills, the American Housing Rescue and Foreclosure Prevention Act (AHRFPA),
provided up to $300 billion in Federal Housing Administration insurance for renegotiated
mortgages, which translated into using public funds to provide debtor relief. MST show that
legislators with more constituents in financial distress were more likely to vote in favor of the

17

bill. Similarly, legislators in competitive districts were more likely to respond to constituent
pressure.
At the same time, creditors--i.e., the shareholders and debt-holders of large financial
institutions--pushed a second bill which was closely tied to protecting their own interests. The
$700 billion Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA) enabled the Treasury Department
to bailout AIG which had provided insurance against losses to creditors. The bill also allowed the
Treasury to put public money as preferred shares in banks, therefore protecting creditors from
realizing losses. MST show that legislators that had received larger campaign contributions from
the financial industry were more likely to vote in favor of the EESA bill.
It is worth clarifying why we classify EESA, which eventually led to the Troubled Asset
Relief Program, as a bailout bill that primarily benefited creditors. While the banks were highly
levered, the primary beneficiaries of the legislation were the creditors to and shareholders of
highly levered financial institutions. As seen in Table 1, high net worth individuals hold the
lion's share of financial assets in the US economy, which includes these claims on financial
institutions.
While both debtors and creditors were effective in passing legislation in their favor, there
were two important differences in the magnitude of their effectiveness. First, the debtor friendly
bill provided fewer resources ($300 billion versus $700 billion) than the creditor friendly
legislation. The difference in resources devoted to the two bills becomes even more stark when
one takes into account the fact that debtors faced substantially larger losses - in both absolute and
proportional terms - than creditors in the face of the US housing crisis.
Second, while the creditor friendly EESA bill was fully implemented and executed, the
housing legislation was a miserable failure. As of December 2008, there were only 312

18

applications for relief under the program and the secretary of Housing and Urban Development
was highly critical of the program.9 When the Obama Administration arrived and implemented
the Home Affordability Modification Program under AHRFPA, their initial goal was to help 3 to
4 million homeowners with loan modifications. In July, 2011 President Obama admitted that
HAMP program has “probably been the area that's been most stubborn to us trying to solve the
problem.”
It is worth noting that one of the main reasons for the ineffectiveness of the HAMP
program has been the lack of cooperation from creditors. The initial legislation made creditor
cooperation completely voluntary, thereby enabling many creditors to opt out of the program
despite qualifying borrowers. In fact, as Representative Barney Frank noted, banks actually
helped formulate the program in the summer of 2008.10
What was the net result of these programs? Figure 2 plots total household asset value at a
quarterly frequency and also breaks it down into household financial assets (green line) and real
estate assets (red line). Financial assets include various debt instruments as well as stocks. Both
financial and real estate assets declined in the initial phase of the financial crisis. However, by
2011, while financial assets have largely recovered, real estate assets remain at depressed values.
In terms of numbers, between 2007Q2 to 20011Q2, total (nominal) wealth dropped by $7.25
trillion dollars and out of this housing wealth loss is $5.92 trillion.
Financial wealth dropped by only $1.33 trillion while housing wealth dropped by $5.92
trillion. Although not reported separately in the flow of funds data, it is likely that once the
decline in financial wealth due to stocks is taken out, the decline in value of debt held by
creditors will be even smaller. In other words, while debtors lost a major chunk of their overall

9

See http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/12/16/AR2008121603177.html .
See http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/07/23/AR2008072300317.html .

10

19

wealth represented by home equity, their liabilities largely remained fixed in nominal terms.
Even some of the losses passed onto creditors due to defaulting mortgages were insured either
via GSEs or the EESA bailout package.
Why were creditors better able to protect their interests in the recent US financial crisis?
It is difficult to conclusively know the answer, but one possibility is that creditors were relatively
smaller in number (due to the concentration of wealth) and better organized through financial
institutions. Indeed, Johnson and Kwak (2010) notably identify thirteen banks (and their
bankers). Textbook collective action theory á la Olson (1965) would predict that politically
organized and cohesive special interests, such as banks, would be ideally suited to influence
government policy. Concentrated benefits (to banks) often trump diffused costs borne by
taxpayers. The effective bailout of General Motors, Chrysler, and Ford, which followed TARP,
seem to conform to this explanation as well. Debtors, on the other hand, were numerous and
diffused, therefore suffering from typical collective action problems. In light of the 2008
presidential elections few months ahead, millions of struggling mortgage holders represented a
large enough electoral constituency to obtain policy recognition through the AHRFPA, but
apparently were not a sufficiently cohesive force to effectively profit from the bailout down the
road.
B. Cross-country evidence on financial crises and change in creditor rights
The seminal work of La Porta et al (1998), followed by Djankov et al. (2007), introduced
cross-country index of “creditor rights” from 1978 to 2002. The index captures the rights of
secured lenders under a country’s legal system. A country has stronger creditor rights if: (i) there
are restrictions for a debtor to file for reorganization; (ii) creditors are able to seize collateral in

20

bankruptcy automatically without any “asset freeze”; (iii) secured creditors are paid first; and
(iv) control shifts away from management as soon as bankruptcy is declared.
Stronger creditor rights favor creditors in bargaining situation vis-à-vis debtors. Djankov
et al. (2007) show that creditor rights, which are partly determined by a country’s history such as
legal origins, lead to stronger growth in credit. This result is to be expected, since stronger
creditor rights will make creditors more likely to extend credit and offer it at cheaper prices.
However, as the discussion in section II.A. highlighted, such rights may not be helpful ex-post in
the event of a financial crisis. There is likely to be a tension between creditor rights and the push
to introduce reforms in the aftermath of a financial crisis.
There is evidence in the Djankov et al. (2007) data on creditor rights that suggests this
tension is real. While the creditor rights index is remarkably stable, it does occasionally change
for a given country. Table 2 shows that there are twelve instances between 1978 and 2002 when
creditor rights deteriorate in a country, and eight instances when creditor rights are strengthened.
Six of the eight instances when creditor rights are strengthened involve transition economies
such as Romania, Lithuania and Bulgaria. These countries had very low creditor rights to begin
with and were in the process of broadly changing their legal code in conjunction with western
norms.
What is more interesting is that most of the instances of a relaxation in creditor rights
involve established democracies. Moreover, the timing of these changes in creditor rights often
comes after a severe financial crisis. For example, Indonesia and Thailand actively reduced
creditor rights in the aftermath of the East Asian financial crisis of 1997-98. Similarly, the
Nordic banking crisis of the early 1990s led to a relaxation in creditor rights in both Sweden and
Finland.

21

A more formal analysis of the likelihood of reduction in creditor rights in the face of
financial crises confirms the anecdotal evidence above. Employing Reinhart and Rogoff (2009,
2011), henceforth RR, information on banking, debt (external or otherwise), currency, and
inflation crises, it is possible to focus on within-country variation in creditor rights. Table 3
performs simple country fixed effect regressions of creditor rights in the sample of countries
which undergo a crisis, restricting to observations at most five years before and five years after
the crisis for comparison. The inclusion of country and year fixed effects allows to formally test
whether the reduction of creditor rights is systematic around financial crises.
Notwithstanding the limited numbers of changers in the sample and the different
coverage of RR relative to Djankov et al. (2007), the evidence appears to go in this direction.
Across all four types of crises, the evidence points toward a relaxation of creditor rights after a
financial crisis (negative sign on the post-crisis indicator variable). In the case of banking and
currency crises the reduction is also highly statistically significant. Notice, however, that
magnitudes are not large, around 7 percent of a one-point decrease in creditor rights index
(which is the modal size of a change in the creditor right score), suggesting that creditor rights
get relaxed around crises, but that this type of policy change is not the norm after a financial
crisis.11 The following section will investigate the fundamental reasons for the sparseness of this
type of reform.
Overall, while creditor rights promote the origination of more credit, a financial crisis
that results from excessive debt tends to reduce creditor rights. These results highlight a
fundamental tension between the benefits of stronger creditor rights ex-ante and the debt

11

To be more explicit, given that the coefficient on post-crisis averages creditor rights decreases across all postcrisis instances, one would expect a coefficient around -1 (the modal change) on the post-crisis dummy in the case
all crises were systematically followed by changes in creditor rights. The estimated coefficient in Table 3 is much
lower, -0.07, instead, indicating that less than 1 in 10 crises are followed by creditor rights decreases.

22

overhang costs associated with giving creditor too much power in the financial crisis state of the
world.
C. Cross-country evidence on financial crises and political polarization
Ex-post relaxation of creditor rights is not the norm after a financial crisis. This section
highlights an underappreciated reason for this phenomenon: political polarization in the
aftermath of a financial crisis.
More specifically, we show that financial crises are systematically followed by political
polarization and that this may result in gridlock and anemic reform. The logic is simple.
Financial crises polarize debtors and creditors in society. On the one hand, debtors are weakened
by a fall in the value of assets they hold. On the other hand, creditors become more sensitive to
write-offs during bad times (losing an extra dollar on a loan when a lender is close to be
insolvent is worse than when the lender is on solid grounds) and possibly more reluctant to
converge onto a renegotiated platform because of their increased reliance on the satisfaction of
the original terms of agreement.
Although the debtor-creditor tug of war is hardly the only explanation of the current shift
of US voters’ ideological positions to extremes (e.g., the Tea Party versus Occupy Wall Street,
but also evidence from Gallup polls in Figure 3), it fits the profile. Furthermore, although the US
does not appear to suffer from systematic chipping-away from the moderate middle after
banking, currency, and market crashes according to self-reported Liberal-Conservative scores in
the American National Election Study Cumulative Data File 1948-2008 (see Figures 4a-4c), this
seems to be more the result of the lack of depth of the ‘typical’ US crisis. 12 The congressional
stalemate observed in the fall of 2011 debate on the national debt ceiling raise, with its
exceptional political salience and persistence, appears telling in this respect.
12

The definition of crises is again derived from RR.

23

More systematically, Figure 5 considers de-trended (HP-filtered) congressional party
polarization levels as standard in the political science literature (see McCarthy et al., 2006) built
from ideological position scores and based on the spatial voting models of Poole and Rosenthal
(1985, 1997). Political polarization in the United States appears higher after banking crises and
market crashes, while lower after currency crises.13
The US is no exception though. Increases in polarization of voters are a common feature
across all 70 countries sampled by RR. For example, South Korea's Gini coefficient increased by
6 percent in the four years after 1996 and the Asian financial crisis. Thailand experienced drastic
increases in economic disparity in the post-financial crisis period as well, particularly in the
North and Northeast areas. Both events led to political attrition within these countries. Indeed,
one would expect systematic shifts in political polarization on a systematic scale, which we show
below.
The frequency of crises of the various types reported by RR and their distribution by year
are reported in Tables 5a and 5b. In Figure 6 we employ the official aggregate World Value
Survey from 1981-2008, which includes a question on self-positioning on the political scale (1 is
most liberal, 10 most conservative). The sample covers about 250,000 individual interviews from
60 countries, which we matched to the pre-crisis and post-crisis RR crisis indicators and then
collapsed based on their selected ideological bin. After a crisis, the share of centrists/moderates
in a country goes down in 3 out of 4 types of crisis and the share of extremists (left or right
radicals) goes up in 7 out of 8 possible cases. Interestingly, while banking and currency crises are
neutral (i.e. they increase extremists on both the left and the right of the political spectrum),

13

There are almost no debt crises in the US that we can use for the analysis. A caveat in the interpretation of Figure
5 is that crises in the US are sparse and the number of congresses used to generate the graphs is very limited,
typically around 10-15. Once again we only include congresses within five years before and after the crisis.

24

inflation crises appear to produce more conservative extremists and debt crises produce many
more left-wing radicals.
Further, financial crises move political systems toward systematically more polarized
legislatures and fragmented political scenarios. After a crisis, governments have to rely on
weaker coalitions, oppositions grow larger and more fragmented, and overall political
disintegration becomes the norm. Figures 7, 8, and 9 report the shift in the vote share of the
governing coalition, the vote share of the opposition (excluding unaligned parties, which are
political forces that may align alternatively with the government or the opposition), and the
overall degree of fragmentation within the legislative assembly, respectively, as reported by the
World Bank’s Database of Political Institutions. We observe in Figure 7 that ruling governments
become weaker after almost any type of financial crisis. We also observe that their opposition
grows in size (Figure 8) and that the overall fragmentation of the political environment
unambiguously increases (Figure 9).
Differently, form the survey evidence discussed above, DPI’s cross-country and time
coverage is excellent and the DPI sample’s overlap with RR is almost perfect, which allows for a
more systematic analysis of the data. In Table 4 we report summary statistics useful for the
interpretation of Tables 5 and 6, where the issue of ‘politics after the crisis’ is explored in a
regression framework. Once again, the evidence points in a direction of increased political
polarization after a financial crisis. Table 5 performs pooled and country fixed effect regressions
of government vote shares, opposition vote shares, and polarization indexes in the sample of
countries which undergo a banking, currency, debt, or inflation crisis, again restricting to
observations to (at most) five years before and five years after the crisis for comparison
(similarly to what presented in Table 2).

25

We first examine unconditional mean differences pre and post crisis across countries. We
then include country and year fixed effects in order to capture country-specific unobserved
heterogeneity and time effects. Notice that the inclusion of time effects is particularly
demanding, as financial crises tend display cross-border contagion. Yet, all our results point
clearly in the direction of countries becoming more polarized post-crisis.
The magnitudes of the estimated post-crisis differences are quantitatively meaningful.
For instance after a banking crisis the within-country analysis indicates a drop in government
electoral support of more than 6 percent, a sizeable drop relative to a sample mean of 56%. At
the same time, the opposition's gain is 7%, a sizeable increment relative to a sample mean vote
share of 37%. Qualitatively similar effects are observed also when considering the share of seats
in the legislative body held by government or opposition, as opposed to vote shares. We do not
report them for brevity.
In Table 7, we explore measures of fractionalization, which consider the probability that
two representatives drawn at random within the government coalition, the opposition coalition,
or the assembly at large belong to different parties (hence, 1 indicates maximal fractionalization
and 0 no fractionalization). Fractionalization increases across the board for both the government
and the opposition after a financial crisis. However, it is sufficient to look at the sample means in
Table 4 to see that the increase is similar in relative terms for the governing coalition than for the
opposition. The probability of two legislators drawn at random from the government coalition
belonging to different parties increases by 2.5 percentage points, relative to a mean of 20%. For
opposition the post-crisis effect is 4.3 percentage points against an average fractionalization of
48%. Governments that may be initially monolithic before a financial crisis, tend to fragment in
its aftermath. Oppositions, in turn, both grow and fragment, with somewhat ambiguous effects

26

on their relative strength vis-à-vis the ruling coalition (it may be harder to negotiate with
multiple opponents, but also fragmented opponents may be easier to divide).
While we do not have direct evidence on reform implementation, it is easy to see how
these three facts would lead to political stalemate.14 Weak and disperse ruling coalitions are
known to breed stalemate and present leadership lacking room for maneuver (see Alesina et al.
2004 for an analysis of institutional features which produce endogenous insulation of leaders).

IV. Concluding Remarks and Discussion
This paper begins by highlighting how financial crises put pressure on debtors and how
the ensuing debt-overhang problem deepens economic downturn. A potential solution discussed
in the macroeconomic and finance literature involves relaxing creditor rights and bailing out
(partially or totally) debtors.
However, such policy interventions are rare. Why? Based on within US and crosscountry evidence we conjecture that bailouts and pro-debtor reforms may be stifled by
ideological polarization and political gridlock that systematically follow financial crises. Politics
after the crisis is substantially skewed in favor of stalemate, with systematically more polarized
voters, weaker governments, and more fragmented oppositions. Our results offer a political
economy explanation for why financial crises often lead to prolonged economic slumps and why
it becomes hard to reach a policy consensus in the aftermath of a financial crisis. Crises bring
gridlock through polarization. Gridlock delays reform and it possibly makes recovery slower,
explaining long post-crisis slumps (see Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009; Reinhart and Reinhart, 2010).

14

For strong evidence on the role of polarization on stalemate and policy gridlock in the US see Binder (2003),
Coleman (1999), and McCarthy, Poole, and Rosenthal (2006).

27

The inability to reach a political consensus can lead to further losses. Gridlock brings
political uncertainty and markets for sovereign debt often respond heavily to such conditions.
Debt crises may be a natural consequence of gridlock. Recent U.S. and European events
highlight the cost that political indecisiveness imposes on the economy.
Gridlock also brings selective policy intervention. If a reform overcomes political
gridlock, it is likely because of strong political organization by its constituency. Concentrated
special interests (banks) did get a sizeable bailout. Diffused special interests (mortgage debtors)
did not. Importantly, this mechanism feeds back into higher inequality in society and
polarization.
Overall our aim in this paper is to highlight the shifting political landscape in the
aftermath of a financial crisis. It is a question that has not been extensively addressed in the
literature15 but has important economic consequences. Any model of post-crisis macro
intervention leaving this political feature aside forgoes what we believe is an important
dimension. Indeed, any type of post-crisis reform becomes harder, including bailouts. Crises are
occasionally thought of as critical junctures where macroeconomic reform unlocks by shattering
entrenched conditions. The opposite seems true.
Since post-crisis politics makes it difficult to politically resolve the debt-overhang
problem ex-post, what other alternatives are there? One possibility is to explicitly put in place a
contingency in traditional non-contingent debt contracts. The contingency only needs to be
written on the aggregate state of the economy. For example, in mortgage contracts the
contingency could be the level of aggregate (or regional) price index. If the state of the economy,

15

With some exceptions, such as Alesina et al. (2011) who study electoral consequences of large fiscal adjustments.
Brender and Drazen (2008) look at electoral consequences of fiscal and inflation performance, but with no emphasis
given to post-crisis recovery.

28

or the housing index in this example, performs too poorly then the contingency could
automatically kick in and restructure the debt.
The typical benefit of non-contingent debt is that it protects the lender from moral hazard
issues related to the borrower deliberately mis-utilizing the loan. However, if the contingency for
debt reduction is written on the aggregate state of the economy, such moral hazards continue to
be avoided. More generally, we believe that the mechanism design problem of contracting
around the debt-overhang problem for the overall economy is an important and practical issue to
investigate.

29

References
Alesina Alberto and Allan Drazen. 1991. "Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?" American
Economic Review, 81: 1170-88
Alesina, Alberto, Philippe Aghion, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. "Endogenous Political
Institutions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 565-613.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi. 2006. "Who Adjusts and When? On the
Political Economy of Reforms," IMF Staff Papers, 53, 1-29.
Alberto Alesina, Dorian Carloni, Giampaolo Lecce. 2011. "The Electoral Consequences of Large
Fiscal Adjustments" NBER WP 17655
Alston, Lee. 1984. "Farm Foreclosure Moratorium Legislation: A Lesson from the Past"
American Economic Review, 74(3): 445-457
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 79, 14–31.
Binder, Sarah A. 2003. Stalemate: Causes and consequences of legislative gridlock. Brookings.
DC
Bolton, Patrick and Howard Rosenthal. 2002. "Political Intervention in Debt Contracts." Journal
of Political Economy, 110: 1103-34.
Brender, Adi and Allan Drazen (2008) "How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth Affect
Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries", American Economic Review,
98(5): 2203-20
Coleman, John J. 1999 “Unified Government, Divided Government, and Party Responsiveness”,
American Political Science Review 93(4): 821-35.
Djankov, S, C. McLiesh and Andrei Shleifer, 2007. “Private Credit in 129 Countries”, Journal of
Financial Economics.
Drazen, Allan, and Vittorio Grilli (1993). “The benefits of crisis for economic reform,"
American Economic Review 83(3), 598—607.
Drazen, Allan and William Easterly (2001) “Do Crises Induce Reform? Simple Empirical Tests
of Conventional Wisdom,” Economics and Politics, 13:2, 129-158.
Eichengreen, Barry and Peter Temin (2000) “The Gold Standard and the Great Depression”,
Contemporary European History, 9, 2 (2000), pp. 183±207 # 2000 Cambridge University Press.

30

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2011, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
Fisher-Minsky-Koo approach,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Fisher, Irvin, 1933, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica, 337-357.
Glick, Reuven, and Kevin J. Lansing. 2010. “Global Household Leverage, House Prices and
Consumption.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2010-01 (January 11).
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
Liquidity Trap”. NBER WP 17583
Holmstrom, B. and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
sector” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 663-91
Johnson, Simon and James Kwak, 2010. 13 Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the Next
Financial Meltdown. Pantheon Books NY.
Jorda, Oscar, Moritz HP Schularick, and Alan Taylor, 2011, "When Credit Bites Back: Leverage,
Business Cycles, and Crises," Working paper, November.
King, Mervyn, 1994. “Debt Deflation: Theory and Evidence,” European Economic Review, 38:
419-45.
Koo, Richard, 2009, The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan's Great Recession,
John Wiley and Sons.
Kroszner, Randall, 1998, "Is It Better to Forgive than to Receive? Repudiation of the Gold
Indexation Clause in Long-Term Debt During the Great Depression," Working paper, October.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211–
248.
McCarty Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized America: The Dance of
Political Ideology and Unequal Riches MIT Press.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2010, "Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009," IMF
Economic Review: 58, 74-117.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011a, "Household debt and the Weak US Economic Recovery,"
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, January.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011b, "What explains high unemployment? The Aggregate Demand
Channel", Working paper, November.
Mian, Atif R., Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2011, "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
and the Economic Slump," Working paper, November.
31

Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2010a. "The Political Economy of the US
Mortgage Default Crisis". American Economic Review, 95: 587-611.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2010b. "The Political Economy of the US
Mortgage Expansion". mimeo UBC.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2011. "Foreclosures, House Prices and the Real
Economy". mimeo UBC.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1978, “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression,” Journal
of Economic History, 38: 918-37.
Nunez, Steven, and Howard Rosenthal. 2004. "Bankruptcy Reform in Congress: Creditors,
Committees, Ideology, and Floor Voting in the Legislative Process." Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization, 20: 527-557.
Olney, Martha, 1999, “Avoiding Default: The Role of Credit in the Consumption Collapse of
1930”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114: 319-335.
Olson, Mancur, 1965, “The Logic of Collective Action” Harvard University Press.
Philippon, Thomas and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2011. “Household Leverage and the Recession”
NBER WP 16965.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. "A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
Analysis." American Journal of Political Science, 357--384.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll
Call Voting. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent Reinhart. 2010."After the Fall", NBER WP 16334.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Ken Rogoff. 2009."The Aftermath of Financial Crises" American
Economic Review P&P, 99, 466-472.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Ken Rogoff. 2011. "From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis" American
Economic Review, 101, 1676-1706
Romer, Thomas and Barry R. Weingast. 1991. "Political Foundations of the Thrift Debacle" In
Politics and Economics in the Eighties, ed. Alberto Alesina and Geoffrey Carliner, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Shleifer, Andrei and Rob Vishny, 1992, "Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach," Journal of Finance 47: 1343-1366.

32

Figure 1: Cross-Country Change in Mortgage Default Rates and House Prices (2007 to 2009)

-.5

0

.5

1

The figure plots mortgage to GDP ratio, change in default rate from 2007 to 2009 and change in house prices from
2007 to 2009 for four European countries and the U.S. We multiply the change in default rate by 10 in order to keep
the scale comparable across the three variables.

France

Ireland

Spain

UK

USA

Mortgage to GDP
Change in Default (07-09) (multiplied by10)
Change in House Prices (07-09)

33

Figure 2: US Flow of funds real estate and finance assets.
The figure plots quarterly flow of funds data for total assets and assets broken down by real estate (non-financial)
and financial assets (include deposits, bonds and stocks).

20

40

Asset Value
(trillions of $

60

80

Real Estate and Financial Asset Values Over Time

2005q3

2006q1

2006q3

2007q1

2007q3

2008q1

2008q3

2009q1

2009q3

2010q1

2010q3

2011q1

Quarter

Total
Financial

Real Estate

34

Figure 3: United States Ideological Groups Time Series.
This figure reports shares of respondents in Gallup polls self-identifying in each ideological category. Coverage:
United States, years 1992-2011.

10

20

30

40

50

Gallup Poll
Annual Average Share of Respondents

1990

1995

2000
Year
Conservatives
Moderates

2005

2010

Liberals

Source: Gallup.com

35

Figure 4a: Post-Crisis Decreases Mass at Ideological Center.
This figure reports the average shares of the population in each ideological bin of the Thermometer Index: LiberalConservative, American National Election Study Cumulative Data File 1948-2008 (VCF0801, 2011). We include all
United States banking crises 1948-2010 as identified by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011).. Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years
before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis.

0

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.005
.01
.015

.02

Banking Crisis

0

20

40
60
Ideology (Right is 100)

80

100

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

36

Figure 4b: Post-Crisis Decreases Mass at Ideological Center.
This figure reports the average shares of the population in each ideological bin of the Thermometer Index: LiberalConservative, American National Election Study Cumulative Data File 1948-2008 (VCF0801, 2011). We include all
United States currency crises 1948-2010 as identified by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years
before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis.

0

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.005
.01
.015

.02

Currency Crisis

0

20

40
60
Ideology (Right is 100)

80

100

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

37

Figure 4c: Post-Crisis Decreases Mass at Ideological Center.
This figure reports the average shares of the population in each ideological bin of the Thermometer Index: LiberalConservative, American National Election Study Cumulative Data File 1948-2008 (VCF0801, 2011). We include all
United States market crashes crises 1948-2010 as identified by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). Pre-Crisis Sample: 5
years before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis.

0

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.005
.01
.015

.02

Market Crash Crisis

0

20

40
60
Ideology (Right is 100)

80

100

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

38

Figure 5: Post-Crisis Increases in Congressional Polarization.
This figure reports the kernel densities of HP Filtered Difference in DW Nominate Scores Party Means, Chambers
Average, United States Congress, 1879-2010 as obtained from Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal voteview.com.
Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis. Crises
definitions follow Reinhart and Rogoff (2011).

Currency Crisis
Density
0 10203040

Density
0 20 40 60

Banking Crisis

-.02
-.01
0
.01
.02
Congressional DWnominate Polarization, HP Filtered

-.02
-.01
0
.01
.02
.03
Congressional DWnominate Polarization, HP Filtered

Pre-Crisis

Pre-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .326

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .374

Density
10 20 30 40

Market Crash Crisis

-.02
-.01
0
.01
.02
Congressional DWnominate Polarization, HP Filtered
Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis
Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .121

39

Figure 6: Post-Crisis Decreases Mass at Ideological Center.

0

2

4
6
8
Ideology (Right is 10)

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.05
.1
.15

Pre-Crisis

10

2

4
6
8
Ideology (Right is 10)
Pre-Crisis

Currency Crisis

0

2

Post-Crisis

Domestic/External Debt Crisis

0

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.05
.1
.15

Banking Crisis

10

Post-Crisis

4
6
8
Ideology (Right is 10)
Pre-Crisis

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.05 .1 .15 .2

Avg. Share in Ideological Bin
.05 .1 .15 .2

This figure reports the average shares of the population in each ideological bin of the Self Positioning in Political
Scale, World Values Survey 1981-2008 Official Aggregate (e033, 2009). Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years before first
year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis. Crises definitions follow Reinhart and Rogoff
(2011). All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) countries. All crises 1975-2010.

10

Post-Crisis

Inflation Crisis

0

2

4
6
8
Ideology (Right is 10)
Pre-Crisis

10

Post-Crisis

40

Figure 7: Post-Crisis Decrease in Majority Margins for Government.
This figure reports the kernel densities of the vote share of government parties from the Database of Political
Institutions (World Bank, 2010). Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years
after last year of crisis. Crises definitions follow Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
countries. All crises 1975-2010. The null of equality of distributions is rejected in all panels according to a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Currency Crisis
Density
0.01.02
.03
.04.05

Density
0 .01.02.03.04

Banking Crisis

20

40
60
80
100
Vote Share of Government Parties

0

Pre-Crisis

Pre-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

Domestic/External Debt Crisis

Inflation Crisis
Density
0 .01.02.03

Density
0.005
.01
.015
.02
.025

20
40
60
80
100
Vote Share of Government Parties

0

20
40
60
80
100
Vote Share of Government Parties
Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

0

20
40
60
80
100
Vote Share of Government Parties
Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

41

Figure 8: Post-Crisis Increase in Opposition Share.
This figure reports the kernel densities of the vote share of opposition parties, excluding unaligned parties (of
relevance for minority governments only) from the Database of Political Institutions (World Bank, 2010). Pre-Crisis
Sample: 5 years before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year of crisis. Crises definitions
follow Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) countries. All crises 1975-2010. The null of
equality of distributions is rejected in all panels according to a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Currency Crisis

Density
0 .01.02.03

Density
0 .01.02.03.04

Banking Crisis

0

20
40
60
Vote Share of Opposition Parties

80

0

Pre-Crisis

20
40
60
Vote Share of Opposition Parties

80

Pre-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .025

Inflation Crisis

Density
0.005
.01
.015
.02

Density
0.005
.01
.015
.02
.025

Domestic/External Debt Crisis

0

20
40
60
Vote Share of Opposition Parties
Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

80

-20

0
20
40
60
Vote Share of Opposition Parties

80

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis
Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

42

Figure 9: Post-Crisis Increase in Party Fractionalization in Legislative.
This figure reports the kernel densities of party fractionalization indexes from the Database of Political Institutions
(World Bank, 2010). Pre-Crisis Sample: 5 years before first year of crisis. Post-Crisis Sample: 5 years after last year
of crisis. Crises definitions follow Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) countries. All
crises 1975-2010. The null of equality of distributions is rejected in all panels according to a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test.

Density
0 1 2 3

Currency Crisis

Density
0 1 2 3

Banking Crisis

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Fractionalization Index

1

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Fractionalization Index

Pre-Crisis

1

Pre-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

Inflation Crisis

Density
0 .5 11.52

Density
0 1 2 3 4

Domestic/External Debt Crisis

0

.5
Fractionalization Index
Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

1

-.2

0

.2
.4
.6
Fractionalization Index

.8

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis
Note: Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
of Rejection of Equality of Distributions = .001

43

Table 1
US Net Worth Distribution for Homeowners, 2007
This table presents net worth information for US homeowners as of 2007. The information is from the 2007 Survey
of Consumer Finances. We isolate the sample to homeowners and then split the sample into quintiles using
population weights.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Net worth,
$thousands

Home value/
Total assets

Financial
assets/ Total
assets

Debt/Assets

Home debt/
Home value

Quintile 1

32.8

0.821

0.034

0.705

0.709

Quintile 2

115.1

0.752

0.111

0.406

0.505

Quintile 3

234.1

0.659

0.207

0.225

0.306

Quintile 4

443.0

0.515

0.271

0.153

0.250

Quintile 5

1194.7

0.299

0.395

0.059

0.161

44

Table 2: Changes in Creditor Rights
The table reports the timing of changes in the credit rights index introduced by Djankov et al (2007). The last
column reports the most recent major financial crisis prior to the change in creditor rights index.
Country
Canada
Finland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Japan
Malawi
Niger
Sweden
Thailand
Ukraine
Azerbaijan
Bulgaria
Denmark
Kazakhstan
Lithuania
Mongolia
Romania
United Kingdom

Credit Rights
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed
Relaxed

Creditor Rights
Changed In
1992
1993
1993
1998
1990
1996
2000
2000
1998
1995
1999
1999

Most Recent Financial Crisis Prior To
Change
1985 (Banking)
1993 (Banking and Currency)
1993 (Banking and Currency)
1998 (All types)
1977 (Currency)
NA
2000 (Banking)
NA
NA
1994 (Banking)
1999 (Banking)
NA

Toughened
Toughened
Toughened
Toughened
Toughened
Toughened
Toughened
Toughened

1997
2000
1984
1997
1995
1997
1994
1985

NA
NA
1980 (Market Crash)
NA
NA
NA
1994 (Banking, Currency and Inflation)
1984 (Banking)

45

Table 3

Banking Crisis
(1)
PostCrisis
R2
N

Currency
Crisis

Dom./External
Debt Crisis

Inflation Crisis

(2)
(3)
Dependent Variable: Creditor Rights

(4)

-0.0771

-0.0630

-0.0075

-0.0163

[0.0203]**
0.98

[0.0227]**
0.97

[0.0221]
0.99

[0.0153]
1.00

573

521

305

275

Notes: Independent variable is a post-crisis indicator variable. All columns include
country and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets. ** Significant at .01 *
significant at .05. Includes only country and year observations within 5 years before or
after a crisis. All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) countries. All crises 1975-2010.

46

Table 4: Summary Statistics for Political Regressions
Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Government Vote Share
Opposition Vote Share (Excluding
Unaligned Parties)
Polarization
Party Fractionalization
Government Fractionalization
Opposition Fractionalization
Banking crisis
Currency crisis
Debt crisis
Inflation crisis

1698

56.03

19.49

9.47

100

1698

37.40

19.25

0

90.20

2308
1670
1687
2004
2520
2515
2520
2520

.61
.56
.20
.48
.17
.21
.19
.18

.87
.24
.26
.26
.38
.40
.39
.38

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
.93
.92
1
1
1
1
1

47

Table 5a: Frequency of Crises 1975-2010 by Country. Source: Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
Country Name
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Central African Republic
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Korea
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Myanmar
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
UK
USA
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Years of
Banking
Crisis
3
7
10
4
3
3
7
6
3
19
5
8
8
4
4
9
2
6
9
1
4
5
6
9
8
3
3
8
7
6
8
4
6
10
9
11
9
0
9
2
8
3
4
13
5
7
2
6
9
12
5
3
10
4
2
3
12
5
4
2
4
14
5
7
8
12
5
11
1
14

Years of
Currency
Crisis
6
17
19
6
1
2
7
24
1
1
12
4
19
4
1
1
6
17
6
1
1
2
4
19
10
3
4
8
15
5
6
5
3
1
9
5
1
5
12
1
1
1
5
8
9
3
0
10
18
5
19
7
15
16
1
9
4
4
5
2
1
3
2
26
7
3
25
13
17
20

Years of
Debt Crisis
6
20
21
0
0
0
17
13
0
29
9
0
0
9
27
0
28
17
1
16
0
0
0
3
0
2
30
0
0
2
5
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
9
6
10
0
0
32
14
0
14
9
17
12
14
0
4
22
0
5
0
5
0
0
0
0
4
4
0
0
7
13
12
10

Years of
Inflation
Crisis
5
21
21
1
0
0
10
21
0
1
10
1
18
7
3
0
9
19
6
5
0
0
0
22
2
3
6
6
14
0
3
2
1
0
4
2
0
3
17
0
19
0
0
15
12
0
0
11
20
2
13
3
13
8
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
27
1
0
21
20
20
19

48

Table 5b: Frequency of Crises 1975-2010 by Year. Source: Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
Year

Countries in Banking
Crisis

Countries in Currency
Crisis

Countries in Debt
Crisis

Countries in Inflation Crisis

Number of
Countries

1975

1

10

4

14

70

1976

3

16

5

11

70

1977

5

14

2

14

70

1978

5

10

4

9

70

1979

4

14

7

16

70

1980

5

11

6

21

70

1981

10

17

13

17

70

1982

14

22

17

13

70

1983

16

23

24

17

70

1984

15

27

24

20

70

1985

15

22

23

17

70

1986

12

20

27

17

70

1987

15

16

26

16

70

1988

13

20

23

19

70

1989

16

27

24

19

70

1990

17

22

24

25

70

1991

20

21

21

25

70

1992

22

19

20

21

70

1993

21

21

18

20

70

1994

25

16

17

23

70

1995

27

16

15

20

70

1996

17

14

15

16

70

1997

20

21

12

10

70

1998

18

14

10

10

70

1999

18

16

9

9

70

2000

12

14

11

8

70

2001

13

9

11

9

70

2002

10

10

11

8

70

2003

4

5

11

8

70

2004

1

3

10

4

70

2005

1

13

10

2

70

2006

2

1

6

3

70

2007

5

1

7

3

70

2008

17

22

8

5

70

2009

16

2

7

1

70

2010

13

4

6

1

70

49

Table 6
Banking Crisis
(1)
PostCrisis

-10.6029
[1.4469]**

R2
N

0.09
534

Currency Crisis
(2)

(3)

Dom./External Debt Crisis

(4)
(5)
Dependent Variable: Government Vote Share

-6.8459

-5.6889

-2.9830

[1.4906]**

[1.4648]**

[1.0052]**

0.67
534

0.03
599

-17.0451
[2.8974]**

0.77

(6)
-3.3900

236

(7)
-26.6331

[2.3458]

0.13

599

Inflation Crisis

-10.2615

[2.9077]**

0.84
236

(8)

[1.6419]**

0.27
279

0.92
279

Dependent Variable: Opposition Vote Share (Excluding Unaligned Parties)
PostCrisis

8.6544
[1.5059]**

R2
N

0.06
534

7.7531
[1.3673]**
0.71
534

2.8580

0.5635

[1.5110]

[1.0068]

0.01
599

10.9867
[2.7145]**

0.75

0.07

599

236

2.5713
[2.6374]
0.74
236

20.4801
[2.8892]**
0.17
279

6.3344
[2.1033]**
0.86
279

Dependent Variable: Polarization
PostCrisis

0.1761
[0.0625]**

R2
N

0.01
752

0.1002

0.0971

0.0605

[0.0637]

[0.0646]

[0.0489]

0.64
752

0.00
753

0.2732
[0.0753]**

0.63

0.03

753

366

0.1126
[0.0840]
0.57
366

0.4836
[0.0616]**
0.09
411

0.1099
[0.0727]
0.67
411

Note: This table estimates pre and post crisis levels of three different dependent variables. Independent variable is a post-crisis indicator variable. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) include country and year
fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets. ** Significant at .01 * significant at .05. Includes only country and year observations within 5 years before or after a crisis. All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff
(2011) countries. All crises 1975-2010.

50

Table 7
Banking Crisis
(1)
PostCrisis

0.1059
[0.0189]**

R2
N

0.05
523

Currency Crisis
(2)
0.0656
[0.0110]**
0.82

523

(3)

Dom./External Debt Crisis

(4)
(5)
Dependent Variable: Party Fractionalization

0.0733
[0.0193]**
0.03

0.0466

0.2250

[0.0115]**
0.85

585

[0.0397]**
0.14

585

230

(6)
0.1859
[0.0280]**
0.91
230

Inflation Crisis
(7)
0.3346
[0.0338]**
0.31
269

(8)
0.1269
[0.0193]**
0.92
269

Dependent Variable: Government Fractionalization
PostCrisis
R2
N

0.0195

0.0248

0.0179

0.0444

0.0680

[0.0219]

[0.0188]

[0.0221]

[0.0177]*

[0.0379]

0.00
534

0.68
534

0.00

0.73

591

0.01

591

232

0.1006
[0.0359]**
0.74
232

0.1210
[0.0241]**
0.06
275

0.0296
[0.0296]
0.74
275

Dependent Variable: Opposition Fractionalization
PostCrisis
R2
N

0.0481

0.0434

0.0125

0.0178

0.0678

0.0161

[0.0207]*

[0.0192]*

[0.0198]

[0.0171]

[0.0349]

[0.0455]

0.01
652

0.56
652

0.00
723

0.61

0.01

723

258

0.51
258

0.0999
[0.0345]**
0.02
310

0.0561
[0.0312]
0.77
310

Note: This table estimates pre and post crisis levels of three different dependent variables. Independent variable is a post-crisis indicator variable. Dependent variable is a post-crisis indicator. Columns (2),
(4), (6), and (8) include country and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets. ** Significant at .01 * significant at .05. Includes only country and year observations within 5 years before or
after a crisis. All 70 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) countries. All crises 1975-2010.

51

