                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         U.S. INTERNATIONAL EQUITY INVESTMENT

                                              John Ammer
                                             Sara B. Holland
                                             David C. Smith
                                           Francis E. Warnock

                                          Working Paper 17839
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17839


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012

A revised version of this paper will be published in Journal of Accounting Research. Previous versions
of this paper were titled “Look at Me Now: What Attracts U.S. Shareholders?” The authors thank
Sandro Andrade, Mark Carey, Mihir Desai, Laura Field, Charles Hadlock, Andrew Karolyi, Christian
Leuz, Ross Levine, Michelle Lowry, Darius Miller, Greg Nini, Bent Sorensen, Mark Spiegel, Michael
Weisbach, an anonymous referee,and seminar participants at the 2004 EFA Meetings, 2006 AFA Meetings,
Binghamton University (SUNY), College of William and Mary, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve
Board, Federal Reserve System SCIEA Meetings, ISCTE Business School, Michigan State University,
NYSE, Penn State University, Stockholm Institute for Financial Research, Universidad Catolica Portuguesa,
Universidade do Porto, University of Houston, University of Minnesota, and University of Virginia
for helpful comments. Nathanael Clinton and Alex Rothenberg provided exceptional research assistance.
 The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other employee
of the Federal Reserve System. The statistical analysis of security-level data on U.S. investors’ holdings
reported in this study was conducted at the International Finance Division of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality requirements.
 Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John Ammer, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        U.S. INTERNATIONAL EQUITY INVESTMENT

                                             John Ammer
                                            Sara B. Holland
                                            David C. Smith
                                          Francis E. Warnock

                                         Working Paper 17839
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17839


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012

Previous versions of this paper were titled “Look at Me Now: What Attracts U.S. Shareholders?”
The authors thank Sandro Andrade, Mark Carey, Mihir Desai, Laura Field, Charles Hadlock, Andrew
Karolyi, Christian Leuz, Ross Levine, Michelle Lowry, Darius Miller, Greg Nini, Bent Sorensen, Mark
Spiegel, Michael Weisbach, an anonymous referee,and seminar participants at the 2004 EFA Meetings,
2006 AFA Meetings, Binghamton University (SUNY), College of William and Mary, European Central
Bank, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve System SCIEA Meetings, ISCTE Business School,
Michigan State University, NYSE, Penn State University, Stockholm Institute for Financial Research,
Universidad Catolica Portuguesa, Universidade do Porto, University of Houston, University of Minnesota,
and University of Virginia for helpful comments. Nathanael Clinton and Alex Rothenberg provided
exceptional research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of
the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System or of any other employee of the Federal Reserve System. The statistical analysis of
security-level data on U.S. investors’ holdings reported in this study was conducted at the International
Finance Division of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under arrangements that
maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for
generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John Ammer, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
U.S. International Equity Investment
John Ammer, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith, and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 17839
February 2012
JEL No. F3,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

U.S. investors are the largest group of international equity investors in the world, but to date conclusive
evidence on which types of foreign firms are able to attract U.S. investment is not available. Using
a comprehensive dataset of all U.S. investment in foreign equities, we find that the single most important
determinant of the amount of U.S. investment a foreign firm receives is whether the firm cross-lists
on a U.S. exchange. Correcting for selection biases, cross-listing leads to a doubling (or more) in U.S.
investment, an impact greater than all other factors combined. We also show that our firm-level analysis
has implications for country-level studies, suggesting that research investigating equity investment
patterns at the country-level should include cross-listing as an endogenous control variable. We describe
easy-to-implement methods for including the importance of cross-listing at the country level.


John Ammer                                                  David C. Smith
International Finance Division                              McIntire School of Commerce
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System            University of Virginia
Washington DC 20551                                         Charlottesville, VA 22903
john.ammer@frb.gov                                          dcs8f@comm.virginia.edu

Sara B. Holland                                             Francis E. Warnock
University of Georgia                                       Darden Business School
Terry College of Business                                   University of Virginia
sbh@uga.edu                                                 Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                            and NBER
                                                            warnockf@darden.virginia.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17839
1. Introduction

        U.S. investors are the single largest group of international equity investors in the world. As

of end-2007, U.S. international equity investment totaled $5.3 trillion, an amount comparable to

the securities holdings of all sovereign wealth funds or to the total holdings of all global reserves

held by national governments.1 The past decade has witnessed a resurgent interest in studying

patterns of international investment, and U.S. international equity investment figures prominently

in many studies.2 Despite the size of the U.S. foreign equity portfolio and the renewed focus on

international investment research, no study can point to the most important determinants of the

amount of U.S. investment that a foreign firm receives.

        Perhaps the largest roadblock in the literature is that, until recently, there has been no

dataset that is particularly well-suited to examining U.S. equity investments abroad. Many existing

studies use country-level data (e.g., U.S. investors’ holdings of German equities as compared to

Japanese equities), which is publicly available but naturally limited. Some studies utilize firm-

level data, but with narrow datasets (e.g., focusing on a small set of foreign countries, or limited to

the portfolios of institutional investors with public disclosure obligations) or with simple

methodologies that make establishing causation difficult.

        In this paper we use the most comprehensive dataset available on U.S. international equity

investment—a confidential security-level dataset of all U.S. investors’ holdings of foreign equities

used by U.S. Treasury officials to calculate foreign holdings by U.S. residents—to answer one

important question: What are the most important determinants of U.S. investment in the equity of

foreign firms?

1
 On the investments of sovereign wealth funds, see Bernstein, Lerner, and Schoar [2009].
2
 See, among many others, Glassman and Riddick [2001], Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003],
Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock [2004], Chan, Covrig and Ng [2005], Fidora, Fratzscher, and Thimann [2007], Kho,
Stulz, and Warnock [2009], Lane and Milesi-Ferretti [2008], Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012], Desai and Dharmapala
[2011], Didier, Rigobon, and Schmukler [2010], Amiram and Frank [2010], and Yu [2010].
         To motivate this question further, consider the composition of U.S. investors’ foreign

equity portfolios compared to what would be implied by traditional portfolio theory. The simplest

portfolio approach to international investment predicts that all investors hold portfolios with a

weight on each firm that is proportional to the firm’s weight in the world market portfolio. While

it is well-established that U.S. investors, in aggregate, underweight foreign equities (and

overweight domestic stocks) relative to simple benchmarks, our firm-level holdings data show that

on a firm-by-firm basis the U.S. international equity portfolio also differs dramatically from the

market portfolio weights.3 U.S. investors ignore many foreign stocks—the median foreign firm

received U.S. investment amounting to only 0.4 percent of market capitalization—and concentrate

disproportionately on others. Foreign firms in the 90th and 95th percentiles attract U.S. investment

totaling 10.7 and 16.7 percent, respectively, of their market capitalization. As it turns out, a

significant proportion of these firms with heavy U.S. weights have also cross-listed on a U.S.

exchange.

         These observations, as well as past work that noted an association between U.S.

investment and cross-listings,4 prompts us to explore the differences in U.S. holdings of cross-

listed and non-cross-listed foreign firms. In fact, merely distinguishing whether or not a foreign

firm cross-lists in the United States reveals a striking contrast. Median U.S. investment in cross-

listed firms is 13.6 percent of the firm’s market capitalization, dwarfing the 0.3 percent median

holdings in non-cross-listed firms.

         This stylized fact, while interesting, cannot be interpreted without reference to the


3
  On the home bias, see Lewis [1999], Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock [2004], and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2009],
among many others.
4
  Our paper is not the first to note that cross-listing can increase U.S. investment. See, for example, Ahearne, Griever,
and Warnock [2004], Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller [2004], Edison and Warnock [2004], Aggarwal, Klapper, and
Wysocki [2005], Ferreira and Matos [2008], and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2009]. However, due to data limitations,
none of these papers can accurately measure and distinguish a cross-listing effect from potential selection biases, nor
do they investigate causation.


                                                            2
underlying causal links between cross-listing and U.S. investment. In particular, cross-listing is a

voluntary decision, and it is typical for large, well-established and highly liquid firms to choose

the United States as a cross-listing venue. Thus, the kinds of firms that choose to cross-list might

be the types that attract substantial U.S. ownership even without the cross-listing. Moreover, these

firms might choose to cross-list exactly because this attracts large U.S. investment. As we discuss

below, distinguishing these effects has important economic implications. What the summary

statistics do tell us is that any attempt to understand the most important factors determining which

foreign firms are able to attract U.S. investment must also address the firm’s decision of whether

or not to cross-list on a U.S. exchange.

        Because the econometrics literature suggests that there is no single statistical methodology

that perfectly accounts for the endogeneity inherent in a firm’s decision to cross-list, we use three

complementary techniques to study the impact of selection and isolate the cross-listing effect on

U.S. holdings.5 We first estimate a parametric model that explicitly accounts for the underlying

endogeneity between U.S. holdings behavior and the decision to cross-list on a U.S. exchange.

The model jointly estimates the cross-listing and holding decisions as a system of simultaneous

equations, using a Heckman [1979]-type methodology first proposed by Lee [1978] to study the

impact of union membership on wages. This framework not only allows us to adjust for the effects

of selection bias, but also produces structural estimates of the relation between holdings and cross-

listing. We follow the parametric results with two additional methods for selection-bias

adjustment: semi-parametric propensity score matching and non-parametric “difference-in-

differences” estimates.

        The results from all three methodologies present a consistent and compelling picture of the


5
 For recent critiques and reviews of selection-bias corrections, see Lalonde [1986], Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and
Todd [1998], and Larcker and Rusticus [2010].


                                                         3
determinants of U.S. investment in international stocks. First, we find that the selection

adjustments do matter; firms with characteristics (such as size) that help attract ample U.S.

investment even without the cross-listing are more likely to elect to cross-list in the United States.

But more importantly, we show that a dramatic cross-listing effect remains once we control for

selection bias. The firm’s decision to cross-list is the single most important determinant of the

amount of U.S. investment it will receive, and the act of cross-listing causes a substantial increase

in U.S. investment. Adjusted for sample selection, average U.S. holdings in foreign firms that

cross-list on a U.S. exchange is two to three times higher than it would have been had the firm not

cross-listed in the United States.

         The impact of cross-listing cannot be ignored. The cross-listing effect itself accounts for

25-35% of all U.S. investment in foreign equities, even though only 4% of foreign firms are cross-

listed.6 Our estimates imply that of the $5.2 trillion in foreign equity held by U.S. investors in

2007, investment due to cross-listing accounted for $2 trillion, an amount equivalent in size to all

foreign exchange reserves held by China and the eurozone or to the holdings of the largest five

sovereign wealth funds. A U.S. cross-listing is not the only measurable characteristic that

influences U.S. portfolio choice among foreign firms; we also report evidence that among the set

of non cross-listed firms U.S. investors prefer firms that are large, transparent, and liquid.

However, the firm’s decision of whether or not to cross-list appears to have a greater impact than

all other identifiable factors combined.

         We explore explanations for the cross-listing effect and show the most obvious—that

trading costs for U.S. listed stocks are lower for U.S investors—cannot explain the effect. The

majority of U.S. investment in foreign companies is held directly in the foreign-traded shares,

6
  The cross-listing effect is 8-11%, depending on the methodology and sample. In our sample, the market
capitalization of cross-listed firms is $3,300 billion, so the cross-listing effect accounted for $264-$363 billion in U.S.
investment, or roughly 25-35% of the $1018 billion total U.S. portfolio investment.


                                                             4
rather than in the corresponding American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) that are traded on U.S.

exchanges. That is, the majority of U.S. investors do not even use the U.S. market to acquire

foreign shares of cross-listed firms; rather, they acquire the shares in the firms’ home market.

Moreover, U.S. holdings in Level I ADRs experience a much smaller “Level I effect”. While

traded on U.S. over-the-counter markets, Level I ADRs do not afford the legal and disclosure

protections of foreign firms listed on a U.S. exchange. Instead, U.S. investors seem most attracted

to cross-listed firms that become more informationally transparent following the cross-listing,

particularly those firms with poor accounting practices prior to listing in the United States.

           Identifying the most important factor behind U.S. international equity investment could

directly impact the literature on international investment. Much of the recent research on U.S.

international investment (e.g., Didier, Rigobon, and Schmukler [2010], Andrade and

Chhaochharia [2010], and Desai and Dharmapala [2011]) does not control for cross-listing,

implicitly treating the cross-listing effect as a sample selection issue. Because we establish that

causation runs from cross-listing to U.S. investment, it is important to ascertain whether failure to

include the cross-listing effect could alter inferences in the current literature.7 A priori, one would

expect that inferences in papers involving variables that are highly correlated with cross-listing,

but that omit a measure of cross-listing in their specifications, are most likely to be altered. In the

final section of the paper, we reproduce regressions from two recent country-level U.S. equity

investment papers, Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010] and Desai and Dharmapala [2011]. We add

a cross-listing variable to these regressions, instrumenting for potential endogeneity in the cross-

listing decision, and use a dependent variable that is both adjusted for closely held shares

(following Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003] and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2009]) and

free of a size bias (Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012]). With the additional cross-listing control in place,

7
    We thank our referee for making this suggestion.


                                                       5
we show that the Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010] result tying U.S. equity investment in a

country to the level of U.S. foreign direct investment no longer holds, while the Desai and

Dharmapala [2011] results showing a shift in portfolio allocations following the lowering of U.S.

dividend taxes are somewhat weakened. Our objective is not to overturn the results of these

papers—indeed, we estimate regressions that differ in important ways from the ones they

implemented—but simply to show that conclusions from U.S. international investment papers are

sensitive to the inclusion of a cross-listing variable (and a properly constructed dependent

variable).

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the data used in the paper.

Section 3 provides simple but informative summary statistics. Section 4 describes the

methodologies we use for estimating the average cross-listing effect. Section 5 reports the main

firm-level results. Section 6 applies the insights from our firm-level analysis to country-level U.S.

studies, and shows that including cross-listing as an endogenous explanatory variable alters some

past results. Section 7 concludes.



2. Data

2.1. Benchmark Survey Data

          Our investigation relies on comprehensive security-level data on U.S. holdings of foreign

stocks as obtained confidentially through periodic benchmark surveys conducted jointly by the

U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board.8 The surveys cover holdings at two

distinct points in time: December 1997 and March 1994. These surveys are somewhat dated, but

are the latest available; since the 1997 survey no such survey has been processed in a way that


8
 Griever, Lee, and Warnock [2001] provide a primer on the survey. Complete details of the 1997 survey, including
forms, instructions, and data, are available from http://www.ustreas.gov/tic/fpis.html.


                                                        6
allows the type of security-level analysis necessary to adequately assess the determinants of U.S.

investment.

         Each survey must be completed by all U.S. financial institutions, both within the United

States and abroad, that are entrusted with the management or safekeeping of client equity

holdings. Institutions covered include all U.S. custodian banks, other commercial and investment

banks, mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies, endowments, and foundations.

Respondents are required to report the foreign stock holdings of all U.S. resident clients and are

subject to penalty under law for noncompliance.9

         The survey, designed to pick up all recorded U.S. resident portfolio holdings of foreign

equities, is the source for official U.S. data on cross-border portfolio investment.10 The only

portfolio investments missed by the survey are “uncountable” holdings – i.e., those that evade

detection because the U.S. resident used a foreign custodian, provided a foreign home address, or

instructed the custodian not to employ a U.S. sub-custodian. Federal Reserve cross-checks with

non-U.S. data collectors suggest that the number of uncountable holdings is small.11



2.2 Sample Selection



9
  Custodians are the main source of information, covering 97 percent of the market value of the securities in the 1997
survey. Institutional investors report in detail on their ownership of foreign securities only if they do not entrust the
safekeeping of these securities to U.S.-resident custodians. If they do use U.S.-resident custodians, institutional
investors report only the names of the custodians and the amounts entrusted, information that is then used to cross-
check the security-level data submitted by custodians.
10
   “Portfolio investments” exclude holdings for control purposes, defined to be individual holdings of 10 percent or
more of shares outstanding. Excluding these large holdings is likely to have little impact in our sample because it is
relatively uncommon for a single U.S. investor to hold more than 10 percent of a publicly traded foreign company.
11
   Other data sources of U.S. investor holdings are relatively limited. For example, U.S. institutional investors’
holdings as reported to the SEC on Form 13(f) exclude holdings in securities that do not trade in U.S. markets and in
foreign securities that underlie ADRs. Only a small fraction of publicly traded firms domiciled outside of the United
States actually trade in U.S. markets (3.5 percent in 1997, according to the U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve survey),
and, as shown below, among those that do trade within U.S. borders U.S. investors hold more than half of their
ownership in the underlying security, not through ADRs. Thus, Form 13(f) filings cover only a small segment of the
securities available to U.S. investors and underestimate U.S. holdings in the firms covered in their sample.


                                                            7
       We include in our investigation U.S. holdings of all non-U.S. companies tracked by

Worldscope. We use the May 1999 release of Worldscope, which contains 1997 financial and

accounting data on 13,445 non-U.S. companies domiciled in 52 different countries.

       Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003] and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2009]

argue that float-adjusted measures of holdings provide a better sense of stock available for

purchase by dispersed portfolio investors who have no inside connection to the firm. Thus, where

possible we normalize firm-level U.S. holdings by “float”, defined to be market capitalization net

of the value of holdings by insiders, which requires data on both market capitalization (market

value of equity) and insider holdings. Datastream, which provides the broadest international

coverage of market price data, is our primary source for firm-level market capitalizations. When a

value is missing in Datastream, we turn to reports from Morgan Stanley, which provide reliable

market data for companies included in the MSCI All-country World index, or Worldscope, which

provides December market capitalizations for those companies that complete their fiscal year at

the calendar year-end. We also use Morgan Stanley and Worldscope to cross-check the

Datastream numbers for recording errors. In total, we are able to calculate market capitalization

figures for 12,236 of the original 13,445 Worldscope firms. Because of obvious data errors we

discard 15 very small firms for which the reported value of U.S. holdings exceeds reported stock

market capitalization. The remaining sample of 12,221 firms spans 46 home countries, as listed in

Table 1. To get to float, we scale market capitalization down by the figure given in Worldscope’s

“closely held share” field, which reports the fraction of equity owned by corporate officers,

directors and their family members, individual shareholders with more than 5 percent holdings,

other corporations, and the firm’s own pension funds and trusts. We adjust these Worldscope

figures to exclude the value of depositary institution holdings, which are sometimes mistakenly




                                                 8
counted in the closely held fields.12 Because of missing data on insider holdings, our float-adjusted

sample contains 8,528 firms. Note, too, that accurate firm-level data on float are largely

unavailable for our 1994 sample, so when we analyze that sample we scale holdings by market

capitalization.

         Our sample is quite representative. The 12,221 firms for which we could match

Worldscope and U.S. holdings data had an end-1997 market capitalization of $11,079 billion,

representing more than 90 percent of the value of all non-U.S. equity (International Finance

Corporation [1998]). U.S. investors’ $1,018 billion stake in these companies accounted for over 92

percent of the $1,208 billion total U.S. foreign equity holdings. Most of the $90 billion in U.S.

holdings omitted (by necessity) from our sample are in firms located in the Caribbean financial

centers, for which firm-level variables are generally unavailable.



3. Summary Statistics

3.1. U.S. holdings across all foreign firms

         Table 2 reports the distribution of U.S. holdings of non-U.S. firms as of December 1997.

As a benchmark, note that if U.S. investors followed a simple portfolio model in which the weight

of each firm in U.S. portfolios equaled its weight in the “world market portfolio”, U.S. holdings

would amount to 49.6 percent of the market capitalization (58.3 percent of float) of each foreign

firm.

         The table shows that firm-level U.S. holdings differ dramatically from the world market


12
   Specifically, we exclude holdings by the Bank of New York, Morgan Guaranty Trust, and Citibank, because these
shares are likely to be holdings for ADR programs, and the New Zealand Central Securities Depositary. There are
other reasons to believe that the Worldscope measure of insider holdings contains measurement error. Worldscope
coverage of the “closely held shares” field is uneven, and reporting requirements differ across countries. Moreover, it
is unclear whether the classifications within Worldscope of what constitutes a closely held share conform well to
theory on who gains private benefits from control and who would be willing to sell to a U.S. investor. For example,
the measure includes holdings of large, unaffiliated blockholders.


                                                           9
portfolio. Mean U.S. holdings are 3.5 percent of foreign firms’ market capitalization (6.3 percent

of float). This substantial underinvestment relative to the world market portfolio is, of course, one

representation of the home bias. While the home bias is well-established, the extent of the

underinvestment is striking, with fully one-quarter of all foreign firms receiving no U.S.

investment at all, and median U.S. investment equivalent to only 0.4 percent of market

capitalization (1.2 percent of float). However, the figures for the 90th and 95th percentiles show

that holdings in these less popular firms are offset by a significant minority of international

companies in which U.S. investors own 10 percent or more of the market capitalization and at

least 20 percent of the outstanding float.

         In other words, the aggregate foreign equity portfolio of a very large, diverse, and

quantitatively significant group of investors appears to deviate quite sharply from market weights.

This fact seems particularly surprising given that much of this investment is directed by

professional managers whose performance tends to be measured against broad market

benchmarks. It is also at odds with the notion that U.S. investors, were they relatively uninformed

outsiders, ought to take a passive approach to portfolio choice in foreign equities.



3.2. U.S. holdings and cross-listing

Why do some foreign firms receive so much more U.S. investment than others? What is the most

important determinant of the extent of U.S. investment a foreign firm receives? As a first pass at

answering these questions, we reexamine the distribution of U.S. holdings, but this time we split

the sample by whether a firm is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange (Table 3).13 The summary



13
   Most cross-listed firms in the U.S. do so via an ADR, a traded financial claim backed by a set number of equity
shares in the underlying company. ADRs are created when a firm initiates a relationship with a broker that buys the
firm’s shares and instructs a U.S. financial institution, called a “depositary,” to hold the shares in custody and issue


                                                            10
statistics reveal a striking pattern. The vast majority of non-U.S. firms are not cross-listed on a

U.S. exchange, so the distribution of U.S. holdings for the non-cross-listed sample closely

resembles that of the full sample. In contrast, the summary statistics for cross-listed foreign firms

are dramatically different. U.S. investors hold substantial stakes in almost all cross-listed firms.

The median cross-listed foreign firm receives U.S. investment totaling 13.6 percent of market

capitalization (20.2 percent of float), while the 90th percentile cross-listed firm has almost 40

percent U.S. ownership (and over 50 percent of float).

         Taken at face value, these results suggest that a U.S. cross-listing is an important

determinant of the extent to which U.S. investors hold shares in a foreign firm. Whether selection

can explain this large difference—in that those firms that cross-list in the United States are those

that U.S. investors would prefer to hold anyway—or whether this difference is due to a true

“cross-listing effect” is the key question that we address in the following sections.



4. Methodology: Controlling for Selectivity

         Selection biases arise when a researcher attempts to compare two different population

groups as if they are similar. The problem commonly occurs when heterogeneous participants self-

select into groups rather than are randomly assigned to the groups. We cannot observe the amount

U.S. investors would have held in cross-listed firms in December of 1997 if those firms had not

cross-listed, nor can we directly observe the reasons why the foreign firms decided to cross-list in

the United States. Simple estimates of the relation between U.S. investment in foreign firms and

cross-listing will be biased if the firm’s propensity to cross-list on a U.S. exchange is correlated

with other characteristics of the firm that affect U.S. investors’ holding decisions. Moreover, firms

negotiable securities backed by the shares, the “receipts,” to an interested investor. Level I ADRs trade OTC, while
the “cross-listed” Level II and III ADRs list and trade on one of the major U.S. stock exchanges.



                                                          11
might cross-list in the United States for the specific purpose of increasing U.S. investor interest, in

which case the causation between cross-listing and U.S. holdings could run in both directions.

        Our goal in determining whether there is an actual “cross-listing effect” is to estimate the

unobservable component of what U.S. holdings would have been in cross-listed firms had they not

cross-listed. Then, the cross-listing effect is an estimate of the treatment effect

     E(H iL | X  1)  E(H iL | X  0) ,                                                         (1)

where X is an indicator variable set to one when a firm has cross-listed on a U.S. exchange,

E(H iL | X  1) is the expected level of U.S. holdings in cross-listed firm i conditional on it being

listed, and E(H iL | X  0) is the expected level of holdings in cross-listed firm i if it had not cross-

listed.14

        Corrections for selection bias are themselves subject to specification error (Lalonde

[1986]; Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd [1998]; Larcker and Rusticus [2010]). Therefore,

while we motivate much of our analysis of holdings and cross-listing using fully parameterized

structural models of the holdings and cross-listing decisions, we ultimately incorporate three

different estimators—a structural model, p-matching, and difference-in-differences—to robustly

measure the cross-listing effect. We first describe the structural model, and then turn to the more

general estimation of the cross-listing effect.



4.1 Modeling the holdings and cross-listing decisions: a structural framework

        Our first estimator adopts the structural framework in Lee’s [1978] study of unionization

and wages, which extends the Heckman [1979] selection-bias correction to a simultaneous system.


14
  One could also estimate the listing impact from the non cross-listed firms, E(HU|X=1) - E(HU|X=0), or from both
cross-listed and non cross-listed firms to generate an unconditional listing impact, E(H|X=1) - E(H|X=0). Heckman,
Ichimura, Smith, and Todd [1998] provide an overview of issues relating to the different measures.


                                                         12
In our application, the framework allows feedback from bias-adjusted holdings equations to the

cross-listing decision.

        4.1.1 U.S. investors’ preferences for foreign equities

        The system begins with a model of U.S investor preferences for holding foreign equity:

        H iU  U  ZiHβU   iU .                                                        (2)

        H iL   L  ZiHβL   iL                                                         (3)

        We use the same set of determinants ( Z iH ) to model both U.S. holdings of non-cross-listed

stocks ( H iU ) and holdings in cross-listed stocks ( H Li ), but we place no restrictions on the

coefficients, recognizing that decisions to hold these two types of stocks may be fundamentally

different. This not only provides more flexibility in estimation, but also can help identify the

structural parameters. Note that observations of H Li are H iU are truncated by selection because, at a

given point in time, we can only observe a firm as cross-listed or not.

        The instrument set Z iH contains firm- and country-level proxies for a variety of factors that

could influence the willingness of U.S. investors to invest in a foreign firm. We motivate the

contents of this instrument set in the following paragraphs. Appendix A contains specific

definitions for each variable.

        U.S investors may want information—both simple and more fundamental—about a foreign

stock before deciding to purchase it. Firm size is a natural variable to include; larger firms are

generally believed to be more transparent than smaller firms, in part because they tend to get more

coverage both from the press and from securities analysts. Because measures of size are not

consistent across industries—there is, in particular, a disconnect between size measures for

financial services firms and firms in other sectors—we measure size using a combination of




                                                    13
average industry market capitalization and the firm’s size (assets) relative to its industry average.

We also include an MSCI member dummy; MSCI index members are selected on the basis of

liquidity, size, and market representation. Illiquidity can reflect asymmetric information (e.g.,

Easley and O’Hara [2004]) that would put U.S. investors at a disadvantage.

       The quality or relevance of information about a foreign company will depend on, among

other things, the accounting and disclosure practices of the company. Therefore, U.S. investors

may favor companies that provide an accurate and timely accounting of their financial

performance (Leuz and Verrecchia [2004]; Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller [2004]), and may be

attracted to foreign stocks domiciled in countries with forthright accounting practices (Lang, Lins,

and Miller [2003]). Thus, we include two measures of accounting quality. The first measure is the

national accounting quality index compiled by the Center for Financial Analysis and Research

(CIFAR). As reported by Bushman, Piotroski, and Smith [2004], the index averages across firms

within a given country the number of items, out of a possible maximum of 90, that are included as

part of a firm’s financial statements. The second measure is a firm-level accounting quality index,

constructed as the sum of four indicator criteria based on whether the firm uses a Big Six auditor,

received a clean audit report, used international accounting standards or U.S. GAAP, and reported

consolidated statements. This variable measures variation in firm-specific accounting quality not

picked up by the national accounting quality variable.

       U.S. investors may care about the safety of their investment in the hands of managers who

operate outside U.S. borders. LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV [1999],

[2002]) document substantial cross-country variation in how well legal systems protect outside

shareholders from expropriation by firm insiders. Durnev and Kim [2005], among others, show

that the quality of corporate governance within a country can vary greatly across firms. Thus, U.S.




                                                  14
investors could tilt their investments toward countries with strong legal protections of minority

investors and seek out firms with a reputation for good corporate governance. We consider two

measures that capture governance/legality issues: the country’s LLSV shareholder rights index and

a dummy for dividend-paying firms. U.S. investors may choose to underweight firms from

markets with weak protections of minority shareholders.15 A company’s dividend-paying record

can be viewed as a commitment device, with the willingness to dispense cash signaling a

commitment not to expropriate funds from minority shareholders.16 A dividend-payment dummy

also helps control for a variable that cannot be included in float-adjusted regressions because it

would induce measurement bias: the proportion of shares held by insiders.17

         Both instrument sets also include some more general control variables. We include a

country’s dividend tax withholding rate faced by U.S. investors. Withholding taxes can cause U.S.

investors to face higher tax rates on dividends originating from a given foreign country than on

U.S. stock dividends. This would make stocks from the foreign country less attractive to U.S.

investors, particularly if other potential investors in stocks from the two countries did not face the

same tax rate differential (otherwise, prices could adjust to equilibrate after-tax expected returns).
15
   See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998].
16
   See Faccio, Lang, and Young [2001], Kalcheva and Lins [2007], Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2006],
Easterbrook [1984], and Jensen [1986].
17
   Kalcheva and Lins [2007] provide evidence of the link between dividend payments and potential expropriation by
insiders. Evidence that outside investors avoid ownership in closely held companies, perhaps fearing the power of
insiders to expropriate firm resources at the expense of minority shareholders, is provided in La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1999], Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer [2000], and Leuz, Lins, and
Warnock [2009]. To see the bias if a closely held variable was included in our float-adjusted regressions, let F̂i
represent our market-float adjusted holdings, Ûi represent the market capitalization (unadjusted) holdings, and Iˆi be
our measurement of the proportion of shares held by insiders. Then, by definition,
      Uˆ
Fˆi  i .
     1 Iˆi
Suppose that the insider stake is measured with some error so that Iˆi  I i i , where Ii is the insiders’ true stake and ηi
is some white-noise error. Then, cov(Fˆ  F , Iˆ  I )  0. In other words, measurement error in the proportion of
                                         i    i   i   i
insider holdings imparts a positive bias on the coefficient estimate in the holdings model when scaled by market float.
Intuitively, a positive measurement error shock increase the right-hand-side variable (measured proportion of shares
held by insiders) as it also increases the dependent variable (holdings, by reducing the denominator).


                                                             15
Often a U.S. investor can obtain a tax credit that fully offsets a dividend tax that has been withheld

by a foreign government. However, U.S. pension funds are not taxed directly on dividends, so tax

credits are of no use to them, and thus taxes charged on foreign dividends generally will represent

a differential between the foreign and domestic dividend tax rates that U.S. pensions face (the

domestic rate is zero). Thus, at least one important investor group is clearly affected by dividend

withholding tax rates.

        As a measure of economic proximity (Sarkissian and Schill [2004]), we include the share

of imports in total U.S. supply at the industry level. Greater economic proximity may increase

familiarity and improve the flow of information. We also include in Z iH a dummy variable for

firms that might be fundamentally different. For example, we include a dummy for Canadian firms

for two reasons. Institutional similarities and ties within North America may make Canadian firms

special. In addition, for cross-listed stocks, SEC disclosure requirements are different for firms

based in Canada than for those from other countries, which could affect their relative transparency

to U.S. investors, all else equal.

        4.1.2 Firms’ decisions to cross-list

        The second part of the simultaneous system involves a firm’s decision to cross-list on a

U.S. exchange. We motivate the decision by considering the potential benefits and costs of cross-

listing. Let X *i represent the net benefits that flow to firm i from cross-listing on a U.S exchange.

We assume that these benefits can be described by the following relation,

                                    
        X *i  α x  γ 0 H iL  H iU  γ 1 H iU  Z iX β x  ε iX ,           (4)

where H iL and H iU are the endogenously determined proportion of firm i’s equity that would be

held by U.S. investors if the firm were cross-listed (L) in the United States or not cross-listed (U),

respectively.



                                                                16
       The difference H iL - H iU models the anticipated impact of listing on U.S. holdings. It is

included in (4) to allow for foreign firms to cross-list in the United States precisely because it

attracts greater U.S. investor interest. H iU also enters equation (4) independently to allow the level

of U.S. holdings prior to cross-listing to affect a firm’s decision to cross-list. We posit that firms

with large pre-existing U.S. shareholdings could cross-list on a U.S. exchange to reduce trading

costs for their shareholder base.

       The vector Z iX contains firm- and country-specific variables that are associated with

benefits and costs of cross-listing, but that are taken to be exogenous. There are both direct and

indirect costs associated with listing in the United States that could make firms reluctant to cross-

list. Most cross-listed firms face a host of direct registration, disclosure, and compliance costs.

They must register with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and submit periodic

filings that are in English and include financial statements reconciled to U.S. generally accepted

accounting principles (GAAP). They must meet the listing requirements of the U.S. exchange,

which are often stricter than those in the firms’ home country, and pay both listing fees to the

exchange and filing fees to the SEC. Firms that cross-list to raise new capital must also register

their securities under the SEC 1933 Securities Act and the 1934 Exchange Act. Indirect costs

include the commitments that cross-listed firms make to abide by U.S. regulations and law. Firms

that violate exchange regulations risk fines and the threat of delisting. Those that violate SEC

regulations face potential shareholder lawsuits and civil or criminal penalties under U.S. law.

Closely held firms may be especially reluctant to cross-list if the increased level of disclosure and

legal oversight gives more power to minority shareholders.

       The benefits of cross-listing vary across firms and can include product market

considerations (to the extent that listing on the NYSE can help make a foreign company a



                                                   17
household name in the United States), employee compensation (to the extent that it includes grants

of options or stock), and takeover strategy (where a cross-listed stock can serve as a takeover

currency). One potential benefit that both practitioners and theorists cite as a reason for cross-

listing is to increase the set of investors that can, at low cost, access information and trade shares

in the firm. That is, cross-listing reduces “receiver” costs associated with expanding the

shareholder base (Merton [1987]].18 This in turn may improve risk sharing, pricing, and the

liquidity of a firm’s stock. Accordingly, firms seeking to expand their shareholder base through

increased U.S. ownership might have the strongest incentive to cross-list. Firms may also list in

the U.S. to reduce institutional frictions associated with maintaining their existing investor base.

For example, if a firm already has U.S. investors, it may cross-list to make it easier for those

investors to manage their stock portfolios. But the other considerations (product market,

compensation, takeover currency) might be more important: Any consideration that involves

expanding the shareholder base must be weighed against that of relinquishing any private benefits

of control.

        We also include some of the variables from Z iH , as these variables are also likely to

influence the cross-listing decision. Firm size will be important for the listing decision if there are

economies of scale in the direct costs of listing, including regulatory compliance and accounting

disclosure. Cross-listing may be less costly for firms in industries with greater economic

proximity. We include the Canada dummy because cross-listing should be less costly for Canadian




18
  Lang, Lins, and Miller [2003] argue that foreign firms may cross-list simply to expand their “shareholder base”, the
set of investors available to purchase a given firms’ shares. See also Merton [1987], Miller [1999], Foerster and
Karolyi [1999], Karolyi and Stulz [2003], and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004]. The argument is also popular among
U.S. practitioners who encourage foreign clients to cross-list. See Fanto and Karmel [1997], and the ADR websites at
JPMorgan (www.adr.com/research/about_types.html) and the Bank of New York (www.adrbny.com).



                                                         18
firms, as they enjoy an exemption from most SEC reporting requirements.19 We also posit that

firms from countries with weak accounting standards will find it more costly to prepare financial

statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.

         In addition, we include three variables that are unique to the cross-listing specification:

home-country trading volume/GDP (because the benefits from cross-listing might be particularly

high for firms that quickly “outgrow” their underdeveloped home equity markets), a Civil Law

dummy (following Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004]), and the proportion of shares held by

insiders (which proxies for the cost of relinquishing private control benefits through increased

disclosure and monitoring associated with cross-listing).20

         4.1.3 Closing the structural model

     We do not observe X *i in equation (4). Instead, we observe realizations of the indicator

variable Xi,

         X i  0 if X *i  0                                                                       (5)

         X i  1 if X *i  0 .                                                                     (6)

Xi equals one when firm i is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange, and zero otherwise. Note that

equations (4)-(6), coupled with an assumption that the error term  iX is normally distributed, imply

that the listing decision can be estimated using a probit model.

         Taking into account selectivity adjustments, U.S investor preferences for holding cross-

listed and non-cross-listed stocks become:




19
   Under the Multi-Jurisdictional Disclosure System (MJDS) agreement between the SEC and the Canadian Securities
Administration, Canadian firms can cross-list on a U.S. exchange without conforming to U.S. GAAP and with only
minimal reporting to the SEC.
20
   Importantly, identification in the structural model depends on some variables directly determining one of the two
endogenous variables, but not the other. Structural models can be criticized for imposing too much structure, which is
one reason we also use semi- and non-parametric techniques, described below.


                                                          19
                                  (ˆ R  ZiR ˆR )
        H iL   L  ZiH  L                R ˆ
                                                     L  iL                                (7)
                                 ( R  Zi  R )
                                     ˆ

and

                                    (ˆ R  ZiR ˆR )
        H iU  U  Z iH U                      R ˆ
                                                       U  iU .                            (8)
                                 1  ( R  Z i  R )
                                          ˆ



Now H iL and H iU take on the additional interpretation of being the estimated holdings in firm i

when the firm is cross-listed and when it is not, while             and Ф denote the probability density and

cumulative density functions of the standard normal distribution. Equations (4), (7), and (8) now

constitute a system of equations that can be estimated with maximum likelihood techniques. The

estimation procedure is discussed in Appendix B. We note here only that the coefficient on λL in

(7) is the inverse Mills ratio, which forms the basis for standard corrections for selectivity bias

when inclusion in an estimation sample is contingent on a discrete outcome (see Heckman [1979]

or Maddala [1983]), while the coefficient on λU in (8) is a similar but less frequently used

correction for selectivity bias for the non-selected observations.

        Importantly, the estimates ˆ L , ˆ L and ˆ U , ˆ U from (7) and (8) are used to calculate fitted

values Ĥ iL and Ĥ iU , which can then be plugged into the structural probit specification, (4). Because

H iL and H iU are scaled (by market capitalization or market float) to only take on values between

zero and one, we work off of transformations of equations (7) and (8). These transformations,

along with other details of the estimation process, are described in the appendix.



4.2 Methodologies to measure the cross-listing effect

        One of our primary interests is measuring the magnitude of the cross-listing effect, defined



                                                            20
by equation (1) and reproduced here:

     E(H iL | X  1)  E(H iL | X  0) .                                               (1)

Consistent estimation of (1) and, thus, the cross-listing effect, involves averaging across firms the

difference between U.S. holdings in the firm and estimates of what the counterfactual holdings in

the cross-listed firms would have been had the firm not cross-listed. Since the first component of

(1), E ( H iL | X  1) , can be estimated as the average the observed holdings in cross-listed firms, we

only have to estimate the unobservable second component, E(H iL | X  0) .

        Because no method is perfect, we consider three methodologies for estimating the

unobservable component. The first estimator derives from the structural model from the previous

subsection. We estimate E(H iL | X  0) by estimating the fitted holdings from equation (8) for each

firm, and then averaging over the resulting fitted holdings.

        The second estimator uses the propensity-score method of matching, also termed “p-

matching,” originally developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin [1983].21 P-matching uses fitted cross-

listing probabilities (“propensity scores”) generated from estimates of equation (4) to match each

cross-listed firm with a non cross-listed firm.22 The idea is that the holdings of p-matched non-

cross-listed firms are likely to be similar to what a listed firm’s holdings would have been if

unlisted, so the average holdings of p-matched firms can be used to estimate E(H iL | X  0) . The

advantage of the p-matching estimator is that it requires no explicit model of holdings, which

reduces the risk of specification error (Drake [1993]; Dehejia and Wahba [2002]; and Zhao

[2004]). The estimator has also been shown to outperform Lee/Heckman-style corrections in

experimental studies of selection bias (Glazerman, Levy, and Myers [2003]). One drawback to the


21
  See Imbens [2004] and Stuart [2004] for recent reviews of matching applications to treatment effect estimators.
22
  The asymmetry in our data makes p-matching a particularly attractive method because we have a large set of firms
from which to select a match (roughly 30 non cross-listed firms for each of our cross-listed firms).


                                                        21
p-matching estimator is that it does not account for unobserved correlation between the holdings

and cross-listing decisions.

         We generate our third estimate of the average cross-listing effect using the “difference-in-

differences” estimator (Heckman and Robb [1985]; Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith [1999]). This

estimator requires holdings observations on cross-listed firms prior to their cross-listing. For this,

we draw upon U.S. holdings data from the earlier March 31, 1994 survey. The difference-in-

differences estimator compares the change in holdings of a firm that was not cross-listed in 1994

but cross-listed by 1997 to firms that remained non cross-listed between 1994 and 1997. That is,

the cross-listing effect is given by

     E ( H iL | X  1)  E ( H iL | X  0)  ( H iL ,1997  H iU ,1994 )  ( H Uj ,1997  H Uj ,1994 ),   (9)

where i indexes a firm that cross-lists between the 1994 and 1997 surveys, j indexes a firm that

remains non cross-listed in both surveys, and bars over the variables reflect sample means across

the i and j categories. The difference-in-differences estimator incorporates many of the advantages

of the p-matching estimator. Moreover, unlike the p-matching estimator, the difference-in-

differences estimator accounts for unobservable components of selection bias, assuming that the

characteristics of a type-i firm do not change in a way that is left uncontrolled by the type-j

firms.23 For our application, the key drawback of the difference-in-differences estimator is that it

relies on a relatively narrow subset of 132 firms that were traded only in their home market in

1994, but cross-listed by 1997.24




23
   Heckman, Ichimura, Todd, and Smith [1998] provide experimental evidence that difference-in-differences
estimators outperform both standard Heckman [1979] corrections and p-matching estimators.
24
   Because the sample size would be reduced to an even greater extent by requiring insider holdings information for
1994 and we have no way of correcting mistakes in 1994 insider holdings data, we do not report difference-in-
differences estimates using the market float measure.


                                                                        22
5. Results

5.1 Results from the structural model

         Table 4 reports estimates of our structural model of cross-listing and U.S. holdings as of

end-1997 scaled by float.25 Results using holdings scaled by market capitalization (not shown, but

available from the authors) are not materially different. Requiring a complete set of explanatory

variables for the Heckman [1979]-based and p-matching estimators reduces our sample to 8,086

firms, 282 of which cross-listed on a U.S. exchange.

         5.1.1 Determinants of holdings in firms that are not cross-listed

         While our focus is on the cross-listing effect, and holding of non cross-listed firms are

quite small (median holdings are 1 percent of float), it is nonetheless informative to understand the

factors behind U.S. investment in firms that are not cross-listed. Among the 7,804 firms that are

not cross-listed (the middle column in Table 4), all of the explanatory variables are significant,

often with signs that accord with intuition. U.S. investors prefer firms that are larger, included in

the MSCI World index, and pay dividends. They are also attracted to firms from Canada and firms

with low dividend tax withholding rates. The latter result indicates that an additional reason that a

home bias might exist is that U.S. investors shy away from international investments when cross-

border dividend tax withholding rates are high. Holdings are higher for firms in industries with a

larger share of imports in U.S. supply, which is consistent with the intuition that greater economic

proximity increases investment.

         A number of the non cross-listed holdings estimates indicate that U.S. investors are

sensitive to the amount and quality of information available on foreign-traded firms. The positive
25
  To make our results more readily interpretable, we report rescaled functions of the estimates. Specifically, for the
coefficients on instruments in the listing decision equation, we calculate the marginal effect of a one-unit change in
the instrument on the percentage point probability of cross-listing. Similarly, the coefficients in the holdings equations
are scaled to reflect the marginal effect of a change in the instrument on the holdings share of U.S. investors
(measured in percentage points). See Appendix B for complete details on transformations and on the estimation
technique.


                                                           23
and statistically significant signs on the firm- and country-level accounting variables suggest that

U.S. investors value high-quality disclosure when choosing a foreign firm in which to invest. This

is consistent with Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller [2004], who show that U.S. investment is higher

in firms with greater conformity to U.S. GAAP.

         The only surprising result for non-cross-listed firms is the negative association between

holdings and the level of shareholder rights protection provided by a firm’s home country. This

result holds whether we use the LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998] index of

anti-director rights (as reported), or country-level estimates of the blockholder premium in share

prices from Dyck and Zingales [2004] (not reported). The willingness of American investors to

undertake larger positions in firms from countries in which minority shareholders are vulnerable

suggests a relative lack of concern about institutional enforcement of their property rights, or that

U.S. investors do not feel they will be protected, regardless of shareholder rights scores.26

         Finally, the selectivity correction variable is negative and significant, indicating that the set

of firms that are unlisted have unobservable characteristics that make their stock less likely to be

held by U.S. investors. In other words, holding all else constant, the mean holdings of the unlisted

sample would be higher if the sample were drawn randomly from a group of firms with the same

observable characteristics.

         5.1.2 Determinants of additional holdings in cross-listed firms

         For the determinants of holdings of cross-listed firms, we report our results for the various

instruments ( Z iH ) in terms of the impact (  L - U ) on the increase in U.S. holdings as a result of

cross-listing (the right column of Table 4), from our estimated parameters for equations (7) and

(8). Only the coefficient on the MSCI member dummy is significant, with the expected negative
26
  While the relationship is negative at the firm level, it is essentially zero at the country level. That is, we formed
country-level U.S. holdings of non-cross-listed firm by aggregating the firm-level data; across countries, the
correlation between that measure and shareholder rights is essentially zero.


                                                            24
sign implying a smaller (by 12 percentage points) cross-listing effect for the relatively large and

liquid MSCI member firms.

         5.1.3 The cross-listing decision and U.S. holdings

         In accordance with our intuition about factors that reduce the costs of cross-listing, the

estimates for the cross-listing equation (the first column) reveal that firms are more likely to cross-

list on a U.S. exchange if they are large, have better home-country accounting standards, or are

domiciled in Canada. Firms in industries with greater imported share of U.S. supply are more

likely to cross-list. Two of the three variables that uniquely identify the listing equation enter with

estimated signs that are in line with our expectations: firms that are closely held and from more

liquid markets are less likely to cross-list on a U.S. exchange. Interestingly, firms domiciled in

Civil Law countries are less likely to list. While this result runs counter to the intuition that these

firms would benefit more, it may be the case the firms from non Civil Law countries find cross-

listing less costly. Neither the expected increase in U.S. investment from cross-listing nor the level

of U.S. holdings prior to listing influences the cross-listing probability.27



5.2 The average cross-listing effect

         Estimates of the average cross-listing effect are summarized in Table 5. At the end of 1997

U.S. investors held an average of 16.5 percent of the market capitalization of the 282 cross-listed

firms (row 1), an average that is slightly less than for the somewhat larger sample in Table 3.

Accordingly, for our Heckman-based and p-matching (cross-sectional) estimates of the average

cross-listing effect, we use 16.5 percent as our estimate of E(H iL | X  1) .

         The Heckman [1979]-based estimate of E(H iL | X  0) is 5.9 percent of market capitalization
27
  Specifications exist in which both of these variables are significant, suggesting that firms cross-list to both expand
their investor base and service their existing U.S. investor base. However, in many specifications, including the one
reported, there are insignificant, owing in part to the relatively small number of firms that have cross-listed.


                                                           25
(row 2). This is larger than average holdings of non-cross-listed firms (2.9 percent of market cap),

as cross-listed stocks have attractive features even without the cross-listing. But the Heckman

[1979]-corrected estimates still suggest a sizeable, statistically significant cross-listing effect: U.S.

holdings in a typical cross-listed stock are 10.6 percentage points of market capitalization (or 13.4

percent in terms of float) higher than they would be without the U.S. listing.28

          The p-matching and difference-in-differences methodologies produce results that are close

to the Heckman [1979]-based estimates. The p-matching produces an estimate of E(H iL | X  0)

equal to 5.3 percent of market capitalization or 8.1 percent of market float (row 4), implying a

statistically significant listing effect equivalent to 11.2 percent of market capitalization (17.7

percent of market float). The bottom panel of Table 5 shows that in March 1994, U.S. investors

held 8.6 percent of market capitalization of the 132 firms that were not cross-listed then but that

cross-listed by December 1997 (and for which March 1994 U.S. holdings data exist). Adding the

0.6 percentage increase in the holdings of non-cross-listed firms over the period 1994-1997 yields

our highest estimate of E(H iL | X  0) , 9.2 percent of market capitalization. Nonetheless, with U.S.

investors holding 17.1 percent of these firms by the end of 1997, this still implies an average

cross-listing effect of 7.9 percent.29 Overall, the three techniques estimate a sizeable average cross-

listing effect that ranges from 8 to 11 percent of market capitalization (or 13 to 18 percent of

float).




28
   The standard error for the listing effect estimate is calculated as the observation-weighted standard deviation of the
279 paired differences.
29
   In our sample, 23 of the 132 firms that cross-listed between the two survey dates also undertook seasoned equity
offerings (SEOs). It is plausible that the combination of a SEO and cross-listing has different implications for U.S.
holdings than a cross-listing alone, particularly if the issue targets U.S. investors. However, when we compare the
change in U.S. holdings for cross-listing stocks with and without these SEOs, we find no statistically significant
difference. Accordingly, we do not treat cross-listing firms that raise public equity differently from other cross-listing
firms. For further evidence on the capital-raising behavior of cross-listed firms, see Reese and Weisbach [2002] and
Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach [2006].


                                                            26
5.3 What is behind the cross-listing effect?

        5.3.1 Is it the firm or the security?

        It is natural to wonder whether the cross-listing effect might reflect information about the

firm or might just be due to the fact that the security is available in the United States. We address

this question in two ways and find that while there is some advantage to the shares trading directly

in the U.S., it does not entirely explain either the cross-listing effect or the observed pattern of

holdings in both the U.S.-traded security and the underlying security.

        Table 6 shows that for cross-listed firms, U.S. investors hold large proportions of their

shares (11.1 percent of market capitalization) in the underlying foreign security purchased in the

foreign home market and only a small portion (6.4 percent) in the ADR purchased in the US. This

fact has an important implication. ADRs enable U.S. investors to forego concerns about trading in

other currencies, dealing directly with foreign regulatory authorities, and potentially high

execution costs on foreign stock markets. If investors were responding to the reduction in

transactions costs associated with being able to trade these stocks on the NYSE, we would expect

most of the cross-listed holdings to be in the form of ADRs. In contrast, most U.S. holdings in

cross-listed firms are in the underlying foreign security. This is direct evidence against transaction

costs as a primary impediment to foreign investment.

        Additional evidence on the motives for holding cross-listed shares is provided by a set of

vehicles (Level I and Rule 144a ADRs) that are denominated in dollars and trade in the United

States, but trade over-the-counter rather than on an organized exchange.30 There are important

differences between over-the-counter Level I and Rule 144a ADRs and their exchange-traded

Level II and III cousins. Importantly, because they are not listed on a major U.S. exchange, firms

30
 In this paper’s main analysis we treat Level I and Rule 144a firms as non-cross-listed firms. Note that many Level I
ADR programs have been initiated by U.S. investors or depository banks, not by the foreign companies themselves.
Rule 144a programs typically arise from private placements available only to institutional investors.


                                                         27
with Level I or Rule 144a ADRs are not required to reconcile financial statements with U.S.

GAAP or submit regular disclosures to the SEC and are not subject to most U.S. securities laws.

Thus, Level I and Rule 144a ADRs provide U.S. investors the opportunity to acquire foreign

stocks that trade in the US but sit outside the protections of U.S. securities regulation. The middle

of Table 6 shows that U.S. investors do hold a greater proportion of shares in a Level I and Rule

144a ADR-firm (8.9 percent of market capitalization, 15.1 percent of market float) than in the

average foreign firm not traded in the United States, but these holdings are substantially lower

than in foreign stocks that trade on organized exchanges (Level II and III ADRs) and are thus

required to comply with U.S. securities regulations.

       While U.S. holdings of Level I/Rule 144a stocks are smaller than those of stocks listed on

a U.S. exchange, they are still greater than U.S. holdings of the typical foreign equity. In Table 7,

we distinguish between the portion of the increased holdings of Level I/Rule 144a that is due to

other firm characteristics and the portion that might be called a “Level I effect”. Applying a p-

matching methodology to compare holdings of firms that trade in the U.S. OTC market to firms

that have no vehicle for U.S. investment, we find that Level I/Rule 144a stocks would have greater

than average U.S. holdings even without the program because of the characteristics companies that

trade Level 1 shares (9.6% of float, compared with 5.1% of float for foreign firms without a U.S.

trading vehicle). But this leaves a statistically significant Level I effect of 5.2%. This Level I

effect is small relative to the 13-18% effect for cross-listed stocks, but is not insubstantial. A

possible reason for this non-negligible Level I effect is that while Level I ADRs and Rule 144a

vehicles confer on limited legal protection to U.S. investors, the protections could be important.

Indeed, Iliev, Miller and Roth [2011] show that recent SEC rule changes expose foreign firms with

unsponsored programs to liability under U.S. law; these come in addition to the potential right to




                                                   28
sue unsponsored entities in state courts prior to the SEC changes. In addition, the creation of a

Level I ADR could facilitate investment by U.S. residents that may face obstacles or extra costs

that deter them from directly investing in foreign securities, although as Table 6 showed most of

the holdings are in the underlying security, not in the U.S.-traded ADR.

       Overall, the evidence in this subsection suggests that the ability to hold a security that

trades in the U.S. matters but is just one factor behind the observed increase in investment in

cross-listed stocks.

       5.3.2 Other Factors

    Table 8 reports the results from regressions using the difference-in-differences setup to

generate firm-level estimates of the cross-listing effect on the U.S. holdings share. Specifically, we

regress the 1994 to 1997 change in holdings of stocks that were not cross-listed in 1994 on a

cross-listing dummy, its interactions with instruments measured as of 1994 and 1997, and the

change in the value of instruments over the 1994 to 1997 period,

     H i   D  X i  D  X i Z 1994
                                  i           
                                       β D  Z 1997
                                               i    - Z 1994
                                                        i     
                                                              D  Z 1994
                                                                     i     D   iD ,   (10)

where Xi equals one if the firm cross-lists in 1997, and zero otherwise. We include changes and

first-period levels of the instruments in the regression as controls for changes in firm

characteristics and in U.S. investor preferences, respectively. This is essentially a conditional

difference-in-differences approach.

       For brevity, we report only the interaction estimates ( β D ) in Table 8 that identify the

marginal influence of the instruments on the cross-listing effect. Overall, the results are consistent

with the notion that improvement in the availability and quality of value-relevant information

about a firm is a key aspect of cross-listing in U.S. markets. The negative and statistically

significant coefficient on a firm’s size relative to its industry average indicates that the change in



                                                         29
holdings for large liquid firms, which may be more transparent than smaller firms, is lower after

cross-listing. Additional evidence for the importance of transparency comes from the smaller

estimated cross-listing effect for Canadian firms. Because Canadian firms are not required to

reconcile to U.S. GAAP or increase disclosures as much upon cross-listing, cross-listing should

have less impact on U.S. investors’ willingness to hold Canadian stocks.

       While we observe evidence that greater transparency reduces the cross-listing effect,

results on accounting quality are mixed. For example, we obtain a negative and statistically

significant coefficient estimate for the firm-level accounting quality index. The estimates imply

that U.S. investors increase their ownership in a cross-listed firm by 2.5 percentage points for

every unit decline in the firm’s accounting quality index. The coefficient on the cross-listing

dummy interacted with the national accounting quality index, however, is positive and statistically

significant. There is an increased cross-listing effect for firms from countries with a higher

national accounting quality. Overall, the estimates imply that improved firm-level accounting

practices linked to cross-listing spurs U.S. investment in firms with previously weak accounting

standards, but strong national accounting quality may actually be complementary to cross-listing.

        In the second column of Table 8, to increase the number of observations we present a

more parsimonious specification that does not include the accounting variables or the dividend-

paying firm dummy. The coefficient estimates on size and the Canadian firm dummy confirm

results indicating that more transparent firms have a smaller change in holdings following cross-

listing. One further bit of indirect evidence favoring an information explanation is the reduced

listing effect for the more liquid stocks that are included in the MSCI World index. To the extent

that illiquidity reflects asymmetric information between company insiders and other potential

traders, as in the models of Diamond and Verrecchia [1991] and Easley and O’Hara [2004], the




                                                  30
enhanced disclosure requirements associated with cross-listing will tend to matter more for less

liquid stocks.

       With a positive coefficient estimated for the interaction of cross-listing with the

shareholder rights index, we do not find that U.S. investors respond to the enhanced protections of

U.S. securities laws in the manner that has been suggested by some of the proponents of the

investor-protection hypothesis. In particular, all else equal, cross-listing has a smaller impact on

U.S. investors’ holdings for firms from countries with weaker shareholder protection. Our result

here does not imply that U.S. investors fail to value shareholder protection provided by other

countries’ legal systems, but is consistent with cross-listing complementing such legal rights. In

fact, to the extent that cross-listing in the United States makes a firm more transparent, legal

protections provided to minority shareholders in the home country may become more effective.

(Furthermore, the disclosure requirements accompanying a U.S. listing typically include

information about home-country legal risks that may leave some U.S. investors better informed

about their rights.) What our results do suggest is that cross-listing in the United States is not a

substitute for adequate protection of minority shareholders under the home-country legal system.



6. Application to Country-Level Studies

       Using a unique dataset, we have demonstrated that cross-listing is the most important

determinant of U.S. international investment and, importantly, that incorporating cross-listing

introduces a selection bias that requires estimation with appropriate econometric techniques. Of

course, in many research projects such a detailed and complete security-level dataset might not be

available. Nevertheless, the insights gleaned are still applicable to more aggregated data sets.

Much research on international investment uses country-level data, so as an aid to future research




                                                   31
we suggest a way for country-level studies to include the effect of cross-listing and address the

selection issue in an econometrically robust way.

       We start from the view that any country-level study of U.S. international equity investment

must have three features: the dependent variable must be float adjusted, the dependent variable

should be free of a country-size bias, and the analysis must properly account for cross-listing.

       That the dependent variable must be float adjusted is well established in Dahlquist,

Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003] and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2009]; shares held by

insiders are not available to dispersed portfolio shareholders and so should be omitted from

portfolio analysis. While there is no exact measure of insider ownership that is available both

across a range of countries and through time, a country-level measure built up from the firm-level

closely-held field in Worldscope is a reasonable proxy.

       Less well understood, but explored in detail in Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012], is that the

dependent variable should be free of a country-size bias. Common dependent variables that

contain a country-size bias that researchers are unable to adequately control for include the dollar

amount of holdings or variants thereof (e.g., Desai and Dharmapala [2011]), the share of the

country’s equities in U.S. portfolios (e.g, Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010], and even a

‘difference home bias’ measure, that would at first glance appear to account for country size.

Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012] suggest a measure similar to the following, which they label as a

‘foreign bias’ vis-à-vis a country i (FBi):


                 Fi /Fworld - USH i /USH world
        FB i                                  , if USH i /USH world  Fi /Fworld
                             Fi /Fworld                                                (11)
                 USH i /USH world  Fi /Fworld 
        FBi                                 , if USH i /USH world  Fi /Fworld
                        1 - Fi /Fworld          




                                                        32
where F is float and USH is U.S. holdings, both in U.S. dollars.31 Note that as defined, a decrease

in FB vis-à-vis a particular country i is equivalent to increased U.S. holdings (relative to the

country’s weight in the world float portfolio).

         The FB measure is both suggested by theory (international CAPM) and free of any

country-size bias. The reader might readily accept that holdings expressed in dollars (or log

dollars) or as a share of the U.S. portfolio has a country size bias, but might expect a difference

bias measure (essentially the numerator from above) to be free of such bias. However, as Figure 1

shows, the difference home bias measure has a substantial country size bias; a ratio home bias

measure a la Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012] does not.32

         The third requirement, properly incorporating cross-listing into the analysis, calls for

appropriate econometric techniques as well as a country-level cross-listed variable. For a country-

level cross-listing variable, we calculate the fraction of the destination country market

capitalization that is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange.33,34 For the econometrics, our security-level

analysis indicated that cross-listing is endogenous. At the country level a straightforward way to

deal with this endogeneity is to instrument for a country’s cross-listed fraction. We select a

parsimonious list of instruments from our Table 4 and Doidge et al [2009]: trading volume,


31
   The underlying U.S. holdings data can be taken from the IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Surveys (CPIS).
We normally would not advise the use of these data, which are typically of poor quality. But, for U.S. investment
abroad, the entries come from high quality U.S. benchmark surveys (except for 2002, when no such survey was
conducted and the U.S. CPIS numbers were based on estimates in Thomas, Warnock, and Wongswan [2004]).
32
   Note that at a point in time the top line in equation (10) is essentially equivalent to U.S. holdings as a percent of the
destination country’s float (times a measure that is constant across countries at a point in time, the share of the U.S. in
the world portfolio), another reasonable measure for studies limited to one source country and one time period.
33
   We scale our country-level cross-listing variable using annual country-level market capitalization from the World
Bank Development Indicators. Calculating the market capitalization of U.S. listed stocks is not straightforward. Our
technique is to aggregate the market capitalization of firms in the CRSP (i.e., U.S.-listed) universe that are
incorporated outside the U.S. (shrcd=12) or ADRs (shrcd=30 or 31) by year and by country, using Compustat
calendar price (prcc_c) and shares outstanding (csho) data and the foreign incorporation code (fic). This approach is
not foolproof. For example, Accenture PLC switched incorporation from Bermuda to Ireland in 2009, and so is now
Irish based on the current CRSP variable shrcd. Thus, for a financial center like Ireland we rely only on information
on ADRs to indicate U.S.-listed Irish stocks.
34
   Our cross-listing variable and float adjustment are posted at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17839/.


                                                             33
national accounting quality, a dummy variable for countries with a civil law origin, bilateral trade

linkages (exports plus imports between the U.S. and destination country divided by total trade of

U.S., often referred to as economic proximity), and log GDP per capita.35 As an example, in a

pooled 2001-2009 annual dataset these instruments explain a large amount of the variation in the

cross-listed fraction (first column of Table 9). Moreover, a comparison of the second and third

columns suggests that they do not—once the cross-listed fraction is taken into account—have

additional explanatory power for float-adjusted bias. This short list of instruments appears to be

suitable to address the selection issue of a country-level cross-listing effect in an econometrically

robust way, as the proposed country-level instruments can explain a large portion of the variation

in the cross-listed fraction and any subsequent effect on holdings is likely through the effect on

cross-listing.

         We apply this selectivity adjustment to the analyses in Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010]

and Desai and Dharmapala [2011]. Our objective here is not to overturn the results from either

paper, but rather to show how the insights from our work can be applied to the burgeoning

literature on country-level U.S. international investment.

         Like many studies of international investment, Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010] includes

a range of control variables but focuses on one variable in particular, in this case the amount of

U.S. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in each destination country in 1990, a proxy for information

endowment. We focus on the main specifications from their Table 3 using a float-adjusted bias

measure (somewhat analogous to the non-float-adjusted bias measure used in their Table B2),

rather than a country-size-bias plagued portfolio weight measure, and can closely replicate their

35
  We do not claim that our list of country-level instruments is exhaustive, and leave for future work the search for the
ultimate instrument set. We note that we also tried a closely held measure (from Worldscope) as an instrument, as
suggested by Doidge et al. [2009], but it was not associated with country-level cross-listing and was associated with
U.S. holdings, suggesting that it is a poor country-level instrument. Note that Doidge et al. [2009] use a finer measure
of insider ownership that is not available across time (or, generally, to other researchers).


                                                           34
results.36 As the first column in Table 10 shows, when replicating their results, countries with

more U.S. FDI in 1990 had more U.S. international investment (i.e., less bias) in the 2001-2009

period.

          But cross-listing is an important omitted variable – one that is potentially correlated with

variables of interest.37 Specifically, all else equal, countries that receive a lot of US FDI relative to

their market float should tend to be the ones with capital markets that are underdeveloped relative

to the underlying investment opportunities. Firms in such countries would have relatively strong

incentives to cross-list to attract more international ownership, so cross-listing is a potentially

important omitted variable correlated with the study’s variable of interest.

          We illustrate this in the second and third specifications of Table 10. In the second

specification, in a simple OLS regression of float-adjusted bias on the same explanatory variables

as Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010]—FDI position in 1990, the share of a country’s market

capitalization in the world market portfolio, and the volatility of stock returns in the destination

country—we add the cross-listed fraction.38 As expected, the coefficient on the fraction of

destination country market capitalization cross-listed in the U.S. is negative and statistically

significant; the larger the percent of a country’s market capitalization that is cross-listed, the larger

is U.S. investment (the smaller is the bias). But the coefficient on FDI 1990 switches sign and is

insignificant.

          While including the cross-listed fraction solves the omitted variable problem, it does not

address the endogeneity that arises from the selection issue. Because holdings and cross-listings

are simultaneously determined, all coefficient estimates are inconsistent. In the third specification,

36
   Additionally, we update their results using data through 2009 and have a slightly different sample (35 countries
versus their 38) because of our instrument choice. Neither of these differences materially impacts the results.
37
   Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010] describe a robustness check that includes fraction of equity cross-listed in 1997,
but not a time series that spans the sample used in the analysis.
38
   See Appendix Table A2 in Andrade and Chhaochharia [2010] for details on the construction of their variables.


                                                         35
we estimate the effect of cross-listing using an IV regression and instrument for the cross-list

fraction using the instruments proposed earlier.39 The coefficient on the cross-list fraction

increases and is still negative and statistically significant. The coefficient on FDI 1990 is again

insignificant.40

         We next apply the same type of adjustment to the Desai and Dharmapala [2011] analysis

of the impact of changes in dividend tax treatment on U.S. international equity investment. The

policy change examined is the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) of

2003, which lowered the dividend tax rate to 15% for a particular subset of countries with which

the U.S. has a tax treaty. Desai and Dharmapala [2011] find evidence of a substantial portfolio

reallocation toward countries for which the tax treaty applied.

         While we would argue that cross-listing is an important omitted variable in the Desai and

Dharmapala [2011] study, it is less obvious that it should be correlated with their variable of

interest. For any cross-listing prior to the treaty date, for there to be a meaningful correlation the

treaty countries would have had to been chosen based on cross-listing (or, by extension, U.S.

investment since cross-listing is the most important determinant of U.S. investment). More

generally, a common trend in the relative bias for treaty countries could induce a positive

correlation between the cross-list fraction and the tax policy variable. So while a priori we suspect




39
   In unreported results from the first stage regression, the p-value from a test of the overidentifying restrictions is
0.55, indicating that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the proposed instruments are suitably exogenous.
Instruments must be chosen for a particular application. In Table 8 our goal was to identify a parsimonious set of
economically important instruments that is broad enough to be candidates for a range of studies. For the particular
application in Table 9, a narrower set of three instruments (trading volume, national accounting quality, and civil law)
better meet the criteria for good instruments. For continuity the results in Table 9 use all proposed instruments from
Table 8; using 3 instruments (instead of the 5) has no perceptible impact on the results.
40
   If we use a size-biased dependent variable like the raw unadjusted portfolio weights, compared to specification (1)
the effect of FDI is reduced but still significant and the effect of Cross-List Fraction – without accounting for the
endogeneity – is very strong. If we instrument for the Cross-List Fraction, the magnitude of the effect of cross-listing
increases and the effect of FDI is almost halved but remains statistically significant.



                                                          36
that the correlation between the 2003 JGTRRA policy change and cross-listing is muted, we

cannot readily dismiss the potential for an omitted variable problem.

         We examine this in specifications (4) – (6) of Table 10. Again, for the dependent variable

we use a float-adjusted bias measure similar to that in Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012], rather

than a size-biased measure. The variable of interest in Desai and Dharmapala is an indicator

(PostJGTRRA) that equals one for the years after the 2003 enactment of JGTRRA for countries

covered by the treaty. Column (4) is analogous to the baseline regression in Desai and Dharmapala

(their Table 3, column 2). PostJGTRRA is highly significant; U.S. investment increased (bias

decreased) in countries covered by the treaty. In columns (5) and (6) we bring in the cross-list

fraction, first as an exogenous independent variable, then as an endogenous one instrumented as in

Table 9. In both columns, the cross-list fraction is highly significant and negative, as expected.

The coefficient on PostJGTRRA is still negative and significant when cross-listing is included—

suggesting that the variable is not highly correlated with cross-listing—but the magnitude of the

effect decreases by more than a third.41

         As noted above, our objective here is not to overturn or weaken the results of Andrade and

Chhaochharia [2010] or Desai and Dharmapala [2011]. Moreover, the effect of including the

cross-list fraction depends on the relationship between this potentially important omitted variable

and any other proposed determinant of foreign investment. In both cases, it is likely that another

specification could be found that re-establishes the strength of their main results. Rather, our

objective is merely to show how the insights from our work can be applied to the burgeoning

literature on country-level international investment. A variable measuring the fraction of a market


41
   One difference between our specification and that in Desai and Dharmapala [2011] is that they include country
fixed effects. Including country fixed effects in our specification (5) has no material effect on the results. In our
specification (6), including country fixed effects rules out the use of some instruments and, not surprisingly, the
instrumented cross-list fraction is insignificant.


                                                           37
cross-listed on U.S. exchanges should be included as an explanatory variable, preferably as an

endogenous regressor. Doing so might render coefficients on other variables of interest

insignificant or decrease their magnitude, perhaps to be expected when an omitted variable bias is

addressed.

        We view the applications in the section as illustrative. Future work should aim to refine the

modeling of the endogeneity of cross-listing.


7. Conclusion

        Using comprehensive survey data, we document that the aggregate foreign equity portfolio

of all U.S.-resident investors has deviated sharply from market weights. Cross-sectional analysis

of U.S. residents’ investment choices indicates that U.S. portfolio flows have tended to gravitate

toward larger, more liquid, and more transparent firms. However, our selection bias-corrected

estimates indicate that cross-listing is by far the most important determinant of U.S. investment in

foreign equities. Non-cross-listed foreign firms have roughly 3 percent U.S. ownership. Cross-

listed firms, even prior to the cross-listing, have characteristics that are attractive to U.S. investors;

all of their attractive (pre-cross-listing) attributes result in an average of 3.5-6 percent more U.S.

investment. On top of that we estimate, using various techniques, that a cross-listing in the United

States leads to an increase in U.S. holdings of 8 to 11 percent of firm market capitalization,

doubling (or more) the amount prior to cross-listing. By examining the holdings in firms that trade

over the counter in the U.S. but are not cross-listed on a U.S. exchange, we can rule out that

trading costs drive this effect. Rather, it appears that firms that become more informationally

transparent following the cross-listing, particularly those firms with poor accounting practices

prior to listing in the United States, experience the largest increase in U.S. investment.

        Our results present a clear challenge for future research on international investment. Cross-



                                                   38
listing, which we find to be the most important factor behind U.S. international equity investment,

must be considered in any analysis. Moreover, given that cross-listing is a decision often made by

otherwise attractive foreign firms, econometric techniques must be used that can appropriately

deal with issues of selection bias. To illustrate this point, we show how to apply the lessons of

firm-level investment to country-level studies and find that results are sensitive both to accounting

for cross-listing as well as for estimating the effect in an econometrically appropriate way. In

addition to addressing the important effect of cross-listing, any study at the country level must

employ a measure of investment that is both float-adjusted and free from any size bias.

        But emphasizing that selection bias requires careful econometric modeling also has

implications that reach far outside the literature on international investment. For example, the

corporate finance literature on the valuation impact of cross-listing has yet to fully deal with

selection bias.42 Our hope is that this paper can spark innovations in that literature as well.




42
  See the debate that began with Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004] and has continued through Gozzi, Levine, and
Schmukler [2008] and Sarkissian and Schill [2010], among others.


                                                        39
References


Aggarwal, R., L. Klapper, and P. Wysocki, 2005, Portfolio preferences of foreign institutional investors,
Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 2919-2946.

Ahearne, A., W. Griever, and F. Warnock, 2004, Information costs and home bias: an analysis of U.S.
holdings of foreign equities, Journal of International Economics 62, 313-336.

Amiram, D., and Mary Margaret Frank, 2010, The Effects of the Taxation of Dividends on the Allocation
of Foreign Portfolio Investment Around the World, (available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1539422).

Andrade, S. C. and V. Chhaochharia, 2010, Information Mobility and Foreign Portfolio Investment,
Review of Financial Studies 23, 2429-2463.

Bekaert, G., S. Siegel, and X. Wang, 2012, Home bias revisited, unpublished working paper.

Bernstein, S., J. Lerner, and A. Schoar, 2009, The Investment Strategies of Sovereign Wealth Funds,
NBER WP 14861.

Bradshaw, M. T., B. J. Bushee, and G. S. Miller, 2004, Accounting choice, home bias, and U.S. investment
in non-U.S. firms, Journal of Accounting Research 42(5), 795-841.

Bushman, R., J. Piotroski, and A. Smith, 2004, What determines corporate transparency? Journal of
Accounting Research 42(2), 207-251.

Chan, K., V. Covrig and L. Ng, 2005, What determines the domestic bias and foreign bias? Evidence from
mutual fund equity allocations worldwide, Journal of Finance 60, 1495-1534.

Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and the home bias,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.

Dehejia, R. and S. Wahba, 2002, Propensity score matching methods for non-experimental causal studies,
Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 151–161.

Desai, M., and D. Dharmapala, 2011, Dividend taxes and international portfolio choice, Review of
Economics and Statistics 93(1): 266-284.

Diamond, D. W., and R. E. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital, Journal of
Finance 46(4), 1325-59.

Didier, T., R. Rigobon, and S. Schmukler, 2010, Unexploited Gains from International Diversification:
Patterns of Portfolio Holdings around the World, mimeo.

Doidge, C., G.A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more? Journal
of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Doidge, C., G.A. Karolyi, K. Lins, D. Miller, and R. Stulz, 2009. Private Benefits of Control, Ownership,
and the cross-listing decision, Journal of Finance 64(1), 425-466.




                                                     40
Drake, C., 1993, Effects of misspecification of the propensity score on estimators of treatment effects,
Biometrics 49, 1231–1236.

Durnev, A. and H. Kim, 2005, To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment, and
Valuation, Journal of Finance 60(3): 1461-1493.

Dyck, A.and L. Zingales, 2004, Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison, Journal of
Finance 59(2), 537-600.

Easley, D., and M. O'Hara, 2004, Information and the Cost of Capital, Journal of Finance 59(4), 1553-
1583.

Easterbrook, F., 1984, Two Agency Cost Explanations of Dividends, American Economic Review 74(4),
650-659.

Edison, H. J., and F. Warnock, 2004, U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A Security-Level
Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3), 691-704.

Faccio, M., L. Lang, and L. Young, 2001, Dividends and Expropriation, American Economic Review 91(1),
54-78.

Fanto, J., and R. Karmel, 1997, A report on the attitudes of foreign companies regarding a U.S. listing,
Stanford Journal of Law, Business and Finance 24, 763-812.

Ferreira, M., and P. Matos, 2008, The colors of investors’ money: The role of institutional investors around
the world, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 499-533.

Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher, and C. Thimann, 2007, Home Bias in Global Bond and Equity Markets: The
Role of Real Exchange Rate Volatility, Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 631-655.

Foerster, S. R., and G. A. Karolyi, 1999, The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on
asset prices: Evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States, Journal of Finance 54, 981-1013.

Glassman, D. A. and L. A. Riddick, 2001, What causes home asset bias and how should it be measured?
Journal of Empirical Finance 8, 35-54.

Glazerman, S., D. Levy, and D. Myers, 2003, Nonexperimental versus experimental estimates of earnings
impacts, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 589, 63–93.

Gozzi, J., R. Levine, and S. Schmukler, 2008, Internationalization and the evolution of corporate valuation,
Journal of Financial Economics 88(3), 607-632.

Griever, W., G. Lee, and F. E. Warnock, 2001, The U.S. system for measuring cross-border investment in
securities: a primer with a discussion of recent developments, Federal Reserve Bulletin, 87(10): 633-650.

Heckman, J. J., 1979, Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica 47, 153-161.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd, 1998, Characterizing selection bias using experimental
data, Econometrica, 66, 1017-1098.

Heckman, J., R. LaLonde, and J. Smith, 1999, The economics and econometrics of active labor market


                                                     41
programs, in O. Ashefelter and D. Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Heckman, J. and R. Robb Jr., 1985, Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of interventions, in
Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Markets Data, ed. By J. Heckman and B. Singer. New York: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 156-245.

Henderson, B., N. Jegadeesh, and M. Weisbach, 2006, World markets for raising new capital, Journal of
Financial Economics 82, 63-101.

Imbens, G. W. 2004, Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: a review,
Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 1, 4–29.

Iliev, P., D. Miller. and L. Roth, 2011, Uninvited U.S. Investors? Economic Consequences of Involuntary
Cross-listings. SSRN working paper.

International Finance Corportation, 1998, Emerging Stock Markets Factbook.

Jensen, M., 1986, Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers, American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings) 76(2), 323-329.

Johnson, S,, R, La Porta, F, Lopez-de-Silanes, and A, Shleifer, 2000. Tunneling. American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings) 90, 22-27,

Kalcheva, I,, and K, Lins, 2007. International evidence on cash holdings and expected managerial agency
problems, Review of Financial Studies 20: 1087-1112.

Karolyi, A. and R. Stulz, 2003, Are assets priced locally or globally?, in G. Constantinides, M. Harris and
R. Stulz, eds.: The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-Holland Publishers, New York, NY.

Kho, B., R. Stulz, and F. Warnock, 2009, Financial globalization, governance, and the evolution of the
home bias, Journal of Accounting Review 47: 597-635.

Lalonde, R., 1986, Evaluating the econometric evaluations of job training programs with experimental data,
American Economic Review 76, 604-620.

Lane, P., and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2008, International Investment Patterns, Review of Economics and
Statistics 90(3), 538-549.

Lang, M., K. Lins, and D. Miller, 2003, ADRs, analysts, and accuracy: Does cross listing in the U.S.
improve a firm’s information environment and increase market value? Journal of Accounting Research
41(2), 317-345.

La Porta, R. F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R. F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,
Journal of Finance 54, 471-515.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor Protection and Corporate
Valuation, Journal of Finance, Vol. 57(3), 1147-1170.



                                                     42
Larcker, D., T. Rusticus, 2010, On the Use of Instrumental Variables in Accounting Research, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 49(3): 186-205.

Lee, L.F., 1978, Unionism and wage rates: A simultaneous equations model with qualitative and limited
dependent variables, International Economic Review, 19, 415-433.

Leuz, C., Lins, K., and F. Warnock, 2009, Do foreigners invest less in poorly governed firms? Review of
Financial Studies, 22, 3245-3285.

Leuz, C., and R. Verrechia, 2004, The Economic Consequences of Increased Disclosure, Journal of
Accounting Research 38: 91-124.

Lewis, K. K., 1999, Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption, Journal of Economic
Literature 37, 571-608.

Maddala, G., 1983, Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, Cambridge Press.

Merton, R. C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information, Journal of
Finance 42, 483-510.

Miller, D., 1999, The market reaction to international cross-listings: evidence from depositary receipts,
Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.

Morgan, D. P., 2002, Rating banks: Risk and uncertainty in an opaque industry, American Economic
Review 92, 874-888.

Pinkowitz, L., R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2006, Does the Contribution of Corporate Cash Holdings and
Dividends to Firm Value Depend on Governance? A Cross-Country Analysis, Journal of Finance 2725-
2753.

Reese, W., and M. Weisbach, 2002, Protection of minority shareholders interests, cross-listings in the
United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics, 66(1): 65-104.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin. 1983, The central role of the propensity score in observational studies
for causal effects, Biometrika 70, 41–55.

Sarkissian, S., and M. Schill. 2004. The Overseas Listing Decision: New Evidence of Proximity Preference.
Review of Financial Studies 17, 769–809.

Sarkissian, S,, and M, Schill, 2010. Why are U.S. Firms Listed in Foreign Markets Worth More?, working
paper presented at 2010 Western Finance Association meetings.

Stuart, E., 2004, Matching methods for causal inference: Designing observational studies, Harvard
University Department of Statistics mimeo.

Thomas, C. P., F. E. Warnock, and J. Wongswan, 2004, The Performance of International Portfolios,
International Finance Discussion Paper 2004-817 (Federal Reserve Board).

Yu, Gwen, 2010, Accounting Standards and International Portfolio Holdings: Analysis of Cross-border
Holdings Following Mandatory Adoption of IFRS, Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Michigan.



                                                     43
Zhao, Z., 2004, Using matching to estimate treatment effects: data requirements, matching metrics, and
Monte Carlo evidence, Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 1, 91–107.




                                                    44
                        Table 1: Sample Count by Country, December 31, 1997

The table shows the number of firms by country for the 12,221 non-U.S. stocks in our end-1997 sample.



            Country           Number of Firms Country                      Number of Firms
            Argentina                 41         Korea                           313
            Australia               284          Luxembourg                       22
            Austria                 106          Malaysia                        442
            Belgium                 134          Mexico                           84
            Brazil                  149          Netherlands                     181
            Canada                  503          New Zealand                      49
            Chile                     92         Norway                          184
            China                   111          Pakistan                         78
            Colombia                  28         Peru                             28
            Czech Republic            60         Philippines                     111
            Denmark                 207          Poland                           45
            Finland                 113          Portugal                         97
            France                  772          Russia                           20
            Germany                 655          Singapore                       220
            Greece                  139          South Africa                    206
            Hong Kong               373          Spain                           151
            Hungary                   22         Sweden                          242
            India                   248          Switzerland                     201
            Indonesia               149          Taiwan                          234
            Ireland                   67         Thailand                        277
            Israel                    55         Turkey                           79

            Italy                   204          United Kingdom                2,029

            Japan                  2,402         Venezuela                        14
                                                 Total                        12,221




                                                   45
                          Table 2: Distribution of Firm-Level U.S. Holdings

The table reports firm-level U.S. holdings scaled by market capitalization and float as of December 31,
1997 for our sample of firms. Data on the value of U.S. holdings are from the U.S. Treasury/Federal
Reserve Board survey of U.S. holdings of foreign securities. Market capitalization figures are from
Datastream, MSCI, and Worldscope. We calculate market float by scaling market capitalization down by
the figure given in Worldscope’s “closely held share” field.


                                                U.S. holdings /         U.S. holdings /
                                              Market Capitalization      Market Float


                Mean                                     3.5%                6.3%

                Percentiles:
                         0%                              0.0%                0.0%

                        25%                              0.0%                0.0%

                        50%                              0.4%                1.2%

                        75%                              3.9%                7.8%

                        90%                             10.7%              19.1%

                        95%                             16.7%              29.5%



                Number of firms                         12,221              8,528




                                                   46
           Table 3: Distribution of Firm-Level U.S. Holdings Split by Cross-Listing Status

The table reports firm-level U.S. holdings scaled by market capitalization and float as of December 31,
1997 for our samples of cross-listed and non cross-listed firms. Data on the value of U.S. holdings are from
the U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve Board survey of U.S. holdings of foreign securities. Market
capitalization figures are from Datastream, MSCI, and Worldscope. We calculate market float by scaling
market capitalization down by the figure given in Worldscope’s “closely held share” field. We classify a
non-U.S. firm as cross-listed if its shares are listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ.


                                          U.S. holdings /                         U.S. holdings /
                                        Market Capitalization                      Market Float

                                      NOT                                   NOT
                                     CROSS-               CROSS-           CROSS-             CROSS-
Firms that are:                      LISTED               LISTED           LISTED             LISTED

Mean                                   2.9%               17.5%             5.6%              26.3%

Percentiles:
          0%                           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%               0.2%

         25%                           0.0%               7.2%              0.0%              11.4%

         50%                           0.3%               13.6%             1.0%              20.2%

         75%                           3.3%               24.2%             6.8%              36.7%

         90%                           9.1%               36.4%            17.2%              51.6%

         95%                         14.2%                43.6%            25.7%              68.8%

Memo: Value-Weighted Mean              6.6%               15.4%            10.2%              19.8%

Number of firms                      11,723                 498             8,235                   293




                                                     47
   Table 4: Jointly Estimated Determinants of U.S. Investment and Firms’ Cross-listing Decision

The table reports estimates of a simultaneous system that includes a probit specification of a firm’s decision
to cross-list and two equations that determine the holdings share of U.S. investors (scaled by market float)
—one reflecting holdings conditional on not cross-listing on a U.S. exchange as of December 31, 1997, and
one reflecting additional holdings in cross-listed firms. The reported figures are scaled to reflect the median
(over the firms in the sample) marginal impact of a unit change in the variable in question, on either the
probability of cross-listing (in percent) or on U.S. holding (in percent). E[Gain in U.S. Holdings Share]
from Cross-Listing is the endogenously estimated forecast of the change in holdings that would resulting
from cross-listing for a given firm and E[U.S. Holdings Share] without Cross-Listing is an analogously
defined estimate of what U.S. holdings would be if a firm did not cross-list. The other variables are defined
in Appendix A. P-values corresponding to a null hypothesis of a zero median impact appear in parentheses
below each reported coefficient estimate.




                                                      48
Table 4 (cont.): Jointly Estimated Determinants of U.S. Investment and Firms’ Cross-listing Decision

Percentage-point impact of:           Cross-Listing              U.S. Holdings / Market Float:
                                       Probability      If Not Cross-Listed        If Cross-Listed
E[Gain in U.S. Holdings (%) Share]       -0.001
  from Cross-Listing                     (0.494)
E[U.S. Holdings (%) Share]                0.162
  without Cross-Listing                  (0.129)
Selectivity correction                                        -0.085                    -0.231
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.356)
Proportion of Share Held                 -0.638
   by Insiders (%)                       (0.058)
Trading volume                            -0.804
                                         (0.000)
Ln(Assets) minus                          0.457               0.986                    -0.666
  Industry Average of Ln(Assets)         (0.000)             (0.000)                   (0.746)
Average Industry Market Cap               1.014               1.959                     -0.717
                                         (0.000)             (0.000)                   (0.840)
National accounting quality               0.072               0.065                    -0.230
                                         (0.001)             (0.003)                   (0.445)
Firm-level accounting quality                                 1.078                     -1.305
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.602)

Shareholders’ anti-director rights                            -0.339                    0.022
                                                             (0.001)                   (0.985)

Dividend withholding tax rate (%)                             -0.084                    -0.070
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.707)
Industry-level imported share of          2.390               0.023                    -0.103
   U.S. supply (%)                       (0.003)             (0.009)                   (0.311)

Dummy variables:
  MSCI member                                                 7.540                    -12.090
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.000)
   Dividend-paying firm                                       1.409                    -1.425
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.678)
   Canadian firm                          2.584               5.915                    -4.816
                                         (0.000)             (0.000)                   (0.612)
   Civil law                              -0.822
                                         (0.004)
Number of observations                   8,086                7,804                     282




                                                   49
                      Table 5: Average Cross-Listing Effect for Cross-Listed Stocks

The table reports estimates of the average cross-listing effect using three alternative treatment estimators.
The “Heckman-based” estimates (rows 2 and 3 of Panel A) are based on fitted holdings from the non cross-
listed holdings equation (4) using data on the cross-listed firms. Parameter estimates for these equations
appear in the middle column of Table 4. The “p-matching” estimates (rows 4 and 5) are U.S. holdings of a
sample of non cross-listed firms that have been paired with the cross-listed sample on the basis of fitted
probabilities from a reduced-form probit model of the cross-listing decision. Panel B presents “difference-
in-differences” estimates using data on U.S. holdings for March 31, 1994 and December 31, 1997. The
sample in Panel B is restricted to stocks that were not cross-listed in U.S. markets in the earlier period, with
the columns distinguishing between stocks that cross-listed before the second period and those that did not.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses.

Panel A: Heckman-based and P-Matching Methods              U.S. investors’ aggregate holdings as percentage of:
                                                               Market Cap                  Market Float
1. Mean holdings of cross-listed stocks,                           16.5                        25.9
E ( H iL | X  1)

2. Heckman-based estimate of E(H iL | X  0)                        5.9                           12.5

3. Heckman-based estimate of cross-listing effect,                 10.6                           13.4
      L                   L
E ( H | X  1)  E ( H | X  0)                                    (0.8)                          (1.3)
     i                   i



4. P-matching estimate of E(H iL | X  0)                           5.3                           8.1

5. P-Matching estimate of cross-listing effect,                    11.2                           17.7
E ( H iL | X  1)  E ( H iL | X  0)                              (0.8)                          (1.3)

Panel B: Difference-in-Differences          Stocks Cross-listed on U.S.       Stocks not Cross-listed on U.S.
for U.S. holdings / market cap              exchange by December 1997          exchange by December 1997
6. Holdings: March 31, 1994                             8.6                                 2.3

7. Holdings: December 31, 1997                         17.1                                 2.9

8. Change in holdings (1994-1997)                       8.5                                 0.6

9. Difference-in-differences                                                7.9
estimate of cross-listing effect                                           (0.5)
E ( H iL | X  1)  E ( H iL | X  0)

10. Number of Observations                             132                                 9469




                                                      50
             Table 6: Summary Statistics for Holdings in ADR Form and of Level I ADRs


The table reports additional information. For cross-listed firms, it reports the amount of U.S. holdings in the
actual ADR (as opposed to the underlying foreign equity). For Level I ADRS, which trade only on over-
the-counter markets and are not considered to be cross-listed on a U.S. exchange, it reports the amounts
held by U.S. investors, as well as the portions held in ADR form and in the underlying foreign equity. For
comparison, the table includes data on non-cross-listed firms as well. For further details, see notes to Tables
2 and 3.


                                                                  Firm Market Firm Market
                                                                 Capitalization     Float
                                                                   Available      Available
                                                                 (46 countries) (46 countries)

              Firms Cross-Listed on a U.S. Exchange                   498              293
                 Average share held by U.S. investors                17.5%           26.3%
                 Average share held in DR form                       6.4%            12.4%
                 Average share held in underlying equity             11.1%           13.9%


              Firms with Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs                    640              466
                 Average share held by U.S. investors                8.9%            15.1%
                 Average share held in DR form                       1.8%             2.9%
                 Average share held in underlying equity             7.1%            12.2%


              Firms with no vehicle for U.S. trading                11,066            7,767
               Average share held by U.S. investors                  2.6%             5.1%




                                                       51
        Table 7: Estimated Average Impact of Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs on U.S. Investment

The table reports estimates of the average effect of Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs on the share of market float
held by U.S. investors, using “p-matching” to correct for selection bias. The middle row shows U.S.
holdings of a sample of firms (drawn from those without a vehicle for U.S. trading) that have been paired
with the Level 1 / Rule 144a sample on the basis of the fitted probability (of a Level 1 or Rule 144a ADR
program) from a first-stage probit model that uses the instruments listed in Table 4. The standard error is
shown in parentheses.

                     U.S. investors’ aggregate holdings as percentage of market float

              Mean holdings in Level 1 and Rule 144a ADR firms                 14.8
              (443 firms)

              P-matching estimate of what holdings would have                    9.6
              been without a Level 1 or Rule 144a ADR program

              P-Matching estimate of Level 1 / Rule 144a effect                  5.2
                                                                                (0.9)




                                                    52
             Table 8: Determinants of the Cross-Listing Effect on the U.S. Holdings Share

The table reports coefficient estimates from a regression of the change in U.S. holdings (as a percentage of
market capitalization) between March 31, 1994 and December 31, 1997 on a cross-listing dummy
interacted with 1994 values of the instruments listed in the table. The sample is restricted to stocks that
were not cross-listed in U.S. markets in the earlier period. A dummy variable for cross-listing between
1994 and 1997, first-period values of the instruments, and changes in the instruments (between the first and
second period) are included as control variables in both equations. P-values (for a null hypothesis of a zero
coefficient) are shown in parentheses.


       cross-listing dummy interacted with:                      (1)                         (2)
 Ln(Assets) minus                                              -1.194                      -1.024
   Industry Average of Ln(Assets)                              (0.001)                     (0.000)
 Average Industry Market Cap                                   -0.089                       -1.146
                                                               (0.933)                     (0.256)
 Firm-level accounting quality index                           -2.454
                                                               (0.003)
 Dividend-paying firm dummy                                    2.067
                                                              (0.186)
 MSCI member dummy                                             -1.221                       -3.008
                                                               (0.391)                     (0.030)
 National accounting quality index                             0.331
                                                              (0.000)
 Shareholder rights index                                      0.508                        1.509
                                                              (0.388)                      (0.003)
 Industry-level imported share of U.S. supply (%)              0.065                        0.071
                                                              (0.185)                      (0.144)
 Canadian firm dummy                                           -5.223                      -8.287
                                                               (0.002)                     (0.000)
 Number Not Cross-Listed                                       7,311                        7,722

 Number Cross-Listed                                               99                         103

 Adjusted R-squared                                            0.052                        0.045




                                                     53
                          Table 9: Country-Level Cross-Listing Determinants

The table reports results from panel regressions using annual data from 2001 to 2009 for thirty-five
countries. Dependent variables are cross-list fraction (the fraction of foreign market capitalization cross-
listed on a U.S. exchange) and a float-adjusted bias measure (bias float, adapted from Bekaert, Siegel and
Wang [2012], and defined in Eq. (11)). A decrease in bias float is equivalent to an increase in a country’s
weight in U.S. portfolios relative to its weight in the world float portfolio. Year time dummies are included
in every specification. Standard errors are clustered by destination countries and are robust to
heteroskedasticity. P-values are in parentheses.

                                      Cross-List                     Bias Float
Dependent Variable:
                                       Fraction
Cross-List Fraction                                         -0.481                -0.472

                                                           (0.000)                (0.000)

                                         0.023                                    0.026
Trading volume
                                        (0.307)                                   (0.158)

National accounting quality              0.007                                    0.001

                                        (0.058)                                   (0.802)

Civil law                                0.159                                    0.025

                                        (0.015)                                   (0.740)

Economic proximity                       2.892                                    -0.099

                                        (0.000)                                   (0.921)

                                         0.016                                    -0.018
Log GDP per Capita
                                        (0.490)                                   (0.570)



N                                        315                 315                   315
R2                                       0.42                0.31                  0.33




                                                     54
                Table 10: Applications of Cross-List Fraction to Country-Level Studies

The table reports results from panel regressions of the bias float measure of U.S. international equity
investment. Bias float, adapted from Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012], is defined in Eq. (10). Thirty-five
countries from 2001 to 2009 are included in specifications (1)-(3); thirty-seven countries for 1994, 1997,
2001, 2003, 2004, and 2005 are included in specifications (4)-(6). Cross-list fraction is the fraction of the
foreign market capitalization that is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange. TreatyPostJGTRRA is an interaction
between and indicator variable (Treaty) for countries listed in Desai and Dharmapala [2011] and an
indicator (PostJGTRRA) for the years after the enactment of JGTRRA in 2003. The samples in
specifications (4)-(6) ends in 2005 because, as noted by Desai and Dharmapala [2011], the treaty countries
changed in 2006. Year time dummies are included in every specification. Standard errors are clustered by
destination countries and are robust to heteroskedasticity. P-values are in parentheses.

                                 OLS          OLS            IV           OLS          OLS            IV
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)

Cross-List Fraction                          -0.555         -0.608                     -0.286       -0.304
                                            (0.000)        (0.012)                    (0.000)      (0.000)

FDI 1990                        -0.014       0.004          0.006
                               (0.067)      (0.544)        (0.489)

World Market Float              0.028        0.013          0.011         0.045        0.255       0.270
                               (0.072)      (0.278)        (0.376)       (0.817)      (0.011)     (0.0055)

Stock Return Volatility         0.194        0.033          0.017
                               (0.246)      (0.849)        (0.924)

TreatyPostJGTRRA                                                          -0.092      -0.056       -0.054
                                                                         (0.001)      (0.066)      (0.096)

N                                315          315           315            210          210          207
R2                               0.10         0.35          0.34           0.12         0.59         0.59




                                                      55
                     Figure 1: Size and Measures of U.S. International Equity Investment

The figure shows the relationship between float-adjusted size and two measures of U.S. international equity
investment in 2001. The top graph uses a float-adjusted ratio measure of home bias, as in equation (11)
similar to that in Bekaert, Siegel and Wang [2012]. The bottom graph uses a float-adjusted difference
measure of home bias, as in the numerator of equation (11). Other size-biased measures of U.S. investment,
such as the dollar amount, log dollar amount, or portfolio share, would be similar to the bottom graph; other
measures without size biases, such as U.S. investment as a percentage of destination float, would resemble
the top graph.

                                                                     Bias Float Ratio and Size
                           1




                                         CO AR
                                           MY
                                         PK
                                          PH
                                          GR
                                          TR BE
                                            ZA
                           .8




                                          CLIN
                                         VE       ESIT
                                                  HK                                          JP
                                         PE
                                         ATDK
                                          PT
                                         TH       AU
                                               SE                DE      FR
                                         ID                    CH CA
                Biasfloat Ratio




                                                                                                        UK
                                                KR
                                         NZ
                        .6




                                          NO
                                             BR FI
                                                         NL
                           .4




                                           IL

                                           SG
                           .2




                                           MX
                                         0                     2              4           6         8        10
                                                                                   Size



                                                                   Bias Float Difference and Size
                           8




                                                                                                        UK
                                     6
                Biasfloat Difference




                                                                                              JP
                          4




                                                                         FR
                           2




                                                                 DECA
                                                               CH
                                                       ESIT
                                                       HK
                                                       AU
                                                          NL
                                                 SE
                                              BEKR
                                              AR  FI
                           0




                                            MY
                                             ZA
                                             IN
                                            DK
                                         TH
                                         CO
                                         NZ
                                         AT
                                         ID
                                         PE
                                         VE
                                         PKILBR
                                          GR
                                          TR
                                          PT
                                          PH
                                          NO
                                          CL
                                           SG
                                           MX
                                         0                     2              4           6         8        10
                                                                                   Size




                                                                                  56
Appendix A: Variables and Instruments


Variable                              Definition                                        Included in:

Firm-level variables
Assets relative to industry average   Natural logarithm of the 1997 book value of a      Z iX , Z iH
                                      firm’s assets from Worldscope minus the
                                      average for firms in the same Worldscope
                                      Major Industry, included as the within-
                                      industry part of our measure of firm size.

Proportion of shares held by          Worldscope’s 1997 value for the number of          Z iX
insiders (%)                          closely held shares as a percentage of
                                      common shares outstanding, adjusted to
                                      remove those stakes mistakenly counted as
                                      insider ownership by Worldscope. These
                                      include holdings by the Bank of New York,
                                      Morgan Guarantee Trust, and Citibank,
                                      because these shares are holdings for ADR
                                      programs, and the New Zealand Central
                                      Securities Depository.

MSCI index member                     Dummy variable equal to one when a firm is         Z iH
                                      included as a member of the MSCI All-
                                      country World index at the end of 1997.

Dividend-paying firm                  Dummy variable equal to one when a firm            Z iH
                                      pays a dividend in 1997, as reported by
                                      Worldscope.

Firm-level accounting quality         Index ranging from zero to four, calculated        Z iH
                                      using criteria from Aggarwal, Klapper, and
                                      Wysocki [2005]. Four components takes a
                                      value of one if the firm (1) used a BigSix
                                      auditor, (2) received a clean audit report, (3)
                                      used international accounting standards or
                                      U.S. GAAP, and (4) reported consolidated
                                      statements. The index is the sum of the four
                                      components.




                                                     57
 Appendix A (continued): Variables and Instruments.

Variable                   Definition                                      Included in:

Industry-level variables

Industry-average market    Average natural logarithm of firms’ 1997         Z iX , Z iH
cap                        market caps for all firms in a given
                           Worldscope Major Industry, included as the
                           across-industry part of our measure of firm
                           size..

Industry-level imported    Matched by 2- and 4-digit SIC code to 1992       Z iX , Z iH
share of U.S. supply       data from the Bureau of the Census and the
(percent)                  Bureau of Economic Analysis, included as a
                           measure of “economic proximity” of the firm
                           to U.S. markets.

Country-level variables
Trading volume             Home-country trading value/GDP(%). 1997          Z iX
                           dollar volume of trading in the home market
                           of a firm, normalized by the dollar value of
                           the country’s 1997 gross domestic product
                           (GDP). The volume data are obtained from
                           the International Finance Corporation [1998]
                           and the GDP figures are collected from the
                           International Monetary Fund’s International
                           Financial Statistics.

Tax Rate                   Home-country dividend withholding tax rate       Z iH
                           faced by U.S. investors. For countries
                           maintaining a bilateral tax treaty with the
                           United States, we use the treaty tax rate, as
                           reported in the IRS publication 901, U.S. Tax
                           Treaties. For countries with no U.S. tax
                           treaty, we calculate dividend withholding
                           rates from 1997 gross and net dividend
                           payments to holders of ADRs, as reported in
                           Bloomberg’s Corporate Action Calendar.

Canadian firm              Dummy variable set equal to one for              Z iX , Z iH
                           Canadian firms.

Civil law                  Dummy variable set to one for firms from         Z iX
                           countries using a civil law system.




                                                    58
   Appendix A (continued): Variables and Instruments.

Variable                      Definition                                       Included in:

National accounting quality   Values for 1995 reported by Bushman,              Z iX , Z iH
index                         Piotroski, and Smith [2004]. Compiled by the
                              Center for Financial Analysis and Research,
                              the index averages across firms within a given
                              country the number of items, out of a possible
                              maximum of 90, that are included as part of a
                              firm’s financial statements.

Shareholder rights index      Calculated by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,         Z iH
                              Shleifer, and Vishny [1998]. Index takes on a
                              value between 0 and 6 depending on how
                              many of the following applies to a country’s
                              equity market: percentage of outstanding
                              shares required to call an extraordinary
                              meeting less than or equal to 10 percent,
                              cumulative voting or proportional
                              representation of minority interests on board,
                              voting by mail permitted, mechanisms in
                              place for oppressed minority investors,
                              preemptive right that can only be waived by a
                              shareholder vote, and protection of
                              shareholders from requirements that shares be
                              deposited before a shareholder meeting.




                                                       59
Table A1: Instrument Sample Statistics

                                          Non-Cross-Listed Firms                Cross-Listed Firms

                                     Min       Mean    Median   Max      Min     Mean     Median     Max

Share Held by Insiders (%)               0.0   46.6      32.6   99.9      0.0     32.5       0.4     93.8
Trading volume (% of GDP)                 2      62        34      449     2        52        60     449
Ln(Assets) minus Industry Average    -12.3      -0.1     -0.3      6.9   -3.3       1.7      1.6      6.8
Ln(Average Industry Market Cap)          3.6    4.8       4.8      6.7    3.7       5.2      4.9      6.7
National accounting quality          38.0      73.9      71.6   85.5     38.0     75.3      75.2     85.5
Firm-level accounting quality            0.0    2.2       3.0      4.0    0.0       2.9      3.0      4.0
Shareholders’ anti-director rights       0.0    3.6       4.0      5.0    0.0       4.0      5.0      5.0
Dividend withholding tax rate (%)        0.0   16.0      15.0   35.0      0.0     15.3      15.0     35.0
Industry-level imported share (%)        0.3   10.0       4.5   97.0      0.3     11.1       4.5     77.0
 MSCI member (dummy)                 0.00      0.13      0.00   1.00     0.00     0.47      0.00     1.00
 Dividend-paying firm (dummy)        0.00      0.76      1.00   1.00     0.00     0.68      1.00     1.00
 Canadian firm (dummy)               0.00      0.03      0.00   1.00     0.00     0.29      0.00     1.00
 Civil law (dummy)                   0.00      0.61      1.00   1.00     0.00     0.42      0.00     1.00




                                                  60
Appendix B: Estimating the Structural Model

         Lee [1978] proposes a multi-stage method for consistently estimating a system like ours in which a
first-stage, reduced-form probit generates Heckman [1979]-type correction terms for the holdings
equations. The corrected second-stage estimation of the holdings equations produces consistent estimates of
the relation between the instruments and holdings, and makes it possible to calculate fitted holdings values
as a function of the instruments. The final stage of estimation involves using the fitted holdings for
estimation of the structural probit in equation (7).
         To facilitate implementation of the Lee [1978] estimation framework, we assume that the joint
statistical distribution of the residuals in the listing equation (  iX ) and the two holdings equations (  iL ,  iU )
are jointly normally distributed,

         ( iX ,  iL ,  iU ) ~ N(0, ),                                                           (B-1)

         where Ω is a 3 x 3 variance covariance matrix.

Lee [1978] has shown that multi-stage estimation will produce estimates of structural parameters that are
consistent in the presence of selection bias.

         One advantage of this framework is that although we only observe H iL for firms that have a U.S.
listing and H iU for firms that do not, we can use our parameter estimates to make inferences about what U.S.
holdings of a firm’s stock would have been had the firm made the counterfactual choice about whether to
cross-list. Furthermore, we can generate estimates of the cross-listing effect—i.e., the impact of cross-
listing on U.S. holdings ( H iL - H iU )—either unconditionally or conditional on specific firm characteristics.
         In the first stage of the Lee [1978] methodology, the two holdings equations are substituted into the
listing probit to form a reduced-form listing equation that can be estimated on a stand-alone basis by
numerical maximum likelihood. The set of independent variables (ZR) for the first-stage reduced-form
probit specification consists of all of the instruments in the structural equations for listing and holdings:

         ZR  ZX  ZH .                                                                             (B-2)

We can write the first-stage equation as

         X i*   R  Z iR  R   iR ,                                                             (B-3)
where
          iR   0  iL  Z iR  0   1  iU   iX .                                           (B-4)

The estimates from the probit model embodied in equations (B-2), (B-3), and (B-4) can be used to construct
the selectivity-bias correction in the holdings-equations residuals (εL and εU). It can be shown that for listed
firms (X* = 0),

                                                    ( R  Z iR  R )
         E ( iL | X *  0)   cov( iX ,  iL )                       ,                           (B-5)
                                                     ( R  Z iR  R )

where the variance of εX has been normalized to one and ф and Ф denote the probability density function
and cumulative density function, respectively, of the standard normal distribution. The ratio




                                                                     61
         ( R  Z iR  R )
                                                                                                (B-6)
          ( R  Z iR  R )

is often referred to as the “inverse Mills ratio”. Estimates of the ratio form the basis for standard corrections
for selectivity bias when inclusion in an estimation sample is contingent on a discrete outcome (see
Heckman [1979] or Maddala [1983]). Intuitively, the inverse Mills ratio accounts for the unobserved
correlation between the listing decision and holdings. There is also a similar, but less frequently used
correction for selectivity bias for the non-selected observations,

                                                   ( R  Z iR  R )
         E( iU | X *  0)  cov( iX ,  iU )                           .                      (B-7)
                                                 1   ( R  Z iR  R )

The second stage of the Lee procedure involves estimating the holdings equations by ordinary least squares
by rewriting them as

                                     ( R  ZiR  R )
         H iL   L  ZiH  L                         L  iL                                 (B-8)
                                    ( R  Zi  R )
                                               R


and
                                       ( R  ZiR  R )
         H iU  U  ZiH U                             U  iU .                             (B-9)
                                    1  ( R  Zi  R )
                                                   R




Note that  k  cov( iX ,  ik ) for k = L, U and E( iL | X *  0)  E( iU | X *  0)  0. We use our first-stage
estimates of the parameters αR and βR to construct the selectivity variables, and then substitute these
variables into equations (B-8) and (B-9). The coefficient associated with the selectivity adjustment provides
an estimate of the unobserved covariance between the listing decision and each of the holding equations.
The final stage of the Lee procedure involves using the consistent estimates of αL, αU, βL, and βU from (B-8)
and (B-9) to construct fitted values using the original holdings equations. The fitted holdings are inserted
back into the structural listing decision equation, which is then estimated as a probit model via numerical
likelihood maximization. As noted by Lee [1978], it is possible to construct consistent standard errors for
the holdings equations after making a correction for heteroscedasticity associated with the selectivity terms.

         Because the estimated parameters of the model are difficult to interpret, we rescale the estimates to
show the marginal effect of a one-unit change in the instrument on the percentage point probability of
cross-listing, specifically the median effect over the firms in the sample.




                                                                    62
